
                               1 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 1, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

Sen McCarthy, in article tracing previous unsuccessful attempts to Vietnamize
war, says current Vietnamization program is failure; urges negotiated pol
settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 1, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 21 words

Comment on Nixon news conf and Nguyen Van Thieu s; both said to indicate how
little they expect from next phase of negotiations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 1, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 44 words

Bomb, presumably planted by Vietcong terrorists, wrecks ground floor of US
enlisted men's billet in downtown Saigon and injures 2 Amer sailors; details;
allied forces kill 56 enemy in central highlands; 2 US helicopters downed near
Pleiku; other action reptd; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 1, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 44 words

In Cambodia, Communists attack Kompong Thom, Skoun and Pralay Meas; US
spokesmen, Saigon, deny knowledge of US air strikes on Kirirom plateau; big
enemy force cuts Route 4 SW of Pnompenh, blocking troops seeking to join Govt
forces assembling to retake plateau; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 1, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Spokesmen for Hanoi delegations at talks score statements made by Nixon in his
news conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 1, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 85 words

Nguyen Van Thieu declares S Vietnam's conditions for peace are unchanged and
rules out any coalition govt with Communists except 1 that might result from
free, internationally supervised elections, TV s; puts Communist side and those
urging more flexible negotiating position on notice that Bruce has with him no
new proposals approved by S Vietnamese Govt; says cease-fire is possible but
certain conditions must be met; emphasizes S Vietnam has not made cease-fire
proposal at talks; makes other comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 1, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 126 words

Brig Gen Cole demoted to col, retired and stripped of DSM as result of '69 Cong
probe of abuses in overseas service clubs which found he failed to maintain
'high degree of personal and professional integrity'; charges stem from Cole's
alleged dealings with Sarl Electronics Ltd, which sold millions of dollars worth
of slot machines to clubs in Vietnam; co has been charged with black market
currency dealings and smuggling activities by authorities in Saigon; Cole to
fight action; Army refuses to elaborate on charges but says evidence does not
justify criminal prosecution; por; Overseas Weekly purchased in April by J B
Kroesen; Kroesen says no decision has been made on hiring Col Cole; declines to
name position for which Cole is being considered

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 2, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

Pipe bomb explodes outside NYC bank of Brazil office, damaging plate-glass doors
and corridor windows of bldg's main floor; no injuries reptd; police find word
Weatherman scrawled across bank and small Vietcong flag nearby; 2 maintenance
men tell police they saw 2 men leave pkg at door; say they phoned police but
bomb exploded before police arrived

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 2, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 17 words

Comment on anti-Americanism in S Vietnam, said to be most particularly seen and
sensed in Saigon; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 2, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 2

LENGTH: 44 words

Ed, noting deteriorating Laotian situation and buildup of allied forces across
border in S Vietnam, scores possible Amer thrust into Laos; notes Nixon's
assurance in March that his Adm plans no introduction of ground forces in Laos
and Laird's subsequent remarks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 2, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 57 words

J Reston article on Nixon's middle east intervention holds there will probably
be no real peace but that danger of expanding war has been curbed; maintains
Amer people have right to know what assurances Nixon has committed to Israel;
notes US Vietnam withdrawal proceeds on schedule; notes Vietnam casualty rate is
down; notes Repubs' optimism

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 2, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 20 words

B-52s raid N Vietnamese supply depots in Fishhook region, Cambodia; 5 killed, 4
hurt in crash of Army craft, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 2, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 19 words

Vietcong says Nixon demonstrates in his news conf his wish to prolong war; says
Nixon flatly rejects coalition govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 2, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 55 words

N Vietnamese Min Vo Nguyen Giap says US will be defeated in Indochina because
Communists have time on their side; says Nixon made big pol and strategic
mistake by invading Cambodia; says Nixon wages war more barbarous than that of
Johnson; Chinese mil attache in Hanoi gives reception to mark 43rd anniv of
Chinese People Lib Army

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 2, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 31 words

Communists reptdly hold center of Kompong Thom, attack Skoun and Kompong Cham;
force of Vietcong and N Vietnamese occupies Pralay Meas; map; new clashes reptd,
Kirirom plateau; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 3, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

Article on 4 homes for homeless S Vietnamese children that are run by former
Amer actor and journalist R Hughes; Hughes is responsible for raising $2,500 a
mo needed for homes; had hoped he could pull out and let S Vietnamese take over
homes, but it has not yet worked out and he does not feel he can leave now;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 3, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 49, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 10 words

Maj Gen Nguyen Ngoc Loan named special asst in Defense Min

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 3, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 0

LENGTH: 37 words

'Tell-It-To-Hanoi' Com ad says Gallup polls show 61% of Amers approved of Nixon
after Cambodian venture, 55% approved of him before venture; says 8-million
Amers changed their minds because they realize Nixon can be trusted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 3, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 27 words

Activity continues at low level; enemy shells 20 targets; allied forces kill 61
enemy; N Vietnamese soldiers attack S Vietnamese training camp in Quangngai Prov

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 3, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 261 words

K P O'Donnell, key aide under Pres Kennedy and Johnson, says Kennedy chose
Johnson as running mate in '60 mainly because he wanted to be sure that if he
won election he would have more cooperative and trusted man than Johnson as Sen
majority leader, article in Life (pub); says Kennedy felt it was essential to
make peace with Johnson and Speaker Rayburn so that they would not 'ruin' him
when Cong session resumed after Dem conv; says he said that without their
support in reconvened Cong he would be 'laughing stock' of nation and would lose
election before Labor Day; says Kennedy regarded short-term friendly relations
on Cong level as more significant than his vote-getting value on ticket; denies
R F Kennedy tried to block Johnson's nomination; says that after election,
Kennedy referred privately to Johnson as being 'safely tucked away' in Vice Pres
and teased Johnson by stressing R F Kennedy's role in Adm; says Kennedy was
aware of Johnson's unhappiness as Vice Pres and 'leaned over backwards' to keep
him involved in important Govt affairs; says Kennedy issued order that everyone
in White House was to be courteous and considerate with Johnson; other details
on Kennedy period; says Kennedy was determined to withdraw all troops from S
Vietnam by end of '65, although he planned to delay announcement until after '64
election; says Sen Mansfield and Gen MacArthur played major roles in persuading
Kennedy to reverse position and withdraw troops; other details on Kennedy yrs as
viewed by O'Donnell; Kennedy illus with Johnson in '61 before inauguration

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 3, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 41 words

Vietcong and N Vietnamese reptdly again attack Kompong Thom, Cambodia but are
repulsed with help of fighter-bombers; town reptdly encircled by force of 2,000;
Skoun reptdly occupied by Communists; S Vietnamese force 7 mi west of Krek
attacked; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 4, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Adm's candor, or lack of it, in explaining Vietnam troop withdrawal policy is
issue in Humphrey campaign for Sen seat from Minn; Humphrey's opponent, Repr C
MacGregor, reptdly said at recent meeting of Repub party workers that there will
be no Amer ground combat troops in SE Asia in 10 mos; explained that Laird was
his authority for statement; Pentagon spokesman denies Laird made hard
commitment; MacGregor seeks to picture himself as real dove and Humphrey as
hard-liner; some recent statements made by Laird on withdrawals noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 4, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 33 words

Article on plight of S Vietnamese prostitute in Pleiku; she is said to be
typical of country girls who are majority of prostitutes who flourish wherever
there are large groups of Amer soldiers; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 4, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 115 words

Heavy fighting in prov capital of Kompong Thom, 80 mi north of Pnompenh, enters
2d day as Vietcong and N Vietnamese press apparent objective of occupying town;
Govt spokesman says Cambodian troops have situation 'well in hand'; says they
have lost 32 men killed and 74 wounded; says 111 enemy dead have been counted;
Govt troops retake dist town of Skoun, 37 mi northeast of Pnompenh; enemy has
occupied resort town of Kirirom, 65 mi west of Pnompenh, for 6 days;
counterattack being prepared; map; Cambodian Col Sar Hor says US Phantom jets
attacked enemy forces on Kirirom plateau, but US command in Saigon denies
knowledge of rept; Cambodians illus being instructed in use of carbine; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 5, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 57 words

Cambodian command repts N Vietnamese and Vietcong soldiers have been driven out
of Kompong Thom but that city is surrounded and must rely on aerial supply;
enemy forces reptd still holding Skoun; Cambodian troops reptd to have reopened
Route 4, southwest of Pnompenh, which connects capital with port city of Kompong
Som on Gulf of Siam; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 5, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

S Vietnamese troops kill 44 enemy in Mekong Delta; 6 S Vietnamese killed, 29
wounded; several Amers killed and wounded by booby traps and in scattered action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 5, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 14 words

N Vietnam accuses US of air attacks against its villages in northern part of
zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 5, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 100 words

White House press sec Ziegler says US aircraft fly only 'interdiction' missions
in Cambodia; says there has been no change in Nixon policy, announced June 30,
of confining Amer air activity to attacks on enemy troops and supplies that
endanger US forces in S Vietnam; adds that there are often 'ancillary effects'
from such raids; Defense Dept spokesman says Amer comdrs in S Vietnam have wide
latitude in determining what an 'interdiction mission' might be; Deputy Asst Sec
Friedheim says he has no knowledge napalm is being used on such missions but
says choice of weapons is left to field comdrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 6, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

Brig Gen Nguyen Van Thien reptd missing on flight from Danang to Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 6, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7

LENGTH: 63 words

Nixon Adm sources reiterate US will not use Amer ground troops in Cambodia to
save Lon Nol regime and will not raise level of war there; statement still
leaves Nixon option of using forces in Cambodia to protect those in Vietnam; one
source says US would prefer a neutral govt in Pnompenh rather than a Communist
one because of effect latter would have on situation in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 6, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

Allies conduct intensive operation along 200-mi stretch of Laotian border in
effort to cut troop infiltration and supply routes; sharp clash reptd 50 mi SW
of Danang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 6, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 21 words

Lon Nol says V Vietnamese and Vietcong must consolidate their position in
Cambodia before any renewed offensive in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 6, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

Optimism over possible ltd Laotian truce now greater in Vientiane than it has
been in recent mos; based on belief N Vietnam would prefer to concentrate its
efforts on areas of primary interest; Souvanna Phouma repts to Cabinet after
conf with Tiaosouk Vongsak; Soviet officials in Vientiane lend currency to repts
Pathet Lao and N Vietnamese would welcome truce

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 6, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 151 words

Lon Nol adviser Sim Var holds Govt can last only 6 mos more without important
mil and econ aid, principally from US, int; holds US 'morally and materially
responsible' for current situation; says US incursion into Communist sanctuaries
pushed enemy into countryside and toward capital; stresses econ aid especially;
cites increase in Pnompenh population from refugees and lessening of access rds
from 7 to 2; says US withholds aid because Amer people mistakenly consider
fighting in Cambodia part of Vietnam war, from which they want to withdraw;
calls Vietnam war a 'civil' one, which he holds is not case in Cambodia; says he
is not hopeful of receiving aid from Thailand; Lon Nol says Vietcong and N
Vietnamese must consol their position in Cambodia before any renewed offensive
against S Vietnam, int; expresses optimism about Cambodia's chances if country
is provided with adequate arms and ammunition

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 6, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 54 words

M Frankel says hopes for success in Vietnam talks is slender as 4th negotiating
team in 2 yrs takes over; says Washington officials say Nixon remains convinced
he has outlined a sufficiently generous opening position to interest N Vietnam
if it wants to arrange pol compromise; discusses US position and Vietcong
proposals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 7, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 58 words

S Vietnam's war veterans prevent destruction of their shanty-town dwellings with
violent attack on Govt office and self-inflicted wounds during 8-hr
demonstration outside Pres Palace, Saigon; authorities of Giadinh Province
cancel plans to tear down about 3,000 shacks; also agree to meeting to discuss
fate of shacks in 12 other areas around Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 7, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 16 words

Captured suspected Vietcong being menaced during interrogation by US troops near
Danang illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 7, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 109 words

Souvanna Phouma expresses optimism about outlook for peace talks with
Souphanouvong, int; indicates it is based partly on envoy's failure in 2
meetings so far to raise issue of halt in Amer bombing as precondition for
negotiations; also cites fact that envoy is nephew of Queen and important Pathet
Lao personality; tempers optimism by saying envoy has restated Pathet Lao
familiar conditions for settlement, which do include bombing halt; restates
willingness to reach ltd truce that would exclude region of Ho Chi Minh Trail;
says if N Vietnamese use trail he cannot prevent Amers from bombing; says he
hopes for continued US support in peace efforts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 7, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 87 words

78th session peace talks; Bruce, attending his 1st session, proposes renewed
effort at settlement; Communists declare he has nothing new to offer; positions
of both sides said to be as frozen as ever; N Vietnamese spokesman says Nixon
Adm corrects 'error' in sending Bruce; says Bruce merely repeats statements made
by Nixon; Communist spokesmen avoid any direct answer to question whether their
side will return chief negotiators Xuan Thuy and Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh; details on
session and history of talks; Bruce illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 7, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 113 words

Laird reiterates Nixon Adm contention Amer planes are not giving close air
support to Cambodian troops, calls action at Skoun part of gen interdiction
campaign aimed at protection of Amer forces in S Vietnam, news conf; says Skoun
bombing was aimed at preventing Vietnamese Communists from reopening sea supply
routes through Cambodian coastal towns; does not explain how Skoun could be
connected with coastal supply routes; says interdiction mission in this case was
to destroy personnel; says there would be certain 'ancillary benefits' to
Cambodians; Friedheim comments on difference in situation as seen from point of
view of Amers and of Cambodians; illus of US Skoun raid

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 7, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 196 words

FCC reasserts right of broadcasters to refuse to sell TV time in decision
upholding right of WTOP to reject antiwar spot ads of Business Execs Move for
Vietnam Peace; 2d decision declares broadcasters must accept Dem Natl Com's
fund-raising commercials but can refuse to allow commercials to be used for
discussion of policy issues; chmnBurch, restating fairness doctrine, says it is
public's right to be informed, rather than right of Govt, broadcast licensee or
member of public to broadcast own views, which is basis of Amer broadcasting
system; Comr Johnson, lone dissenter in both decisions, holds Const guarantee of
free speech supports broad access to TV, which he says is principal medium of
pol communication; says comm and cts must set guidelines for access to broadcast
frequencies and that comm should require broadcasters to accept all paid ads on
2-yr trial basis; decision on Dem Natl Com expresses approval of CBS 'loyal
opposition' series and ABC sale of time to natl pol parties; indicates
broadcasters need not go further and do not have to sell fund-raising ads to
groups other than pol parties or offer pol parties more than 1-min spot for
commercials

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 8, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 91 words

Former Asst Sec Hilsman, commenting on Wicker's Aug 4 column, says Kennedy's
policy was to urge S Vietnamese to concentrate on winning the people rather than
killing Vietcong, lr; says Kennedy, in '63, became increasingly skeptical that S
Vietnamese were either willing to or capable of carrying through needed reform;
says Kennedy made clear to him that if his judgment turned out to be correct, he
intended to negotiate settlement along lines of '62 Geneva accords on Laos and
to reject advice to bomb N Vietnam and introduce Amer combat forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 8, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 46 words

S Vietnam Govt announces it will require all foreigners entering country to have
visas; move believed aimed at barring antiwar groups and other persons regarded
by Govt as potential troublemakers or undesirables; Amers currently may stay in
country for 7 days without visas

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 8, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 19 words

S Vietnamese troops kill 17 enemy 40 mi SW of Danang; find enemy ammunition
cache in area; 3 US helicopters downed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 9, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 64, Column 1

LENGTH: 167 words

G Christian, Johnson's ex-press sec, says that on Oct 24 '68, 2 wks before Pres
election, Johnson demanded, and recd, Sec Wirtz's resignation in bitter
disagreement over policy matters, forthcoming book; says resignation was
withdrawn same evening after Sec Clifford and Deputy Atty Gen Christopher, whom
Johnson sent, persuaded Wirtz that pub break would hurt Humphrey's Pres
campaign; describes incident as 'worst flareup' Johnson ever had with
subordinate; dispute was sparked by Wirtz's announcement on Oct 21 of dept
reorgn plan that was not approved by Johnson; plan would have concentrated
greater authority in dept over manpower programs operated by states, plan
Johnson had promised Govs he would not back without consulting them 1st;
Christian says Wirtz's opposition to Vietnam war led Johnson to believe he was
trying to force Pres to remove him, in order to demonstrate breakdown within
Adm; Christian, in int, says he used incident to show difficulties confronting
Pres at end of his Adm

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 9, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 38 words

Article on question of access to TV and problems involved; FCC Ruling on
fund-raising commercials noted; Black Efforts for Soul in TV spokesman A Jordan
tells Sen Pastore of frustrations of black Amers watching white-owned media

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 9, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

G J Stigler opposes catering to campus activists who, he thinks, overreacted in
May to extension of Vietnam war into Cambodia, lr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 9, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 2

LENGTH: 9 words

Lr backs interim govt headed by Gen Duong Van Minh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 9, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 118 words

Reprs Moss and Reid, charging US with paying 3-times more than it should to
finance war and civilian econ, demand Sec Rogers press S Vietnam for devaluation
from 118 piasters to dollar to at least 300, lr to Rogers on behalf of HR
watchdog subcom; say black mkt piasters are readily available at 400 to dollar;
press for higher devaluation after receiving repts that US and S Vietnam may
have decided on new rate of 235 piasters to dollar; say new rate would lead to
more corruption throughout Saigon Govt; say new rate of 358 piasters to dollar
would still be concession at 3/4 black-mkt rate; call for qrly evaluation to
assure equitable exch rate in future; Reid says current exch rate is ridiculous,
int

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 9, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 161 words

Cambodian Govt spokesman repts Skoun retaken after night of fighting that
included heavy air support by 'allied' jets; refuses to comment on repts from
Cambodian ground comdrs that jets were Amer; discloses that brief fight erupts
between Govt troops and enemy at An Long, 15 mi north of Pnompenh; Kompong Thom
now only one of towns attacked simultaneously still seriously threatened; US
command in Saigon issues confidential instructions to unit comdrs that any
statements on air operations in Cambodia should cite purpose of interdicting
enemy supplies and personnel to protect Amers in Vietnam and benefit
Vietnamization program; US spokesman at routine briefing refuses to say if
support missions are being flown by Amers; merely reads policy statement; Stars
and Stripes, authorized armed forces pub, repts Laird avoids comment on
witnessed support missions; prints photo purporting to show USAF F-100 jet
bomber dropping bombs next to Cambodian troops; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 10, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 5

LENGTH: 7 words

Lr says US effort in Vietnam is futile

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 10, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 2

LENGTH: 23 words

NICB study sees $20- to $24-billion 'peace divd' available by end of Vietnam
war; says only 2/3 will be available for domestic programs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 10, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 24 words

12 Amers killed, at least 50 wounded in increased battlefield action in northern
region of S Vietnam; other action reptd; 2 US helicopters downed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 11, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 159 words

Nixon signs bill extending Unemployment Ins coverage to 4.7-million more
workers, White House ceremony; bill covers workers in businesses with 1 or more
workers for 1st time and brings total number of workers covered to 63.5-million;
furnishes emergency benefits for up to 13 additional wks when natl unemployment
rate reaches 4.5% for 3 consecutive mos or when state rate increases 20% over
preceding yr and is at least 4%; provision, scheduled to take effect Jan '72,
could be effective earlier if state enacts legis independently; states and Govt
will share cost equally; bill raises Fed unemployment tax 0.1% and payroll base
on which it is levied from $3,000 annually for each employe to $4,200, effective
in '72; Nixon asserts Adm is combating 'kind of unemployment' considered normal
in early '60s; notes work force will have to absorb 800,000 men who were
released from armed forces and defense plants, partly because of easing of
Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 11, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

US command in Saigon acknowledges for 1st time that Cambodians are flying aboard
observation planes piloted by Amers to help spot targets for bombing strikes in
Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 11, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 48 words

Article on Armed Forces Vietnam Network radio and TV broadcasts to US troops in
battle area; radio programs reach 99% of troops; broadcasts sometimes reach
troops in odd situations; programing is based on preferences of troops;
'command-information messages' are also broadcast; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 11, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 49 words

Fighting between N and S Vietnamese forces reptd in mts near abandoned US arty
base named Ripcord in north; more than 1,000 enemy soldiers believed to be
massing for attack; 2,000 S Vietnamese troops have been sent to area NW of
Saigon to meet threat of enemy troops coming from Cambodia; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 12, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 123 words

Councilman D R Mames says 4 NYC Council members plan to introduce resolution
committing city to withholding portion of Fed taxes that go toward financing
war; taxes would be portion of those city withholds from pay of its employes;
Councilmen A J Katzman, D B Friedland and T S Weiss plan to join Mames in
introducing resolution as part of Vietnam Peace Parade Com campaign; resolution
would also require city to give legal counsel and sanctuary to draft resisters
and those seeking to avoid assignment in SE Asia and to 'give total amnesty' to
those imprisoned for antiwar activities; W G Pietsch, coordinator of campaign,
comments; sponsors of campaign include Dr Spock, P O'Dwyer, Boro Pres P Sutton
and HR seat Dem candidate B Abzug

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 12, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 154 words

Medina, in series of recent ints, ss and news confs, maintains his innocence and
rebuts several charges against him; says 2 of murders he is charged with were
committed by S Vietnamese natl police; says he killed woman in almost reflexive
action of combat situation, thinking she was armed; says charge he killed
2-yr-old boy is 'completely untrue'; says name 'Mad Dog Medina' was nickname
given him in training and was not given him because of any preoccupation with
enemy body counts; says he fired his weapon only twice on day of Songmy incident
and saw only 25 to 28 bodies that day; says mines that caused heavy casualties
to his men mo before were laid by Vietcong, despite some press repts that S
Korean troops laid them; does not discuss events that occurred about 10 days
before incident; details on his statements; he returns to his post at Ft
McPherson, Ga, after making trip to raise funds for his defense; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 12, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 85 words

S Vietnamese troops, supported by US B-52s, battle to repulse enemy soldiers
threatening camp 27 mi W of Hue; halt ground attack, killing 15 enemy; about
1,500 enemy are reptd to be around camp; other action reptd; Cambodian spokesman
repts enemy forces strike for 3d successive night at Saang, 12 mi south of
Pnompenh, but are driven off by Cambodian Air Force fighter-bombers; says
Vietcong frogmen were intercepted while trying to reach Chrui Changvar naval
base on Mekong River, a mi northeast of Pnompenh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 12, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 67 words

S Vietnamese ground troops have taken over from US soldiers primary role of
fending off enemy foces along Cambodian and Laotian borders; US soldiers have
been replaced by S Vietnamese along all but small part of S Vietnamese
frontiers; 1 Amer combat unit is left along border, operating 110 mi NE of
Saigon; most dramatic realignment has taken place near city; details on shift in
several areas; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 13, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 26 words

Govt seizes editions of Saigon dailies Tin Sang, Dan and Anh Sang for allegedly
violating newspaper code by 'printing articles harmful to the natl security'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 13, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says only S Vietnam and Thailand can send
troops to help Cambodia and that time to do so is now, int; conditions action on
Thai ability, which he says he cannot judge; says that if N Vietnam sends more
troops from S Vietnam and Laos into Cambodia he will have to decide whether to
engage S Vietnamese troops in northern regions of Cambodia; says such action
might stretch S Vietnam beyond its resources; says real battle in Cambodia is
for control of masses in countryside, that they will be controlled by whichever
side gets there 1st; says he sent Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky to Bangkok to put this
view to Thai leaders but has recd no answer

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 14, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

HR com recommends contempt of Cong proceedings against US Communist party
official A Johnson for refusing to testify on his connections with New
Mobilization Com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 14, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 49 words

US command repts 85 Amers killed in war last wk, repts 760 wounded; S Vietnamese
and enemy casualties for last wk listed; casualty figures for war listed; sharp
fighting continues near Quangtri; allied forces sa| y 223 enemy have been killed
there in recent fighting; details on action; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 14, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 16 words

N Vietnam says Borman will fail on his mission; Borman arrives in Warsaw after
visit to Moscow

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 14, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

79th session of peace talks; N Vietnam announces it is sending Xuan Thuy back to
Paris; spokesman for Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh refuses to give date for her return;
Bruce appeals for further effort to discuss specific matters in 'practical way';
US spokesman says US does not rule out private talks; Communist side reiterates
that way to get talks moving is for US to withdraw its troops and replace Saigon
Govt with coalition govt; Bruce says Communist approach is inconsistent with
concept of negotiation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 15, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 191 words

FCC says Nixon has made such extensive use of TV to defend his conduct of
Indochina war that networks must now give opponents chance to present critical
replies in prime time; requirement is 1st of its kind and is seen likely to
alter Nixon's use of TV; FCC says it is not creating automatic right of reply to
any Pres broadcast and is leaving substantial flexibility of judgment to
broadcasters_including selection of opposing spokesmen and programs' format;
rules CBS, which designed loyal opposition series to let Dem Natl Com balance
Nixon's use of TV, must now let Repub Natl Com respond to Dem's response; says
none of cases before it falls under equal-time rule; says questions pertain to
fairness doctrine; says Nixon's use of prime network TV time for 5 ss in 7 mos
on Indochina war is exceptional matter; gives Nixon no precise guidance as to
how often or how long he can speak without justifying reply; does specify that
in case of single Pres s, there is no requirement that it be met by countering
single statement; ruling seen serving notice on Pres that he cannot consider
self or TV statements 'above battle' and noncontroversial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 28 words

Hopes for Laotian 'partial peace' involving northern war zone rise but any
accord would likely ignore southern war zone around Communist supply routes to S
Vietnam; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 92 words

J Reston on Nixon technique; says Adm is cautious, tidy, industrious, and
'monumentally dull'; says what is missing is capacity of Nixon and assocs to
convey to people deep feeling of conviction; says 3 basic problems facing Nixon
are how to withdraw from Vietnam and reduce Amer commitments abroad without
sliding into isolation; how to curb inflation; how to deal with threat of
anarchy and rebellion at home without defying civil liberties tradition; says
Adm has not estab sense of trust or affection needed to carry nation through
terrible issues

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 37 words

Hanoi Nhan Dan article markes 25 anniv of Japan's WW II surrender; N Vietnam
charges Japan continues 'path of agression pursued by blood-thristy Japanese
fascists in World War II'; says US has revived Japanese militarism

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 39 words

S Vietnamese Popular and Regional Forces, given nickname 'Ruff Puffs' by Amers,
number about 486,000 men; there are 466,000 men in S Vietnam's regular armed
forces; activities of 'Ruff Puffs' in village of Giabinh in Haunghia Prov

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 73 words

Pfc S G Green Jr convicted of murder of 15 S Vietnamese women and children in
village near Danang last Feb 19; sentenced to 5 yrs in prison; is reduced to
rank of private, given dishon discharge and ordered to forfeit all pay and
allowances; appeal is automatic; Pfc M S Krichten testifies he did not see Green
kill any victims; says Pvt M A Schwarz, already convicted, and Pvt R D Herrod,
awaiting trial, committed slayings; Green illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AFP)

LENGTH: 56 words

N Vietnamese newspapers, despite war, devote space to nonwar topics including
sports, literature, food and birth control; oral contraceptives reptdly are not
available, are expensive and not suitable for women in fields and jungles; drop
in birth rate from 34 per 1,000 in '60 to 25 per 1,000 nationwide and 18 per
1,000 in Hanoi noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 219 words

US officials, basing views on assessment that neither Arabs nor Israel are
deliberately trying to sabotage truce, express confidence cease-fire will not
break down and substantive talks will start soon, probably within coming wk; US
U-2 reconnaissance planes reptdly are monitoring cease-fire zone but Adm reptdly
does not feel it has conclusive proof that UAR violated truce; Adm reprs say US
wants more time to assess intelligence repts before reaching final judgment; US
intelligence reptdly holds there is solid evidence of major effort to improve
missile sites within cease-fire zone during wk prior to start of cease-fire but
are reasonably confident situation became stable within 48 hrs after cease-fire
took effect; US reptdly does not have photos of sites in question prior to
truce; seen viewing 2d Israeli complaint regarding sites west of Great Bitter
Lake as involving movement of missile equipment within gen 1- or 2-mi-wide
complex within cease-fire zone, rather than introduction of any new equipment;
use of Soviet tactic, developed in N Vietnam, of putting dummy missiles in
various sites while putting real missiles in other sites and then reversing them
noted; possibility that recent charges and countercharges will handicap talks
despite US conclusions on charges of violations discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 137 words

S Vietnamese militiamen, known as 'Ruff Puffs', fall upon Vietcong base area S
of Danang and claim 1 of their biggest victories of war; rept killing 125 enemy
and capturing 125 prisoners in coordinated series of more than 80 raids; S
Vietnamese Govt repts Regional Forces killed 308 enemy in 4 days of fighting
along coastal strip S of buffer zone; victories provide big lift for US officers
whose Vietnamization strategy rests heavily on belief that militia will be able
to help handle enemy forces after Amers leave; operation was planned by Col
Hoang Dinh Tho; details on action; 7 Amers killed, 53 wounded in several actions
and incidents; US spokesmen rept decommissioning of Coast Guard Div 13, last of
3 Coast Guard units to be deactivated after all their 26 patrol boats were
turned over to S Vietnamese; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 56, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 92 words

Article notes new mood of militancy adopted by SCLC in its demands for black
identity along with equality with whites; Rev Abernathy demands US be put on
'trial' for alleged crimes against blacks, SCLC conv; announces plans for new
march to Washington, DC, '71, for trial; resolution calls for $5,500 annual
income for all citizens; charges FBI fails to meet its 'responsibility' in
various fields; resolution urges repeal of draft and granting of draft
exemptions for all conf members; calls for withdrawal of all Amer troops from
Vietnam by end of yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

J Gould on battle over access to TV; criticizes recent FCC rulings as
contradictory and betraying unfamiliarity with broadcasters; comments on FCC
decision upholding right of WTOP to reject Business Execs Move for Vietnam Peace
ad; stresses TV's importance in opinion-making

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13, Column 3

LENGTH: 47 words

Article on Saigon TV station, which potentially reaches 75% of population; live
performances of Chinese opera are long-time favorite; TV is used for propaganda
purposes; Amers serve as advisers, but not too successfully; labyrinthine
bureaucracy compounds stations weaknesses; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 18, Column 7

LENGTH: 11 words

Finnish stamp commemg Pres Urho Kekkonen's 70th birthday due

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 18, Column 7

LENGTH: 12 words

S Vietnam stamp commemg rebuilding of old capital of Hue issued; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 17, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 86 words

Group of prominent attys and law profs establishes orgn called Lawyers Mil
Defense Com to provide civilian counsel in Vietnam to Amer soldiers facing legal
charges under mil code of justice; sponsors include R Clark, former Asst Atty
Gen B Marshall, Dean A S Goldstein, Prof L L Jaffe and former ACLU aide J J
Pemberton; Prof C R Nesson, member of com's dirs bd, says com will send field
dir to Vietnam in Oct; he and bd member W P Homans Jr say group would like to
deal with variety of cases, not only antiwar cases

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 17, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 19 words

Amer Red Cross worker V Kirsch found dead of stab wounds in her quarters near
Saigon; arrived in Vietnam 2 wks ago

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 17, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 12 words

Buddhist monk burns himself to death in Danang as sacrifice for peace

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 17, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 41 words

N Vietnamese troops shell 5 allied bases near buffer zone and B-52s stage
heaviest raids in nearly 2 yrs to take pressure off allied bases; casualties
reptd severe at 1 base; other action reptd; grenade wounds 16 civilians in
Saigon; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 18, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 0

LENGTH: 12 words

'Tell-It-To-Hanoi' Com ad urges defeat of McGovern-Hatfield amendment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 18, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Article on campaign for S Vietnamese Sen election on August 30; posters of 1
party employ propaganda technique to gain attention and curiosity; campaign said
to be generally lackluster; rallies have been forbidden to avert violence

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 18, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Vietnam veteran D Gerardo, recipient of Bronze Star, fails to pass police dept
exam because he is lacking 1.2 inches needed to meet 5-ft-7-inch ht requirement
set by State Civil Service Comm

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 18, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 14 words

200 troops trained in S Vietnam moved to Kompong Thom by helicopter as
reinforcements

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 18, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3; (AFP)

LENGTH: 43 words

Pathet Lao envoy Prince Tiao Souk Vongsak repts talks with Govt reprs
stalemated, apparently over issue of preliminary meetings between
plenipotentiaries from both sides; Pathet Lao protests against what it terms
entry of US and S Vietnamese troops into Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 18, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

US mission in Saigon, in move aimed at encouraging service of civilian advisers,
drops 5-yr prohibition against advisers bringing their wives to Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 18, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 396 words

Vice Pres Agnew charges McGovern-Hatfield excerpts; McGovern would halt Amer
combat action at end of this yr and bring all US troops home by mid-'71, is
'blueprint for the 1st defeat' in US history, s, VFW meeting, Miami Beach; says
Nixon Adm is prepared to see war to 'honorable end'; queries if amendment
sponsors 'give a damn'; says passage would destroy prospects of negotiated
settlement, leave S Vietnamese prey to Communist slaughter and have other
negative effects; acknowledges his charges are 'among the strongest' since he
took office but says 'no more dangerous' proposal has been presented to Cong 'in
those 19 mos--or in 19 yrs for that matter'; McGovern issues statement saying
real defeat would be to continue on present course; says he modifies amendment
in bid to win passage; says changes would move date for final withdrawal back to
Dec 31, '71, and would call on Pres to submit list of problems and suggestions
for carrying out withdrawal within 60 days after enactment; White House press
sec says Nixon shares Agnew's opposition to proposal; Scott says he favors
accelerated Amer withdrawal, but agrees that amendment would be 'precipitous
retreat'; Agnew states, more forcefully than Adm official has done before, White
House view that US must remain engaged in S Vietnam to prevent Communist
takeover of all SE Asia; assails Sen doves, including Fulbright, for arguing
that Nixon's Cambodian decision underscores need to place limits on President's
war-making powers; says Nixon decision, which he calls Nixon's 'finest hr',
makes case that Sen 'should leave the Pres alone' to take necessary steps to
protect Amer troops; McGovern says 'God save us from whatever may be (Nixon's)
worst hr'; Agnew says he does not question patriotism of Hatfield and McGovern,
but finds fault with 'their wisdom, their judgment and their logic'; says he
finds it ironic that Sens who did not speak out while Johnson sent 532,000
troops to Vietnam 'are obstructing and undercutting' Pres who is bringing
265,000 Amers home; Goodell says Agnew statement 'calls into serious question'
whether his trip to Indochina will provide Adm with 'any fresh, objective
insights'; says Agnew fails to note S Vietnam's mil force will be 4 times as
large as enemy's if US withdraws; Tass says Agnew s shows US intends to keep its
troops in S Vietnam indefinitely; Agnew illus; excerpts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 19, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 79, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 14 words

Smith's mil atty asks Songmy case be tried in Vietnam; defense makes other
motions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 19, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 101 words

G Noonan, head of Dubuque, Iowa, draft bd, comes to Washington to lobby for Sen
Hatfield amendment that would raise mil pay to level designed to encourage
enough volunteers to make draft unnecessary after June '71; amendment, which has
19 co-sponsors, including Sens McGovern and Goldwater, follows almost exactly
the recommendations made in Feb by Gates comm; supporters concede it will
probably be rejected by Sen-HR conf even if approved by Sen; Nixon Adm holds it
cannot afford estimated $3.3-billion cost in current fiscal yr and also opposes
ending draft so long as US maintains large force in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 19, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 69 words

Vietnam Com of Solidarity with Amer people holds celebration, Hanoi, N Vietnam,
linking struggle of Amer blacks to that of Vietnamese; ed in Communist party
newspaper Nhan Dan discusses similarity of struggles; says Vietnamese people,
who oppose 'Amer imperialist aggressors' with arms, consider Amer blacks as
'natural companions in arms and allies'; Black Panther party delegation attends
event led by E Cleaver

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 19, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 111 words

Former Sgt R J Parkinson says his objections to marijuana smoking so infuriated
men under his command that 1 of them tried to murder him with hand grenade,
testimony to Sen Dodd subcom hearing on drug abuse; former soldier J Steinberg
testifies marijuana smoking has reached epidemic proportions among US soldiers,
but Amer command refuses to face problem; Dodd says he hopes new hearings will
prod mil into action; says he is certain drug problem is worse than Defense Dept
statistics indicate; other statements made by Parkinson noted; writer L H
Whitten Jr says Vietcong defector told him Vietcong soldiers are banned from
smoking marijuana; Parkinson illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 19, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 41 words

Pathet Lao leader Prince Souphanouvong accuses on clandestine radio Laotian Govt
of Premier Souvanna Phouma of introducing S Vietnamese troops into Laos,
Saravane Prov on Aug 9; charges US sent S Vietnamese troops; State Dept denies
charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 19, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

Enemy troops attack S Vietnamese force near fire base 27 mi W of Hue; heavy
rains reduce ground action elsewhere in northern provs; B-52s raid; details on
action; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 19, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 16 words

Australia to offer S Vietnam about $3.6-million as 'defense aid; to withdraw bn
of 1,000 men

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 19, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 23 words

Hamlet of Thanhmy, devastated by Vietcong in massacre in June, has been almost
rebuilt; details on massacre and conditions in hamlet; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 19, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 91 words

Pres Nixon, after 15 mos debate within Adm, will send Geneva Protocol banning
use of chem and germ weapons to Sen; reliable sourc-s rept that his message
accompanying protocol will stress US view that tear gas and herbicides are not
included in treaty; rept Pres has informed Defense Dept that after Vietnam war
only Pres will be allowed to authorize use of either tear gas or herbicides;
rept Nixon willplace only 1 condition on US agreement, that US reserves right to
retaliate with chem weapons if attacked with them; Britain also submits plan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 19, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 231 words

Burch stresses that FCC order requiring TV networks to give prime-time exposure
to critics of Adm's Indochina policy is not grant of equal time to match Nixon's
appearances, statement clarifying ruling; says at least 6 newspapers and AP
reptd decision incorrectly as being 'anti-Nixon' or involving equal time; says
NY Times, Newsweek and Time misconstrued ruling in other respects; White House
officials, distressed at suggestion in 1st repts that FCC ruling would inhibit
Pres' use of TV, work with Burch's personal staff in follow-up briefings with
newsmen; White House expects Nixon will still enjoy favorable balance of TV time
and grant of ltd reply time will not discourage Nixon from using TV as heavily
in future as he has in past; Burch says FCC has not specified equal time or any
amount of time opposition should get; says FCC has rejected any principle of
right of reply or rebuttal to Pres; says decision does not relate essentially to
Nixon or Presidency but to issue of Indochina; NY Times Aug 15 rept on ruling
recalled; rept specified that FCC was not creating automatic right of reply to
any Pres broadcast and noted that order was drawn under 'fairness doctrine' and
not under 'equal time' rule; other papers mentioned by Burch are Christian
Science Monitor, Chicago Today, Washington Star, Chicago Sun-Times, Boston
Globe, St Paul Pioneer Press, Natl Observer

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 19, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 160 words

Sens Hatfield, Fulbright and McGovern accuse Vice Pres Agnew of trying to
undermine const govt by his attacks on them in Aug 18 (1:6) s to VFW in which he
charged that their amendment to end Vietnam war is 'blueprint for 1st defeat' in
US history; Hatfield says he fears Nixon Adm may be giving up trying to forge
pol settlement and may be seeking mil solution, s, Sen; Fulbright says he knows
of no precedent for Vice Pres to attack Sens personally; accuses him of trying
to intimidate Sens in 'dangerous perversion' of dem process; says Agnew is
potentially more dangerous than late Sen McCarthy because he is in line for
Pres; McGovern charges Agnew has apparently so intimidated press that he can
command unltd and umprecedented publicity for his own ideas; says those seeking
disengagement are at 'cruel disadvantage'; Cranston says amendment should be
discussed rationally; Thurmond, Dole and Dodd defend Agnew; Goodell scores
Agnew, s, NYC; excerpts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 20, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 71, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 35 words

Former servicemen, masked and unidentified to insure anonymity, testify before
TV cameras on near tragedy resulting from use of marijuana and other drugs in
US, Vietnam and Korea; US Judiciary Sub comm hearings

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 20, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 20 words

3,000 N Vietnamese soldiers reptdly attack Prek Tameak, 9 mi from Pnompenh;
10-day lull in major combat activity broken

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 20, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

Allied officials say S Vietnamese forces have made surprisingly good showing in
their current offensive against enemy base areas in north; S Vietnamese troops,
using style of fighting allies hope to adopt more and more as Amer withdrawals
continue, are reptd to have clashed almost daily with well-trained and
well-supplied N Vietnamese regulars in mts W of Danang and Hue without word of
any serious defeats; recent action in area discussed; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 21, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 2

LENGTH: 173 words

Dem Natl Com and CBS ask FCC to reconsider its ruling that Repubs must have
opportunity to answer Dem 'loyal opposition' broadcast on CBS in July; Dem party
chmn O'Brien says grant of 25 mins in prime time to Repubs would 'further
aggravate the severe imbalance that currently exists between the two major
political parties in terms of access to the public through radio and TV'; CBS
has announced it was suspending 'loyal opposition' programs but CBS pres Stanton
says network would go to ct if necessary to preserve 'loyal opposition' idea as
means of balancing extensive Pres use of TV; O'Brien charges that 'derailment'
of 'loyal opposition' series plus FCC ruling against paid ad of partisan issues
have blocked Dems' access to public; voices dissatisfaction with FCC order
requiring networks to give prime time to opponents of Nixon's Indochina policy;
NBC execs meet with Dem leaders in Sen on possible prime-time broadcast on Sept
1; Dems hold they should be allowed to use time to answer Nixon's criticisms of
Sen; O'Brien por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 21, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 6

LENGTH: 34 words

Lr, deplores bombing incidents, equates bldg bombs in basements with expressed
purpose of furthering peace in Vietnam and bldg ABM systems in various states
with expressed purpose of furthering world peace

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 21, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Prime Min Holyoake says NZ intends to withdraw inf co of 144 men from S Vietnam
before end of yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 21, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 9 words

S Vietnamese soldier on duty S of buffer zone illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 21, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 47 words

80th session of Paris talks; Bruce does not attend; sends Habib, who speaks for
2 mins and refuses to say why he is there and not Bruce; N Vietnamese spokesman
says Xuan Thuy will return soon; Amer spokesman says no decision has been made
on whether Bruce will attend next session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 21, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 27 words

Nguyen Van Thieu announces shifts in S Vietnamese mil high command; Maj Gens Ngo
Dzu and Ngo Quang Truong, Lt Gen Lu Lan and Brig Gen Pham Van Phu get new posts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 21, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

Laird says avg monthly number of B-52 sorties will be cut to 1,000; Pentagon
spokesman says cut coincides with reduction in US forces and increased number of
raids being flown by S Vietnamese Air Force

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 21, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

US command repts 69 Amers killed last wk, 16 fewer than wk before; repts 615
wounded, compared with 760 wk before; 43,366 Amers have been killed in war; S
Vietnamese and enemy casualties for last wk and war listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 22, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

Some crewmen of US helicopters that have ferried S Vietnamese troops into region
at Laotian frontier say S Vietnamese force of 400 men crossed border into Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 22, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 138 words

US Sen unanimously passes Fulbright amendment to mil procurement bill barring
use of US funds to pay foreign troops fighting in support of Cambodia and Laos;
amendment does not affect any operations in border areas abutting S Vietnam and
does not bar foreign countries, without US aid, from sending troops; Fulbright
says object of amendment is to bar S Vietnamese or Thais from going into
Cambodia and bldg a full-fledged partnership with Govt and drawing US in; Sen
Goldwater agrees; earlier, at Sen com hearing on US-Cambodian arms pact,
Fulbright says pact is substantial step toward commitment to Lon Nol Govt; Sen
Church says dimensions of US involvement are growing; Asst Sec Green testifies
in private on pact; Fulbright says Green declines to specify amt of aid but did
not deny published repts of about $40-million

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 23, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

Mss of 2 essays by late B Russell and other literary material to be auctioned on
Oct 1 by Publishers for Peace, group opposed to Indochina war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 23, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 26 words

Pretrial hearing in ct-martial of M/Sgt Higdon, charged with larceny, graft and
bribery in operation of service club in Vietnam, to begin, Redstone Arsenal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 23, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 11 words

Comment on improvement in performance of S Vietnamese troops; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 23, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 6 words

Comment on Sen election in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 23, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

Repr Zion to fly to Paris with appeal signed by 406 Reprs for more humane
treatment of Amer POWs; to speak with Bruce before delivering appeal to N
Vietnamese delegation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 23, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 15 words

US to give S Vietnam 150,000 tons of rice worth $25-million under Food for Peace
program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 23, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 53 words

Washington judge momentarily turns back appeal by peace groups for equal space
in Capitol crypt for display showing various aspects of war next to huge POW
display donated by millionaire H R Perot, who has tried unsuccessfully to
deliver gifts to Amer POWs in N Vietnam; says const issue of free speech is at
stake

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 23, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 16 words

Herrod pleads not guilty to charges he ordered killing of several Vietnamese
women and children

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 23, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

Informed sources in Saigon say US pilots are free to go anywhere in Cambodia and
attack enemy troops and supply lines; insist there has been no policy change

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 23, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 60 words

Negro Mrs M Campbell vows to have son Sp/4 Williams, killed in Vietnam, buried
in Hillcrest Memorial Gardens, all-white cemetery, Fort Pierce, Fla; says plot
was given to her by Mrs J Diehl, white; cemetery rejected Mrs Campbell's earlier
request for advertised free plot for servicemen; Fort Pierce Biracial Council
plans suit to force cemetery to allow burial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 23, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 100 words

Cambodian troops clear bank of Mekong E of Pnompenh in attempt to uncover enemy
troops left behind after heavy fighting there 2 days ago; no contact made; area
around Puk Rusey heavily bombed by Cambodians; map; S Vietnamese troops open
4,000-man drive against Vietcong near Neak Luong; sources in Saigon say US
pilots are free to go anywhere in Cambodia and attack enemy troops and supply
lines at any time mil officials believe enemy troops pose threat to forces in S
Vietnam; say air strikes are confined to E of Mekong in NE Cambodia; illus of 2
S Vietnamese soldiers carrying wounded comrade; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 24, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 43 words

Mich Dem conv approves resolution to amnesty all persons who have evaded draft
by going to jail or leaving country; adopts resolution calling for immediate
cease-fire and removal of all forces by Xmas; calls for payment of reparations
to 'unified Vietnam'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 24, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

UN Sec Gen Thant says UN is in crisis of authority because of 'outmoded and
unworkable concepts of natl sovereignty,' s, World Assn of World Federalists;
says UN decisions, particularly those of Security Council, must be enforceable;
also urges universal membership in UN because 'world cannot deal with Indochina
war and other matters involving the excluded countries'; says man must soon
solve problems of rising population, increasing pollution and 'multiplied
capacity of destruction' or perish

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 24, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

USAF is closing major fighter-bomber base in S Vietnam and withdrawing nearly
100 supersonice jets

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 24, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 10 words

Hanoi delagate Xuan Thuy is en route to Paris peace talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 24, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 61 words

Cambodia repts 500 enemy soldiers killed by allied air strikes in sanctuary
along border with S Vietnam; declines to identify planes involved; US bombers
based in S Vietnam broke 4-day lull to cross into Cambodia to raid N Vietnamese
infiltration routes; S Vietnamese troops kill 40 enemy in central highlands;
other details on recent action; B-52s fly 2 missions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 24, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 148 words

Vice Pres Agnew warns it will be impossible for US to withdraw combat troops
from S Vietnam if Communists overthrow Lon Nol Govt, int en route to Far East;
says US will do everything possible to help Cambodian regime; charges those Sens
voicing concern that US is becoming growingly committed to preservation of
present Govt fail to realize its importance to situation in S Vietnam; declines
to speculate on possibility that US may find it necessary to send ground combat
units into Cambodia again; voices confidence that HR will not support pending
amendment to mil appropriations bill to bar US financing of allied troops who
come to Cambodia's aid; says US decision to withdraw 20,000 troops will be
carried out, news conf en route to S Korea; arrives, Seoul; White House says
Agnew's remarks linking US interests in Asia to stability of Cambodian Govt
represent no change in Adm policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 25, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

Farber opens campaign by delivering roses to Abzug, irking her; makes 1st s in
front of Lower E Side bldg in which Sen Javits was born; gets his endorsement;
greets voters in several languages; backs unilateral cease-fire in Vietnam and
US troop withdrawal speed-up; Abzug charges he has changed position

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 25, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 28 words

Lrs on Vice Pres Agnew opposition to McGovern-Hatfield amendment; lr, noting
some Agnew statements, urges US not to withdraw troops from Vietnam 'too
precipitously'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 25, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 113 words

Defense attys, during Calley hearing, charged with murder in connection with
alleged massacre at Songmy in '68, seek disclosure of what they term key and
unclassified information that may shed further light on Songmy incident and
secretive Operation Phoenix, aimed at tracking down and sidelining Vietcong
officials; Latimer says most of hearing is taken up with arguments on motions
for perusal of Govt documents and memos; hearing recessed until tomorrow;
Latimer says defense seeks CIA records; says question of Operation Phoenix will
definitely arise during hearing; repts have described operation as leading to
massacre; T'Souvas hearing scheduled to resume; Calley illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 25, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 10 words

Article on kinds and use of helicopters in Vietnam war; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 25, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AFP)

LENGTH: 25 words

Black Panther information min E Cleaver scores Vice Pres Agnew tour and what he
describes as Nixon's doctrine of 'making Asians fight Asians', s, Hanoi

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 25, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 102 words

Explosion, thought to be caused by bomb, rips through U of Wisc Army Math
Research Center, Madison, frequent target of anti-Vietnam war demonstrations,
killing 1 student and injuring 4 other persons; illus; blast tears apart bldg,
destroying most of its contents including $1.5-million computer; details; dead
student identified as R Fassnacht, 33; injured listed; Wis Gov Knowles scores
bombing; center dir Prof J B Rosser says center, operated under Army contract,
does applied math research and has nothing to do with natl defense; cites
mistaken belief of antiwar militants that center worked on mil projects

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 5

LENGTH: 187 words

NYC Mayor Lindsay, urging Natl Munic League delegates to pressure Washington to
change its priorities, holds clean air is necessity; says cost of fighting
pollution has been estimated at $13-billion in next 5 yrs but Washington is
spending $100-million yrly; holds Govt has failed to regulate those whose
products blight our air; holds clean sts are absolute necessity, holds Fed Govt
has failed to regulate those whose products clog our sts; links improvement in
environmental conditions to change in priorities by Washington, cites areas in
which Fed Govt is still trying to fight pollution on econ and pol cheap basis;
holds clean water is necessity; says it has been estimated that it will cost
$54-billion for cleanup in next 5 yrs compared to Washington's current annual
expenditures of little more than billion dollars; holds Govt has failed to
regulate those whose products foul our waters; says search for solution to elec
power pollution has been curtailed by various delays in efforts to end fuel
shortages; says city has increased its environmental budgets by more than
$300-million this yr; scores Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 3

LENGTH: 37 words

Sen Percy, saying Paris talks have failed, urges US to emphasize truce and
negotiations with UN help, lr; urges peace conf on Indochina to arrange pol
settlement; urges US apply Nixon Middle East peace plan to Indochina war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 3

LENGTH: 112 words

J Reston says Washington officials are worried about frustrations of Vietnam;
says they worry about consequences of what they regard as their growing
successes in SE Asia; says they are troubled because they do not know who
formulates N Vietnamese policy and because US withdrawal means course of war
will be decided more by N Vietnam and S Vietnam; says Washington officials are
worried about econ consequences of Amer withdrawal; notes 1 US Cabinet official
holds inflation increases by 25% a yr; cites Cambodia as element of frustration
to Adm's concerns; holds Adm finds itself in familiar bind in which Govt grows
weaker despite mil successes and demands more US help

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 48, Column 6

LENGTH: 194 words

NYS Gov Rockefeller holds Goodell has pol problems because of criticism of Nixon
Adm Vietnam policies, int while traveling to Ft Ticonderoga for bicentennial
fete; says most people feel Nixon has committed himself to end war and they do
not want him to be attacked; says that is majority view and that is his
position; says Goodell is 'on the other end' of war issue says his own support
for Nixon represents majority view, urges adoption by Goodell; lauds Goodell
abilities, indicates he is personally giving financial support to campaign; does
not mention Goodell in day of campaigning in northern part of state; pointedly
ignores him at Malone luncheon while mentioning other Repub nominees; is
escorted there by Franklin County Repub chmn Plumatore although orgn backs
Buckley; sees Rockefeller-Buckley signs at Oneida County airport and signs
opposing abortion law reform; greeted by dozen women carrying signs protesting
his signing of law; attends Malone fair; ceremonies mark Ft Ticonderoga
bicentennial, Rockefeller attends; Goodell suggests any Nixon endorsement would
be part of gen endorsement of ticket, has recd no personal commitment, news
conf, NYC

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 10 words

Nguyen Van Thieu says he has asked US to increase econ aid

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 46 words

J M Sweeney, who says he defected from USMC and fought for Vietcong, arrives in
Stockholm with N Vietnamese passport and asks for pol asylum; says there are
other Amer soldiers who have defected to Vietcong, news conf; says he was not a
prisoner but member of liberation forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 15 words

S Vietnamese Govt now claims control over 92.4% of population, 1.3% increase
over last mo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 27, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 51 words

T'Souvas's atty Capt W C Lanham asks that legal proceedings against T'Souvas be
moved from Ft McPherson, Ga, to Mylai 4; says only in Vietnam can 'psychological
stresses' on fighting men be viewed in light that may reflect more favorably on
T'Souvas; trial judge Lt Col M C Wright defers action on motion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 27, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 25 words

Premier Thanom Kittikachorn says Thailand has begun negotiations with S Vietnam
for withdrawal of its troops; says troops are needed on Thai borders

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 27, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 21 words

2 Amers and Vietcong defector killed in accidental shelling by US unit 100 mi
N-NE of Saigon; incident is being investigated

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 27, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 147 words

Increasing importance attached by Arab commandos to support from ultramilitants
worldwide discussed; Palestine Liberation Orgn newspaper notes arrival of group
of Black Panthers from US in Jordan for Palestinian Natl Council meeting; notes
similarity between status of Palestinains and that of blacks; Arafat reptdly has
met Panther min E Cleaver in Algiers and some Panthers reptdly have received
training at commando camps in Jordan; other visitors to Palestinain Natl Council
meeting, which is devising strategy against peace settlement, are expected to
include reprs from Communist China, N Korea, Albania, Cuba and N Vietnam; recent
signs of upsurge in Communist Chinese backing of commandos discussed; rept that
Communist Chinese Premier Chou En-lai received jr commando envoy H Mahmoud and
assurances of support for Palestinian revolution pledged by Chinese officials
noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 27, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 68 words

Laird says S Korea's request for $3-billion in mil aid and equipment over next 5
yrs is neither feasible nor realistic, given present attitude of Cong, news
conf; Adm officials see 'basic agreement' reached between Agnew and Park in
Seoul, as 1st substantial application of Nixon doctrine outside Vietnam; Adm
conclusions, based on intensive study, that led to decision to apply doctrine in
Korea discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 27, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 114 words

McGovern-Hatfield amendment is modified to prohibit maintenance of more than
280,000 troops in Vietnam after April 30, '71, and, while still calling for
complete withdrawal by end of '71, to give Pres more latitude; modifications
would allow Pres to delay withdrawal for 60 days after end of '71 if Amer troops
are endangered; Sen, 48-30, rejects mil procurement bill amendment sponsored by
Sens Proxmire and Schweiker that would have restricted $200-million fund for
C-5A; amendment detailed; Sen defeats, 62-22, Goodell-Nelson amendment to cut
off funds for herbicides; Nelson's statements in support of amendment and
statements against it made by Sens McIntyre and Dominick noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 27, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 92 words

NY Times survey on sniper attacks, terrorist bombings, shootouts and rising
assaults against policemen throughout nation which are causing deep concern
among police about their personal safety and ability to do their job; policemen
and city, state and Fed officials comment; numerous incidents of terrorism
against policemen cited; graph of policemen killed in line of duty in last 10
yrs; says many ptl feel they are bearing brunt of anger from militant groups for
poor housing, unemployment and Vietnam war, things for which they are not
responsible

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHS & CHARTS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 27, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 419 words

Nixon Adm officials say US is ready to join USSR in 2-nation peace-keeping force
to maintain settlement, background briefing for newspaper eds; say force,
resembling UN Emergency Force that maintained cease-fire prior to June '67 war,
would depend on consent of Israel and Arabs but would not be assembled until
settlement is reached through Jarring talks; say force is viewed as supplement
to any mutual security arrangements that might be devised by Arabs and Israel;
express belief force can do much to maintain settlement and imply that prospect
of force is viewed as easing suspicions and speeding settlement; transcript of
briefing reveals extent to which Adm views conflict as US-Soviet responsibility;
views US and USSR as sharing responsibility for success of talks with USSR
responsible for persuading Arabs to accept compromise solution and US
responsible for exercising restraint on Israel; implies that even if Arabs and
Israelis can achieve settlement, US and USSR might be forced to guarantee it,
viewed as reason why US officials have begun to think about peace-keeping force;
White House sources rept Agnew had consulted with Nixon and was within framework
of natl policy in saying 'we're going to do everything we can to help Lon Nol
Govt', transcript of briefing to eds and publishers at San Clemente compound;
say chances of survival of current Govt are now better than 50-50 whereas they
were judged to be only 1 in 4 before US-S Vietnamese intervention; White House
sources say major reason for Nixon's desire to keep an Amer presence in Asia is
his belief that full-scale retreat may provoke dramatic shift in Japan's
internal policies with unpleasant consequences for US and others; possible
Japanese decision to assume Amer's role in Aisa and other likely policy shifts
noted; say US is persuaded that USSR-Chinese rift may push USSR into
rapprochement with West; Adm is aware of concern of some of most dedicated Amers
with impact of war on soc; Adm also believes that if US reaches situation where
policy is made in sts, it will not be upper middle-class youths who take over
country but more primitive and elemental group; Adm considers self best
protection of some of people who are most vocal against it; Adm officials, at
briefing in Calif, repeat their belief that Vietnamization is working and that N
Vietnam will be induced to reach negotiated settlement; say negotiated peace is
essential; say Adm is conscious of concern of some 'dedicated Amers' with impact
of war on Amer soc

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 28, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 1

LENGTH: 116 words

P O'Dwyer named campaign mgr of Dem ticket in NYC; apptmt made by J Finkelstein,
chmn of NYC Dem Com recently organized to coordinate party activities in NYC,
after consultation with Goldberg, county Dem leaders, leaders of Reform movement
and other party factions; O'Dwyer, stressing unity, says he is spokesman for
leaders and for every aspect of party in city; O'Dwyer to devote full time to
campaign, to have offices at Goldberg hq and own staff; Finkelstein announces
com officers and dirs, none listed; AMVETS Silver Helmet Award for World Peace
to A J Goldberg; Goldberg says he doubts US will have to send mil forces if
Israelis and Arabs negotiate peace and come to terms with each other

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 28, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 8

LENGTH: 11 words

Satirical Wall St prospectus describes co named War In Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 28, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Article on work done by US Army mortuary in Saigon, which receives, identifies
and transports to US bodies of Amer soldiers; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 28, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 64 words

Vice Pres Agnew meets with Nguyen Van Thieu and Nguyen Cao Ky; indicates his
visit to Saigon is 'something of a breather' on his SE Asian tour; lauds S
Vietnamese people for suffering 'so much in freedom's cause' and pledges again
that 'there will be no lessening' of Amer support, s, Tansonnhut Airfield,
Saigon; lauds S Vietnamese for 'impressive achievements'; confs with Abrams

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 28, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 64 words

Pvt Herrod takes stand in his own defense; denies women and children killed were
murdered; his attys fight to introduce 2 secret hq messages sent shortly after
killings by Maj Gen E Wheeler; Sen G Stipe, Herrod's chief atty, says 1 of
messages said Vietnamese officials were not disturbed over incident since all
families involved were considered Vietcong; Herrod describes incident

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 28, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

Only 2 Amers reptd to survive recent helicopter crash in S Vietnam; 30 presumed
dead

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 28, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 57 words

Workers of the Greater Union Force, party representing Caths who fled N Vietnam,
plan strategy for election; pol observers expect election to provide some clues
to popularity of present Govt and its ability to conduct free elections;
election is being carefully watched to discern electoral strength of militant
Buddhists; other details; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 28, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 44 words

Vice Pres Agnew, in Pnompenh, seems to underscore his earlier statement that it
would be impossible for US to withdraw its troops from Vietnam if Cambodia falls
to Communists; he and Nguyen Cao Ky inspecting S Vietnamese hon guard on his
arrival in Saigon illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 28, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 47 words

US command repts 52 Amers died in combat last wk, lowest toll in 3 1/2 yrs;
repts 358 Amers wounded, drop of 257 from wk before; S Vietnamese casualties
lowest in mo; allied spokesmen rept 1,055 enemy killed last wk, lowest figure
since April, '67; figures for entire war listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 29, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 99 words

37 minority group members graduate from summer journalism program at Columbia
Journalism School designed to bring more blacks, Puerto Ricans and other
minorities into news field; J Bond calls on grads to help form coalition from
all ranks of soc to improve conditions in US; program dir F W Friendly says
media now realize need for more minority group newsmen; Ga Repr J Bond rejects
strategies of blacks who preach separatism, s, Columbia U Journalism School;
calls for coalition from all ranks in soc to improve conditions in country;
links Vietnam war to country's domestic problems; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 29, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 31 words

N Vietnam concedes war has heavily damaged its 'already very poor and backward'
econ, rept prepared for country's 25th anniv; nationwide drive to increase
production has been launched

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 29, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu distributes 1st land titles to peasants, Baclieu Prov,
under recently enacted land reform program; titles were printed on US Aid
computer and were based on aerial-photograph overlays

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 29, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

6 Amers killed, 26 wounded after Amer unit is ambushed in central highlands;
hamlet 40 mi E of Saigon shelled by mistake by Amer forces; 3 civilians killed,
13 wounded; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 29, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Article on campaign of Dr Nguyen Duy Tai, Buddhist candidate who talks with
voters in hamlet on outskirts of Saigon; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 29, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 54 words

Vietnam veteran W L Martin, who lied about his age and became soldier in '68
when he was 12 yrs old, is freed from US mil jail after 1 day by Comr Thomas;
Thomas drops charges of fraud at request of Atty Gen's office; Army says no mil
charges are pending; Asst US Atty Richards outlines youth's short mil career;
Martin illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 29, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 57 words

Paris talks said to appear to enter new exploratory phase as result of Bruce
apptmt; decisive Amer delegation move held unlikely for several wks; return of
Xuan Thuy said to remove major hindrance to Bruce's exploration; US and enemy
stands noted; Bruce said to resist Communist pressure to change Amer support of
Saigon regime; Bruce illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 29, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 182 words

Palestinian Natl Council adopts series of resolutions including rejection of
current peace efforts; resolutions are intended to declare strategy of Arab
militants against what they consider threat of peace with Israel; do not
indicate any shift in mil tactics or orgn of commandos and are vaguely worded to
avoid arousing discord among various commando groups; seen attempt to discredit
moderates by declaring that resistance movement is only spokesman for
Palestinians and has natural right to express aspirations of people to liberate
homeland; urge Jordanian Army back goals of militants and reject attempts to
divide country into separate Palestinian and Jordanian states; 11 non-Arab
guests attend session, 6 of whom reptdly are US Black Panthers and 5 are members
of Ethiopian guerrilla group; absence of Cleaver and reprs of Govts of Albania,
Communist China, Cuba, N Korea and N Vietnam noted; Arafat illus at conf; group
of Palestinians clashes with Jordanian troops, Amman, shortly after conf
adjourns, while commandos were attempting to put up posters on walls of Amman
post office

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 29, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 152 words

Vice Pres Agnew tells Lon Nol that US will supply money and arms but will not
send Amer troops to Cambodia's defense, Pnompenh conf; welcomed to city by Cheng
Heng; illus; heavy security measures described; Agnew says later that he made
'no commitments whatsoever' to expand Amer presence; hopes his visit indicates
to Communists US concern when free nations are invaded; says his remarks to Lon
Nol and other officials were 'extremely guarded'; says he voiced US interest in
a 'continued nonaligned status for Cambodia'; modifies earlier statement linking
US troop withdrawal from Vietnam to stability of Cambodia regime; says Lon Nol
understands that US troops would only enter Cambodia again if it becomes
necessary to act against Communist enclaves posing threat to security of US
troops in S Vietnam; doubts US would even send in mil advisers; apologizes to
newsmen for denying that he would visit Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 30, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 12 words

Tarr sees little likelihood of all-volunteer force until Vietnam war ends

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 30, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1; (GP)

LENGTH: 55 words

Gallup poll (July 31-Aug 2) finds Dems lead Repubs as party best able to handle
top US problems, 31% to 19%, with 39% discerning no difference and 11% with no
opinion; gap between Dems and Repubs has doubled since last survey in June;
respondents list as top problems Vietnam war, campus unrest, environmental
pollution; tables

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 30, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 25 words

Comment on little help in war offered by allied troops other than those from S
Vietnam and US; graph shows number of foreign troops in S Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 30, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 62 words

Ed says talk-fight strategy of both sides in Paris talks is bankrupt; holds
negotiated settlement is only way to end war; notes central issue is who shall
govern S Vietnam; urges negotiation of cease-fire; says Nguyen Van Thieu, in
recent s, has opened door for possibility of cease-fire; says US should waste no
time in putting cease-fire proposal on negotiating table

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 30, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 92 words

W V Shannon offers view that trouble with Nixon is that he is not conservative
enough, that function of conservative adm is to calm country; says he has
ideological commitment (stopping Communism in S Vietnam) and pol ambition
(making Repubs into majority party) which seem to take precedence over calming
country; says that in order to achieve pol ambition, he has to arouse voters'
emotions and keep them stirred up; says strategy he and Agnew are using to do so
has effect of dividing country and contradicting normal conservative efforts to
unite it

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 30, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 39 words

Lr on current Sen debate on McGovern-Hatfield 'Amendment to End the War'
stresses importance of setting time limit on US mil involvement in Indochina;
deplores irrelevant argument about whether Pres or Cong should control mil
tactics

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 30, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

C Bethea, ex-soldier who served in Vietnam, arrested on charges of possessing
more than $50,000 worth of cocaine and heroin, NYC; police say they believe he
had mailed drugs from SE Asia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 30, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 62 words

Enemy troops attack Buddhist orphanage and temple S of Danang, killing 15 S
Vietnamese and wounding 45; most of victims were orphans; enemy 1st shelled
complex of bldgs; attack is 1 of 50 staged by enemy throughout S Vietnam;
increased activity said to be designed to disrupt S Vietnamese Sen elections;
enemy attacks 2 polling places NE of Saigon; 2 US helicopters downed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 30, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 13 words

N Vietnamese mil command warns Vietcong troops of booby traps set by US troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 30, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 9 words

S Vietnamese militiamen in field S of buffer zone illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 31, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 3

LENGTH: 87 words

H Mitgang comments on Washington's cover-up of US extensive bombing in S
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos; notes Symington prepares strongly documented record
of US policies 'caught in the slipstream of past errors and present fables';
says censored transcripts dispute Adm line that present combat is designed to
protect Amer forces; notes Laird statements on bombing of Cambodia; notes
Pentagon sources say 7,000 attack sorties took place last mo; says revelations
amplify what news correspondents on scene have discovered

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 31, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 55, Column 2

LENGTH: 207 words

Comr Johnson says every time Pres speaks to nation on TV, networks should give
comparable treatment to opposite views, statement clarifying his concurrence
with FCC ruling that requires networks to give prime time exposure to critical
spokesmen replying to Nixon's 5 ss on Indochina war; holds that whenever Pres
speaks, he has by definition spoken on what Fairness Doctrine characterizes as
'controversial issue of pub importance'; holds leaders of opposing parties and
opposing viewpoints in Cong should be given opportunity to reply; holds such
rebuttal is needed to present different views, to represent opposing pol parties
and to perpetuate system of coequal branches of Govt in TV age; split with Burch
noted; holds FCC should move toward establishing right of reply; holds such
replies to Pres are all the more important since FCC has denied antiwar groups
and Dem Natl Com any right of access to TV; chides Burch for criticizing press
accounts of original FCC decision and questions 'extraordinary force and haste'
with which Burch insisted ruling would not hurt Nixon; by expressing hope that
Burch's clarification was not dictated by White House, Johnson stirs up repts
that Burch's attack on press had high-level encouragement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 31, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 0

LENGTH: 16 words

Com to Support the Pres for Peace in Vietnam urges defeat of McGovern-Hatfield
amendment, ad

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 31, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 7 words

R Showalter elected natl comdr of AMVETS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 31, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 51 words

Japanese news agency says Japan will seek to improve her relations with N
Vietnam soon in attempt to bring peace to Indochina; says informed sources
disclose Deputy Min Shinsaku Hogen has visited several nations to bring about
peace initiatives; will examine possibility of extending econ aid to N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 31, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 67 words

Concerned Academy Grads, newly organized group of antiwar grads of US
armed-service acads, opens drive to convince Amers that only honorable peace is
for US to admit it made mistake and get out ov Vietnam; has as its 1st objective
lobbying for McGovern-Hatfield amendment; 4 members of 125-member orgn held news
conf last wk to announce plans; 2-mo-old group claims membership alumni of 3
service acads

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 31, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 181 words

Several million S Vietnamese cast votes for 30 Sens; voting is marked by
terrorist attacks in some areas and charges of fraud in others; S Vietnamese
command repts enemy troops and terrorists shell hosp, temple and orphanage near
Danang, 14 dist towns, a prov capital and at least 4 polling places; 42 S
Vietnamese civilians killed, 114 injured; enemy initiates 55 incidents; US
command repts 49 shelling attacks during night, highest number since June 11;
election is expected to test pol muscle of Nguyen Van Thieu and militant
Buddhist faction; details on attacks; voting said to go smoothly except for
attacks; several candidates charge prov and dist chiefs in some areas withhold
voting cards, needed by voter in order to receive ballot; only 58% of eligible
voters vote in Saigon; Nguyen Van Thieu says 'dem consciousness' of people has
increased; US command announces recent incident in which Navy jet escorting
unarmed reconnaissance plane 'conducted protective reaction against an AA
installation with unknown results'; US spokesman declines to go into detail;
illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 31, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 152 words

Vice Pres Agnew says that since more than half of Communist forces in Cambodia
have been eliminated there is no present need to consider using US troops in
combat operations across Cambodian border, int, Honolulu; says, in reference to
his original statement on link between withdrawals and Cambodian Govt, he meant
that future withdrawal timetables 'might not be as ambitious' as Nixon Adm would
like if S Vietnamese were to face consolidated enemy force along Cambodian
border; Agnew says he learned from briefings by Abrams that enemy does not have
ability to mount major offensive; says S Korean misgivings over withdrawal of US
troops will fade once they have sufficient opportunity to adjust to proposal;
says he found over-all situation, in countries he visited, 'quite a bit more
stabilized' than it was when he visited in Jan; says Asian allies are prepared
to accept Nixon doctrine of self-reliance

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 1, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

Amer Sociological Assn pres Bendix criticizes politicians and protesters alike
for turning univs into 'convenient battlegrounds,' s, assn conv; says univs
cannot solve pol problems; sees distrust of reason of present generation of
dissenters; links it to failure of natl pol community; Bendix and other officers
of Amer Sociological Assn sign petition calling on Pres Nixon and Cong to
withdraw US troops from Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos immediatley; petition is not
official document but will be circulated among members

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 1, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 73 words

Lr says McGovern-Hatfield approach to getting US out of war is doomed to failure
because of Nixon's success in convincing majority of Amers that he is ending war
in only manner consistent with Amer standards of hon; says doves must take
different approach to hasten end of US involvement; says they should press for
enactment of bar to further use in Vietnam, after Dec 31, of any soldiers who
have not volunteered for duty in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 1, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 93 words

Pres Nixon seeks to dissociate himself from suggestion that US, with USSR, is
ready to establish peace-keeping force if crisis is resolved, TV int; illus;
seen impressed with unfavorable reaction from Israel and Arabs to proposal; seen
believing plan is premature; confs with Sen Murphy, just returned from Israel;
says road to peace is difficult, but that hope exists; Nixon says he expects no
dramatic movement in Paris talks, but indicates he still hopes for negotiated
settlement in Vietnam; expresses unreserved opposition to McGovern-Hatfield
amendment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 1, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 105 words

4-day armed siege of S Vietnamese mil hosp by S Vietnamese Army dr Capt Ha Thuc
Nhan, accused of killing hosp admr Maj Tran Van Hien, ends when 4 armored
vehicles blast their way into hosp compound in Nhatrang; Ha Thuc Nhan is found
dead; at least 3 others, including US Army bus driver, killed as result of
siege; informants say Ha Thuc Nhan's action was touched off by his anger at
murder charge; Ha Thuc Nhan's accusers say his motive for murder was that Tran
Van Hien was 'corrupt'; Ha Thuc Nhan resisted mil police when they sought him
recently, and rallied several wounded hosp patients to begin siege; details on
incident

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 1, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 165 words

Natl League of Families of Amer Prisoners and Missing in SE Asia holds private
screening for newsmen in Washington of N Vietnamese film of Amer POWs attending
Xmas ch service; Repr Zion gave copy of film to orgn; was handed original as he
talked with N Vietnamese delegation members in Paris last wk; league's natl
coordinator Mrs I Powers say film was shown to newsmen so that group could
challenge conception that conditions depicted in film are typical of those in
which more than 600 Amer POWs are held; Pentagon is also given copy of film;
says it has postively identified 14 of about 70 POWs seen in film; 40 others
tentatively identified; Asst Sec Henkin says Pentagon will press for official
list; Mrs Powers comments; some frames from film illus; IRC pres M Naville
scores both N and S Vietnam for their attitude toward IRC inspection of their
prison camps, s, Geneva; urges internatl conf to consider extension of
protection of '48 Geneva conv on POWs to other types of prisoners

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 1, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 28 words

Cambodian Govt troops withdraw from Srang after fierce battle with Vietcong
troops; war activity falls off after surge in connection with election; details
on action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 1, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 150 words

S Vietnamese anti-Govt Buddhists appear to win 10 of 30 Sen seats contested in
election; unofficial returns show 2 Roman Cath slates, 1 pro-Govt and the other
regarded as independent, are victorious; election of Buddhist ticket expected to
enliven Sen rather than present any real problems for Nguyen Van Thieu; Sen as a
whole remains controlled by conservative, essentially pro-Govt elements; for
Buddhists, results mean they will have forum for voicing long-standing
complaints against dominance by Cath population, which is minority accounting
for 10% of population and holding about 50% of Sen seats; Nguyen Van Thieu
advisers are not concerned about strong Buddhist showing; winning Buddhist slate
is led by Prof Vu Van Mau; pro-Govt slate is led by Huynh Van Cao; Nguyen Van
Huyen leads slate that runs 3d; Govt officials say 65.7% of eligible voters turn
out; rept enemy attacked 73 targets

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 2

LENGTH: 49 words

Buckley calls opponents 'white flag' candidates for supporting US Sen motion to
set date for Vietnam withdrawal; campaigns at Cross County Shopping Center,
Yonkers; earlier opens Westchester hq, White Plains; favors returning much govt
responsibility to local communities, away from Fed Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 2

LENGTH: 28 words

Ottinger warns Nixon Adm not view Sen defeat of amendment on Vietnam withdrawal
date as endorsement of its policies; notes he is co-sponsor of counterpart HR
resolution

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 34 words

US soldiers find marijuana is plentiful in S Vietnam; ways they acquire it
noted; many farmers grow it; efforts by officials to suppress use noted; most
soldiers questioned say they use it out of boredom

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 133 words

Vice Pres Agnew briefs Pres Nixon, San Clemente; illus; asked to make like rept
to ex-Pres Johnson; says Cambodian Govt 'has at least a fighting chance for
survival' as a result of US-S Vietnam attack on Communist border sanctuaries,
comment to newsmen after rept to Nixon, San Clemente; says US regards Cambodian
Govt as that of neutral, not ally; says Cambodian situation appears to be
developing well; Agnew's statement seen 1st official indication that US concern
for survival of Lon Nol Govt was consideration in May offensive; Min Koun Wick
says he sees no solution to war short of total withdrawal of enemy troops, int,
Pnompenh; says he will lead Cambodian delegation to conf on nonaligned nations
at Zambia; says Cambodia hopes to increase size of armed forces from 140,000 to
210,000 men

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 96 words

S Vietnamese troops, reinforced by Amers, kill 56 Vietcong in battle lasting
nearly 8 hrs 120 mi E-NE of Saigon; 1 Amer helicopter downed; other action
noted; illus; map; S Vietnamese spokesmen rept 29 enemy POWs escaped while on
their way from work site to prison on Phuquoc Is; mil police rept killing 9
prisoners, wounding 2; Govt forces attempting to recapture Srang meet with stiff
enemy resistance; US command announces disbanding of 2 Amer combat brigades
totaling 10,000 men; 8,000 are left to be pulled out to meet Nixon's schedule
for 384,000 troops on Oct 15; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 4 words

Vu Van Mau biog and por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 179 words

Sen defeats McGovern-Hatfield amendment by 55-to-39 vote; alliance of Repubs and
Southern Dems turns down proposal; number of pro votes becomes issue because
Sens knew amendment was going to be defeated; Sen Griffin says only question
will be 'psychological impact' of debate; says vote supports Nixon; Hatfield
claims moral victory; Sen also rejects, 71-to-22, proposal forbidding Army to
send draftees to Vietnam against their will; Hatfield and McGovern say they have
not considered what to do next to place limitation on war; McGovern concedes he
does not see any possibility of doing anything in this session of Cong; Sens
opposing amendment make it clear they feel their victory, at the least,
indicates willingness on part of Sen to go along with Nixon's plans for
Vietnamization; some backers of amendment warn of possible Sen confrontation;
Aiken, Cooper and Percy vote against amendment, presumably to give Nixon free
hand in negotiations; statements of Stennis and McGovern on amendment noted;
McGovern, Hatfield, Cranston, Goodell and Hughes illus; roll-call

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 102 words

14 Sens urge Nixon to propose comprehensive standstill cease-fire for S Vietnam
at Paris talks, lr to White House; describe proposal as course of action that
has not yet been tried; lr is drafted and circulated by Sen Jackson, firm
supporter of Nixon policy; is also signed by Scott, Mansfield, Bayh, Magnuson,
Bible, McIntyre, Dole, Goldwater, Javits, Prouty, Percy, Young and Stevens;
includes proposals on various aspects of war as part of cease-fire package;
White House press sec welcomes lr and describes it as 'generally consistent'
with US stand; says Nixon has not had opportunity to rev it in detail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 2

LENGTH: 16 words

Xuan Thuy virtually rules out cease-fire plan suggested by 14 Sens, Vietnam
Peace Talks, Paris

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Communist Chinese Premier Chou En-lai accuses US of trying to end fighting in
Indochina by 'feverishly practicing pol deception and contriving peace talk
schemes', s, N Vietnamese Embassy reception, Peking; links USSR to US
activities; says revolutionary situation in Indochina is at its best; says
Indochinese peoples have formed 'powerful united front against US imperialism'
and are helping each other

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 2

LENGTH: 27 words

NYC labor negotiator T Kheel is going to Paris to try to find out if his
experience can be used in Vietnam peace talks; points out he takes trip as
private citizen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 91 words

US transfers control of Army co of 31 helicopters to S Vietnamese Air Force; US
spokesman calls move 'step forward' in Vietnamization program; more helicopters
will be turned over to S Vietnamese later; enemy downs US fighter plane 390 mi
NE of Saigon; US announces nearly 2,000 men from 2 inf units stationed around
Saigon will be withdrawn soon; remaining 10,000 men in units reptdly will be
redeployed by mid-Oct; 3 Amers killed, 14 wounded in explosion of US
fighter-bomber being refueled at Danang air base; plane exploded after catching
fire

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 76 words

Area in S Vietnam called the Street Without Joy, located between Quangtri and
Hue, has begun to stir with life again after villagers from it were evacuated in
'67 by allied soldiers for mil reasons; allies, satisfied Govt control had been
re-established, began moving villagers back in Feb; villagers are rebuilding
their hamlets, but aid to them is being slowed down by bureaucracy; are said to
appear to be glad to be on ancestral ground again; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 48 words

C Stephens, leader of Amer Youths for a Just Peace, group touring S Vietnam,
says its members are astounded by difference between country's image in press
and 'reality' of what they find, news conf; says group finds remarkable progress
in several areas and is amazed at 'level of freedom'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

Ed, noting proposal by 14 Sens and White House reaction to it, says US offer to
negotiate terms of cease-fire could give signal to N Vietnam that US is willing
to accept status quo, pending discussion of more permanent form of pol
accommodation or reconciliation; says Sens' proposal is new only in its broad
spectrum of bipartisan support; says similar consensus may also be in making in
S Vietnam; urges Nixon to put proposal forward

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 37 words

Panther delegation leaves Hanoi for Peking and Algeria; Cleaver discusses tour;
Cleaver says Black Panther delegation met with N Vietnamese leaders during visit
to SE Asia; denounces 'trickery' of Nixon's promises of peace

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 20 words

Lt C C Roberts acquitted by gen ct-martial bd of having negligently killed
Vietnamese woman with sniper rifle March 28

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7; (UPI)

LENGTH: 23 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky will visit US soon to address Washington
rally planned by Rev C McIntire on behalf of Nixon policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 37 words

Vietnam casualty figures for last wk, entire war and other periods reptd; B-52s
bomb Ho Chi Minh Trail; Govt troops reptdly recapture Srang, Cambodia after
6-day battle; enemy stages 28 rocket attacks; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 71 words

Australian Min McMahon scores NY Times comment (Ag 30,IV,1:7) asserting
Australian troops in S Vietnam are mercenaries whose costs are paid by US, s,
Canberra; US Amb Rice says expenses of Australian forces are paid in full by
Australian Govt, statement; says Australian troops are led entirely by their own
comdrs; McMahon s is in answer to question posed by Australian Repr; text of
comment in question; Times says it errs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 56 words

40 disabled S Vietnamese veterans are barricaded in Govt-owned apt house in
Saigon after exchanging gunfire with police and soldiers in their campaign for
improved benefits from S Vietnamese Govt; 9 persons wounded, including 3 Amers;
spokesman for veterans says group intends to hold out as long as it can; details
on violence; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 119 words

Cambodian Govt moves on several fronts to document its case against Communist
forces fighting in Cambodia, underscore its claim of neutralist policy and
appeal to world opinion for support; several activities seen aimed at
influencing participants at coming Zambia conf; moves include well-organized
anti-Communist demonstration by Cambodian youths, Lon Nol reading of 'open lr to
all chiefs of state of the world' repeating his policy of neutrality and release
of white paper reptdly documenting build-up of Vietcong and N Vietnamese forces
in Cambodia; Premier souvanna Phouma says he has asked Prince Souphanouvong to
meet him in Paris in Oct, news conf, Paris, en route to Zambia conf of
nonaligned nations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 121 words

82d session of Paris Peace talks; Xuan Thuy ends 9-mo boycott of talks; declares
US position has not changed; makes clear that Communist position has not changed
either; says US must agree to withdraw unconditionally and 'renounce' Saigon
Govt; he and Bruce, after session, tell reporters that other side presents
nothing new; Xuan Thuy describes as 'very flexible and generous' his side's
proposal to support coalition govt; Vietcong spokesman emphasizes there are
laudable elements in Saigon regime that oppose regime; Bruce, during session,
offers to discuss specific matters in practical way; Pham Dang Lam denounces
Communist actions in SE Asia; Bruce seconds allegations; Communists deny them;
Bruce and Xuan Thuy illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 120 words

24 members of Disarmament Conf approve draft treaty as '70 session ends; Mexico
refuses to accept draft, contending that sec stating that prohibition on nuclear
weapons outside 12-mi limit would not apply either to coastal state or to seabed
beneath its territorial waters would permit outside state to install nculear
weapons in 12-mi coastal zone of another state; will ask Gen Assembly to amend
sec; conf ends '70 session without accord on prohibiting biological and chem
warfare; USSR Amb Roshchin serves notice that next yr he will resume fight for
treaty banning both; says US backs Brit proposal banning biological weapons only
because it wants to retain right to continue using unspecified chem weapons in
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 7; (UPI)

LENGTH: 112 words

1,000 S Vietnam rangers move across Cambodian border into Fishhook area; reptdly
meet little resistance; S Vietnam puts number of its troops in Cambodia at
17,000; 11 US planes and helicopters reptd lost in Indochina conflict, past wk;
Cambodian troops strike Communist forces at Phumo Pongro, 27 mi S of Pnompenh;
enemy reptdly hurls 3-wave attack against Srang; Communist diplomatic sources,
Saigon, rept up to 10 Communist divs are in Cambodia or moving down Ho Chi Minh
Trail through Laos to launch offensive in S Vietnam; Amer mil sources decline
comment; say US planes flew about 2,000 sorties against N Vietnam positions in
Laos and Cambodia during previous wk; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 5

LENGTH: 71 words

Goodell defends credentials as Repub, ss at state fair, Syracuse; discounts poll
taken there showing him running 3d with strong Buckley support; sees Ottinger,
not Buckley, major threat; is applauded in s to United Meth Ch mins conf,
Syracuse U, for urging end to Indochina war; meets with Repub leader M S Auer,
whose Onondaga County orgn has endorsed other Repubs but not Goodell; declines
to press him for endorsement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 36 words

S Vietnamese Embassy in Washington is understood to have advised Saigon that
Nguyen Cao Ky visit to address rally would not be wise; Amb Bui Diem indicates
he advises his Govt against visit because of security reasons

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 52 words

More than 100 veterans and reservists in battle dress begin march, sponsored by
Vietnam Veterans Against the War, through western NJ to Labor Day peace rally in
Valley Forge, Pa, where they will demand immediate US withdrawal; will dramatize
combat incidents during march; orgn exec sec A Hubbard comments; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 57 words

S Vietnam police orgn head Brig Gen Tran Van Hai, in TV s, warns veterans they
could be killed or sentenced to death if they continue to attack, resist or
interfere with police or mil; acts after veterans, war widows and orphans stage
demonstration at Natl Assembly bldg; veterans, earlier, abandoned housing
project where they fought police

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 77 words

A Razak, who will become Prime Min of Malaysia later this mo, calls for
withdrawal of all US troops, which represents major policy change; Prime Min
Rahman has supported Saigon Govt and presence of US in Vietnam; Razak says
Malaysia would like Vietnamese people to be left alone to settle their internal
affairs for themselves; Razak says that under his leadership Govt will follow
nonaligned foreign policy instead of Rahman's generally pro-Western policies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 13 words

US Embassy, Saigon, holding contest for naming embassy's new pleasure boat

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Over 100 veterans continue march from Morristown, NJ, to Valley Force, Pa, for
antiwar rally but express bitterness over opposition they are encountering;
march described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 41 words

Delegates at conf in Zambia of unaligned nations discuss Vietcong provisional
govt representation; delegates discuss procedural issues, such as Cambodian and
Vietnamese representation, prior to meeting of foreign mins; Indian Min Singh
comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 146 words

High-ranking Amers in Saigon, with fighting at low level, stand by early
assessments that thrust into Cambodia severely weakened N Vietnam's ability to
wage anything more than token warfare in southern half of S Vietnam for rest of
this yr; base assessments on allied disruption of N Vietnam's administrative and
supply network in Cambodia; assert operation, combined with Vietnamization,
insures continued withdrawal of Amer forces from Saigon area without serious
setbacks; balance of forces remains unchanged in northern provs, but it has been
radically altered in south by Cambodian venture; directives from Hanoi, even
prior to venture, call on its forces to revert back to guerrilla warfare;
guerrilla strategy said to make little progress; most officials forecast serious
problems for Communists in southern half of country because of gains made by S
Vietnamese Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 17 words

S Vietnamese continue operation in Parrot's Beak area; reptdly kill 37 Vietcong
soldiers in past 2 days

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 55 words

S Vietnam police tear down shanties of 300 refugee families, arrest wives and
children of some disabled Army veterans; action taken on orders by Premier Tran
Thien Khiem to stop refugees from posing as veterans and squatting on empty
land, Saigon; earlier, disabled veterans demanding 'housing and a living'
battled with police

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

B-52s bomb Ho Chi Minh Trail to blunt any N Vietnam build-up; B-52s bomb
suspected enemy targets in Mekong Delta; light ground action reptd; enemy
attacks civil defense training center 275 NE of Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 55 words

Cambodian solders are sent to training bases at Lamson and Chiliang in S
Vietnam; about 3,000 have completed instruction and have returned home; S
Vietnamese Army provides most of them with weapons and equipment; source of
equipment remains mystery; US advisers observe training and suggest improvements
but do not train recruits

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 38 words

'Hansel and Gretel' (by E Humperdinck) to be performed, Saigon, S Vietnam, under
private Amer auspices; cultural value of presentation for Vietnamese debated by
Amer residents; 29 cos in Amer C of C contribute to costs; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 197 words

Journal she kept during 5 yrs as 1st Lady to be pub as Lady Bird Johnson: A
White House Diary, by Holt, Rinehart & Winston; book is based on tape-recordings
she made almost every day while in White House; she recounts her fears over
whether husband should seek another term as Pres, feelings about people and
events that shaped Johnson Adm and her struggle to share husband's pub duties
without neglecting family; details steps leading up to husband's decision not to
seek re-election; tells of roles of ex-Justice Fortas, ex-Gov Connally, Repr
Pickle, self and daughters in decision; says final decision did not come until
afternoon of Mar 31 '68, few hrs before Johnson's TV s in which he announced
halt to bombing of N Vietnam; says she modeled journal after that of Mrs J
Adams; discussed project in int earlier this yr; told how she had to cull book
from transcripts of tapes totaling more than 2-million words; said she will give
complete tapes to Johnson Library at Tex U; excerpts will be pub by McCall's and
newspaper serial rights have been acquired by NY Times Special Features
Syndicate for distribution in Western Hemisphere; Mrs Johnson illus at desk in
White House

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 209 words

Alan Wood Steel Co pres H R Wood, in article on problems of labor leaders, says
inflation keeps great many union members from getting great benefits leaders
bragged about and mgt groaned about when settlements were made over last 5 or 6
yrs; says members are aware of situation; notes growing trend of rank-and-file
members to reject contracts negotiated by leaders; discusses some current
problems of being union leaders; notes increasing turnover in elected leadership
at local level; questions belief by some that situation will straighten itself
out when Vietnam war is over; Wood opposes concept of coll educ for everyone,
holding it will not long remain natl goal in minds of pub; sees trend toward
providing coll educ only to those who can contribute more toward soc than they
can without it; urges continued US efforts to commitment that world's
underdeveloped nations receive benefit of larger portion of world's natural
resources; holds US will have to stop consuming every yr 40% of world's
resources; cites commitment to Medicare and Medicaid and its rising costs; urges
continued efforts toward achievement of goal of racial equality and full
integration in US; lists pollution control as 1 of nation s 'expensive' future
commitments; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 14 words

Comment on S Vietnam's Sen election and its implications; Pres Nguyen Van Thieu
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 91 words

J Reston on Nixon dilemma, as Nov elections approach, in that he cut back on
defense spending but is confronted with econ and unemployment issue; describes
card Laird passes out to friends and the press describing degree of cuts and
comparing them with other budget categories in fiscal '71 prices; econ issues
(unemployment, inflation) are probably decisive issues in election rather than
Vietnam; comment on workers' support of Nixon; holds Nixon can add them to his
new conservative coalition only if he can deal with their econ problems

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 108 words

H Gilchrist lr notes if US peace efforts fail, US may become involved in mil
adventure to protect 'vital' interests and balance of power; questions whether
Nixon Adm has abandoned basic concepts of collective security and NATO-type
alliance; holds if efforts have been made to bring other countries which have
'vital' interests in area into balance-of-power program, Amer people should be
informed; holds if such efforts have not been made, US should question whether
'vital' interests are really vital; notes Amer people, in light of experience of
Vietnam, may hesitate to endorse similar action if support from Western Eur
cannot be relied upon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 5

LENGTH: 9 words

Cartoon on current impass in Paris talks on Vietnam War

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 5, Column 0

LENGTH: 39 words

A J Langguth article on Vietnamization of 9th Div of S Vietnamese Army, which is
commanded by Gen Tran Ba Di; says majority of Amer and S Vietnamese mil men say
only time will tell if Vietnamization is going to be successful; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 93 words

NYS Dem Sen candidates Buckley and Goodell say US should exert pressure on USSR
and UAR to have missile bases allegedly installed along canal since cease-fire
withdrawn, TV int; Buckley charges Sen Goodell has condoned militants on
campuses, holds he has support of Repub leaders, that they oppose Goodell's
liberal pol and Vietnam views, denies he will desert Adams for Rockefeller;
Adams cancels appearances to attend ailing father; Goodell and family again tour
beaches; he urges US press USSR and UAR to withdraw Middle East missile bases;
Buckley illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 73 words

Ed says surprising victory of militant Buddhist slate in S Vietnamese Sen
elections brings S Vietnam's chief neutralist, antiwar and anti-Govt faction
back into S Vietnam's pol system; says it provides Nguyen Van Thieu with new
option for broadening his Govt and introducing added flexibility into
negotiations with Communists to end war; notes Buddhists now talk of regrouping
all external forces into enclaves until elections are held

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 32 words

About 1,130 US troops will return to US when 3 squadrons of USMC jet bombers in
S Vietnam are sent back to US later this mo; enemy troops attack S Vietnamese
position 2 mi S of buffer zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 97 words

Pressures mounts on Nguyen Cao Ky to cancel his appearance before US rally; S
Vietnamese Govt officials fear his appearance would stir antiwar feelings in US
and embarrass Nixon; his aides tell him he will be preaching to 'believers';
sources say he still plans to go ahead with trip to Air Force Acad at Colo
Springs, but he may decide against s; he gets telegram from McIntire expressing
hope he still plans to deliver s; some sources say Nguyen Van Thieu has also
expressed misgivings about visit; friends of Nguyen Cao Ky say trip was arranged
directly between him and McIntire

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 40 words

US command repts US jet fighter-bomber recently attacked N Vietnamese AA
position 5 mi inside N Vietnam; repts jet struck at site in response to 'hostile
actions' in keeping with relf-defense right; says plane had been flying in Laos
at time

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

Antiwar veterans continue their march in Montgomeryville, Pa; are about 15 mi S
of Valley Forge; receive friendly receptions in Bucks County

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 174 words

Lusaka, Zambia conf of 52 nonaligned nations, opens at ministerial level;
studies agenda for heads-of-state meeting; Zambian Min Kamanga named chmn;
comments on key issues; says Southern Africa continues to be bedeviled by racism
and colonialism; says actions of great powers in SE Asia 'continue to be an
unsettling problem'; lauds efforts toward peace; mins faced with delicate
problems of whether to recognize delegation from Vietcong provisional
revolutionary govt and whether to seat delegation of Premier Lon Nol of Cambodia
or that of govt-in-exile of Prince Norodom Sihanouk; Vietcong repr Mrs Nguyen
Thi Binh, now in Dar es Salaam, urges participation of her govt; Cambodian
delegations, in Lusaka, have been lobbying for recognition; mins of India,
Yugoslavia and Indonesia have met to study Cambodian representation; delegations
from freedom movements in Portuguese Africa arrive and are expected to request
participation; had been invited to present repts but not to attend debates; bomb
threat delays Gandhi departure from India

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 57, Column 5

LENGTH: 131 words

Revolutionary People's Const conv on re-writing const, ends; delegates, which
included Women's and Gay Liberation Movements, to reconvene in Washington, Nov,
to ratify const; recommendations to be considered at Nov meeting noted; Panther
official R Hewitt calls conv success; approves inclusion of diverse groups at
conv on basis that move on behalf of any oppressed people is move in right
direction; urge return of Taiwan to communist China; cheers statement that
psychedelic drugs such as marijuana, LSD and mescaline are instrumental in
developing revolutionary consciousness of people; urge support of Pathet Lao;
recommend including liberation of Palestine from what they call Zionist
colonialism; recommend support of Vietcong be considered at forthcoming meeting
in Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 81, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 161 words

R E Casey, former exec vp and top lobbyist for AIMS, whose members receive
$200-million yrly in subsidies, was hired at start of yr by Repr Garmatz as key
staff member of HR Merchant Marine and Fisheries Com, that approves subsidy
programs; Garmatz defends special subsidy programs to cruise ships, cites
importance to natl defense, statement; says Aug 16 AP article was distorted in
asserting Fed aid amounted to $402.90 per passenger on recent cruise; says aid
made up difference in higher wages paid to US crew compared to foreign crews;
says subsidy program helps keep liners available for future defense emergencies;
notes many troops are carried to Vietnam by ships; Casey says he wrote statement
for Garmatz, int; says ships carrying troops to Vietnam are mil transports and
that no cruise ships receiving subsidies have been used; subsidies paid to
cruise ships seen 4 times as high as aid to cargo ships because of extra crewmen
needed for passenger service

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 34 words

Antiwar Vietnam veterans arrive in Valley Forge; lead 1,500 people in demanding
immediate US withdrawal; small group of veterans stages counterdemonstration;
Repr Lowenstein, J Fonda and others s at rally

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

US Vietnam manpower reptdly falls below 400,000 for 1st time since early '67; US
command announces cutback of nearly 3,000 men; plans are made to lower US troop
strength by 11,500 more in next 5 wks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 60 words

Gen Westmoreland sees Communist-led forces trying to develop strength to make
'major effort' to overthrow Lon Nol Govt in Cambodia and open up deep water
ports, int, Tokyo; says allied invasion was success of 'particular
significance'; says they took pressure off southern half of S Vietnam; says he
came away from his last visit to Vietnam 'much encouraged'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 127 words

Meeting of chiefs of states of nonaligned nations, Lusaka, Zambia, is expected
to call for increased pressure of all kinds against Rhodesia's white regime;
mins study 22 draft resolutions presented by Zambia that will form bases of
discussion at summit conf; southern Africa is prime concern; mins agree to leave
Cambodia's seat vacant unless 'heads of state themselves raise issue'; agree to
admit Vietcong reprs as observers; Norodom Sihanouk's and Lon Nol's delegations
lobby actively to represent Cambodia; will be asked to condemn US, France and GB
for pol, econ and mil cooperation with S Africa; will also be asked to condemn W
Ger, Italy and Japan for 'encouraging and inciting S Africa to persist in its
racist policy' by their econ and mil cooperation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 252 words

Pres Nixon gives White House dinner for 75 labor leaders and wives; event called
most elaborate Labor Day gesture a Pres has made toward labor; Nixon hails
labor's patriotism thanks labor leaders for their support of his conduct of war;
Meany is special guest of hon; Nixon lauds him; compares him to Lombardi as a
'man of character'; AFL-CIO is heavily represented at dinner by most of
constituent pres who form its exec council; Teamsters is also represented; UAW
pres Woodcock was invited but did not attend; White House also invites 4,000
lower-echelon officials and aides in Washington offices of labor orgns for mil
torchlight tattoo on White House lawn after dinner; Nixons illus with NMU pres
Curran; s given by Sec Hodgson to Repub candidates earlier this summer seen
indicating some of Adm's strategy at extraordinary dinner; Hodgson says some
unions and many of their members are among most conservative elements in US and
are not lost to Repubs; says steadfastness in foreign affairs, firmness with
domestic unrest; healthy noninflationary policy and other factors will bring
many of them around to Repubs; argues that Adm is less conservative than some
suggest and labor is less liberal than it once was; says Adm and labor are
united on '2 really big things': scaling down Vietnam war, and taking firm
approach to unrest and crime at home; holds top union leaders concede that Nixon
Adm has not been antilabor; contends it has not introduced any antiunion legis;
s being circulated by Repub Natl Com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 9, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 4

LENGTH: 136 words

NY Conservative party candidate J L Buckley appeals for support of voters who
see Amer freedoms in 'state of siege,' s, Rochester rally; especially calls on
young men willing to serve in Vietnam, Negroes and students opposed to militants
and labor rank-and-file exemplified by demonstrations by hard hats in NYC;
appeals to majority of black New Yorkers to repudiate fanatic hatred of
Panthers; says majority of students in colls and univs who really want to pursue
their educ are threatened by extremist tactics of few; is on 4-day Upstate tour;
will visit Goodell base, Chautauqua County and Jamestown; draws to receptions
many Repubs unwilling to be publicly identified with his campaign; is greeted by
crowds at Syracuse state fair; leads opponents in poll taken at fair; opens
Onondaga campaign hq; tours Auburn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 9, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 95 words

More than 200 enemy smash their way into allied posts near Danang, reptdly
killing 34 S Vietnamese, wounding 42; Amer adviser killed, 3 injured; details on
attack; enemy shells Fire Base O'Reilly in north; other action reptd; map;
illus; enemy troops stall Cambodian offensive along Route 6 after they pushed
only 6 mi north of Skoun; map; US turns over to S Vietnam about 40 subsonic
attack bombers; US command announces 3 new troop redeployments that will cut
Amer troop strength by 2,710 men; biggest redeployment is return of 7th Air
Force's 3d Tactical Fighter Wing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              260 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 9, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 115 words

Lusaka conf opens at summit level; 30 chiefs of state and heads of govt attend;
include Emperor Haile Selassie, Tito, Gandhi, Indonesian Pres Suharto, Makarios
and Singapore Prime Min Lee Kuan Yew; Zambian Pres Kaunda named conf chmn; calls
for collective pol and econ action to reduce dependence on big powers; warns
crisis is developing in southern Africa as result of strengthening of mil
position of white-ruled govts; conf gives observer status to Vietcong delegation
uncer Nguyen Thi Binh; other 'liberation' movements have such status including S
Africa, Rhodesia and Portuguese Africa; Zambian authorities arrest 9 reporters
in connection with its militancy on issue of S Africa

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              261 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 9, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 48 words

S Vietnamese Govt spokesman says Nguyen Cao Ky reconsiders his trip to US; says
new fact has been brought to Nguyen Cao Ky's attention by Bui Diem and an aide;
White House declines comment on trip; spokesman for McIntire says he plans to
fly to Saigon to urge Nguyen Cao Ky to attend rally

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              262 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 9, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

Defense Sec Laird instructs services to increase readiness of Natl Guard and
Reserve forces so that future emergencies like Vietnam can be met by calling up
reserves quickly rather than by relying on draft, Aug 31 memo; current reserve
strength noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              263 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 10, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 21 words

Nguyen Cao Ky reiterates his intention to visit US despite some official Amer
and S Vietnamese efforts to discourage him

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              264 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 10, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

Lt Gen Hoang Xuan Lam says N Vietnamese force equal to 5 divs is poised for
thrust against coastal lowlands in northern provs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              265 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 10, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 58 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu briefs and entertains 537 elected city and
provincial councilmen; says he plans to give them larger share in local govt;
says decisions by apptd prov chief must now have approval of prov or city
council; paints generally optimistic picture of some aspects of war, Saigon
luncheon; is concerned with econ problems

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              266 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 158 words

NYC City Council, after heated debate during which 36 Councilmen profess
opposition to war, adopts, 32-to-4, resolution directing Corp Counsel to test
constitutionality of Vietnam war in behalf of any New Yorker ordered to combat
duty in SE Asia; Councilmen F J Biondolillo, T J Manton and W Ward, all of whom
cast negative votes, say they feel no constitutional issue exists and that war
is lawful; Councilman A J Arculeo, who also votes negatively, says war is stupid
and useless; Councilman Sadowsky, who sponsors resolution, says it is offered as
substitute for campaign that failed to get 45,000 signatures of New Yorkers
necessary for referendum for amendment to City Charter in Nov; details on
resolution; City Council approves additional $735,580 for regis costs and
inspectors; approves budget modification for $650,000 to permit Correction Dept
to get architectural designs for housing facilities on Rikers Island for over
1,000 prisoners

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              267 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 247 words

Thant scores Israel for having ignored his 2 appeals and offer to send personal
repr to Israel to discuss release of Belaziz and Jalul, news conf; reiterates
earlier statement scoring hijackings; Tekoah sends lr to Thant acknowledging
appeals but defending arrest of 2 Algerians for interrogation on security
grounds; release of 2 seen major issue that could be used to break stalemated
talks between IRc and guerrillas; says talks under UN auspices are only hope for
Middle East peace and that he is determined to get them started again, news
conf; concedes that talks have suffered setback but expresses confidence they
are not beyond salvage; says Big 4 are closer to agreement on nature of final
settlement now than ever before; says he presented some ideas on how Big 4
leaders, who are expected to attend Gen Assembly opening, could use their
presence for consultation; reptdly proposed hosting working dinner for Big 4
leaders but all countries except France reptdly feel there is not enough time to
adequately prepare for meeting; France expected to be represented by Premier
Chaban-Delmas rather than Pres Pompidou; Thant says he does not expect Communist
China to become member before 'Nov or Dec '72,'; commenting on prospective
applications from E and W Ger, says it would be easier to admit 2 Gers than 2
Koreas or 2 Vietnams; says he does not intend to volunteer for 3d term when
present term expires in Dec '71, but sayd he is not making 'categorical
announcement' now

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              268 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 15 words

Allied troops kill 34 Vietcong guerrillas in 3 separate actions; unearth 2
munitions dumps

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              269 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 281 words

Lusaka conf of heads of 54 nonaligned nations ends; adopts verious resolutions,
including controversial one calling for specific measures against Portugal, S
Africa and Rhodesia if they do not conform to UN resolution on decolonization
and racial discrimination; reptdly was inspired by 5-point proposal presented by
Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie, which included trade embargo and denial of
trading facilities to Rhodesia and urged trade embargo against S Africa,
severance of diplomatic relations and refusal of landing rights and port
facilities to ships and aircraft going to or from S Africa; some delegations
express reservations on this one; Kaunda, in closing s, says 54 nations
attending achieved 'unquestionable identity of views' despite basic differences;
Nguyen Thi Binh is most widely applauded speaker; Zambian Govt, in trying to
explain its treatment of reporters, says 'monopoly press of West' tried to
defame meeting; had detained 16 reporters for as much as 23 hrs, ordered 3
deported, prevented others from covering conf; adopts resolution backing
Palestine liberation movement; adopt resolution supporting liberation movements
in southern AFrica; adopts resolution calling for withdrawal of all foreign
troops; Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh s at conf; outlines 2-point peace program to provide
honorable way for US to get out of war; proposes organization of free elections
by coalition govt; says allies should withdraw troops without posing any
conditions; Zambia Govt has held 16 newsmen for as much as 23 hrs, deported 3
and barred others from covering conf; in explanation, says 'monopoly press of
the West' tries to defame meeting; cites newsmen based in S Africa

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              270 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 60 words

83d session of Paris talks; participants, accusing each other of taking
inflexible stands, remain stalemated; Communists reiterate their demands; faint
hopes are raised by reduction in polemics and because of softening from last wk
in position taken by Vietcong on makeup of provisional govt; Vietcong spokesman
says Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh will return to talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              271 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 92 words

US Embassy, Pnompenh, moves into larger qrs in preparation for arrival of Amb
Swank and more Amers to handle US aid program; major question facing Cambodians
and Amers is what Communists really intend to do about Cambodia; many officials
speculate that N Vietnam has not decided whether to commit to battle bulk of the
40,000 Communist troops reptd in Cambodia or to harass Govt while keeping major
pressure on S Vietnam; others speculate that Cambodia is already top priority
for Communists; debate Cambodia impact on Vietnam; Cambodian soldier illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              272 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 71 words

Vietnam casualty figures for last wk and war listed; US lists names of 22
soldiers killed in recent helicopter crash; 43,568 Amers have been killed in
war; S Vietnam spokesman repts 2,000-man S Vietnamese force has completed week's
operation in Parrot's Beak and has withdrawn into S Vietnam; repts 58 Communist
killed during operation; 8 bn Cambodian task force continues cautious advance up
Route 6 toward Kompong Thom; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              273 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 88 words

Goodell tours Westchester, charging Ottinger has 'paper thin' legis record;
admits Repub Reprs avoid him because of Vietnam views; visits Yonkers urban
renewal site, New Rochelle addiction treatment center; predicts Rockefeller will
mention him more as campaign progresses; earlier, unveils 11 TV commercials, 1
referring to Ottinger's larger ad budget; Repub natl chmn Morton offers to
campaign for Goodell if Rockefeller thinks it necessary, news conf, Washington;
refuses to criticize Goodell; Goodell aide welcomes offer

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              274 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 109 words

Com to Save Our Const asks Corp Counsel J L Rankin to start ct test of
constitutionality of war on behalf of 2 NYC soldiers, Capt R S Kurtz, who has
been ordered to Vietnam, and Sp/4 K Burns, who is in Vietnam now; Rankin
expresses some doubt that resolution passed by council carries sufficient legal
authority to empower him to institute litigation; spokesman says Rankin raises
question of whether Corp Counsel's office has power to represent private
citizens; com says it has sufficient signatures to proceed with referendum
effort;; Assemblyman Stein, co-chmn of com, says it is important to launch ct
test immediately; details on council action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              275 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 11 words

Adm McCain arrives in Saigon for briefings from Abrams and Bunker

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              276 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 108 words

Enemy troops reptd to be at outskirts of Siemreap, Cambodia; threaten its
airport; reptdly occupy Buddhist pagoda and repulsed an attempt to dislodge
them; most enemy pressure directed against Fire Base O'Reilly, arty base near
Laotian border; Amer bombers stage 5th day of heavy raids against N Vietnamese
positions in area; explosion rips through US destroyer firing from off S
Vietnamese coast in support of Australian troops 45 mi SE of Saigon; 3 crewmen
killed, 10 injured; USN spokesman says explosion is not caused by enemy fire;
explosion is under investigation; Adm McCain arrives in Saigon for briefings
from Abrams and Bunker; map map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              277 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

Increasing number of Amer mil personnel and civilians found marrying Vietnamese
despite obstacles; Vietnamese and Amers comment on their pending marriages; US
mil approved 455 marriages in '69, has approved 397 this yr; several problems
discussed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              278 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 81, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 43 words

W Va State Repr P Lister, member of House of Delegates, bicycles 300 mi to White
House to present petition signed by Gov and most legislators to help marine
sentenced to life imprisonment in connection with deaths of 12 Vietnamese but is
refused admission

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              279 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

Ed noting that at conf of nonaligned nations in Zambia, Pres Kaunda stressed
freedom and justice but Govt arrested 16 newsmen; nonaligned nations holds
demand for removal of Israeli troops from occupied Arab territory and UN action
against Israel for 'obstructing' peace talks was expected; ed holds conf
approach 'one-sided' with delegates condemning GB for its intention to sell arms
while deleting specific censure of France for selling arms to S Africa for yrs;
scores Zambia for arresting 16 Western reporters based in S Africa and Rhodesia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              280 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 22 words

Lr, noting 'lawlessness' of US involvement in Vietnam, says Nixon's only course
now consistent with law is to get out of Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              281 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 0

LENGTH: 139 words

M Harrington article on need for new, radical party; holds present 2-party
system, which he views as 'fraticidal coalitions,' will not and cannot do
anything about nation's most desperate problems; says 4th party, assuming
Wallace movement is 3d party, cannot succeed because it can never win majority;
holds only possibility of creating new party that can win is to reunite liberal
labor backers of Humphrey, R F Kennedy and McCarthy 'antiwarriors' and
minorities on basis of common domestic program; says coalition has potential,
after Vietnam war ends, of winning and so transforming Dem party that it
becomes, in fact if not in name, new party; stresses importance of labor
movement, particulary integrated indus unions, to coalition and need for
middle-class liberals to rid selves of what he calls anti-union prejudices;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              282 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 111 words

Rev Dr McIntire, after meeting with Nguyen Cao Ky in Saigon, says Nguyen Cao Ky
will visit US; Nguyen Cao Ky still declines to commit himself publicly; his
aides leave door open for last-min reversal; McIntire says Nguyen Cao Ky would
bring 'new hopes and new life' to Amers; says war can and must be won; says he
does not believe Nixon pursues war forcefully enough; predicts more than
1/2-million people will turn out for rally; says Nguyen Cao Ky's wife will
accompany him; plans to go to S Korea, where he will ask Pres Park to attend
rally; Agnew says Nixon Adm has not attempted to place any pressure on Nguyen
Cao Ky to convince him not to take part in rally

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              283 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 49 words

Pattern of war continues as it has in recent wks, with most of action in
northern provs and Mekong Delta; enemy troops launch 3d assault against S
Vietnamese troops near O'Reilly base; S Vietnamese troops kill 73 enemy in
Mekong Delta; US destroyer steams into Philippines naval base for repairs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              284 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 253 words

Growing number of US officials believe that recent missile movement towards Suez
canal has shifted mil balance against Israel; differ on degree to which movement
would increase Israeli air losses if cease-fire breaks down and fighting along
canal resumes; are studying possibility of providing Israel with variety of
sensors and reconnaissance devices to increase its ability to guard against
incursions across canal; 1 US analyst holds if Israel attempts to re-establish
air superiority over canal during renewed hostilities, it would have to absorb
losses that could not be sustained; maintains substantial losses might force
shift in defense strategy for eastern bank of canal and Sinai Peninsula; Adm
reprs have recently been insisting that mil situation has not become unbalanced
and will not be allowed to become so, seen allusion to decision to provide 24
additional Shrike anti-radar air-to-ground missiles and electronic devices;
Shrike, used against SAM-2 sites in N Vietnam, follows SAM radar signal back to
its source and destroys it; US officials say if Israelis are prevented from
bombing UAR arty positions because of bolstered UAR defenses, Israel may fear
its ability to maintain Bar-Lev line, fortifications along canal designed to
protect against crossings of canal; note that improved UAR defenses do not
increase ability to mount cross-canal operation; contend UAR attack would
require jets to support forward elements, forcing shutdown of forward SAM sites
for fear of hitting their own planes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              285 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 127 words

Article on combat role of S Korean troops; troops weigh shift in role and
tactics; engage in black mkt activity; are said to do financially well in war;
Lt Col Lee Chan Shik indicates Korean force may soon assume more defensive
posture and concentrate more on shielding population from enemy attacks than on
seeking out enemy; US officers and advisers, while praising dedication and
fighting ability of Koreans, often complain about difficulty of getting them out
on aggressive operations; Koreans are under their own command; make their own
plans, run their own operations, and sometimes fail to keep allies fully
informed; details on complaints against Koreans and on their combat activity;
figures; Koreans cover 275 mi along coast from Danang to Nhatrang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              286 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 14, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 3

LENGTH: 31 words

Article on Dr W Haddad, 2d in command of Popular Front, who masterminded
hijackings; absence of Habash from Jordan, reptdly on trip to N Korea, N Vietnam
and Communist China, noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              287 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 14, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 93 words

White House comm under H C Lodge, making interim rept to Nixon on UN and US role
in it, says UN needs stronger peace-keeping machinery and conciliation
procedures; sees major shortcomings in failure of members to make UN paramount
means for maintaining peace and security and in misuse of UN as debating soc and
propaganda platform; says UN record in Vietnam illustrates inability of orgn to
act when interests of big powers clash; suggests system of 'weighted voting' in
light of disparity between voting power and financial responsibility among
members

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              288 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 14, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 115 words

Rev Dr K G Neigh, Natl Council of Chs vp and gen sec of Bd of Natl Missions of
United Presb Ch, charges Rev C McIntire, fundamentalist radio preacher, has been
'damaging natl unity' for 35 yrs, press conf, Phoenix, Ariz; says 'mainstream'
chs have preferred to ignore McIntire's frequent charges over yrs that many of
their leaders are 'dupes' of Communism; says he is speaking out because McIntire
has invited S Vietnam Vice Pres Ky to attend 'total victory rally' in
Washington; says action 'clearly identifies' Saigon regime with US rightist
groups; says FBI several yrs ago had agents working undercover in Presb Ch NY
offices and links surveillance to McIntire's Communist charges; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              289 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 14, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

Article on Do Moi program, started 5 yrs ago by group of N Vietnamese who fled
to S Vietnam and aimed at encouraging Vietnamese community into using its own
money and initiative to provide what it most needs; program now affects poorest
areas of Saigon; accomplishments of program in housing and educ noted; many
citizens want children to have educ and are aiding in bldg of new schools;
desire for educ is linked to fact that good students receive mil deferments;
many parents have low salaries and have difficulty meeting high educ costs;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              290 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 14, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 196 words

E Cleaver, Black Panther party official, repts on his visit to Asian Communist
capitals as US Peoples' Anti-Imperialist Delegation repr, int, Algiers; terms it
'tour of solidarity' to 'cement pol alliances' with Asian revolutionary forces;
says he and other members of his group studied pol development 'within
Marxist-Leninist framework'; announces opening of Panther party 'internatl sec'
in bldg which formerly housed reprs of Vietcong's provisional revolutionary
govt, says unit will seek to establish 'people's diplomacy' and serve as rival
to US State Dept; with R Scheer, deputy leader of returning group, comments on
trip; both say all members of delegation viewed pol developments within
Marxist-Leninist framework; Algerina Govt formally accords party status of
liberation movement; R Scheer, Black Panther party leader, repts Norodom
Sihanouk recd his party in Peking, informed them that his Natl United Front
would have 3 divs of Cambodian troops by end of '70, int, Algiers; 1st Amer
delegation to visit since Korean War; Black Panther aide, describing group's
visit to N Vietnam, says Pham Van Dong said Vietnamizing war will 'simply
intensify and prolong it';

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              291 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 14, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 92 words

US command repts US helicopter gunships, firing at 21 S Vietnamese civilians in
restricted zone 95 mi E of Saigon, kill 3 and wound 4; 12 women and 2 men seized
and turned over to S Vietnamese natl police for interrogation; details on
incident; ground fighting continues at relatively low level; enemy troops keep
up pressure on O'Reilly base; Vietcong make 1st attempt to smash Cambodian Army
advance on Kompong Thom; sharp fighting reptd; N Vietnamese and Pathet Lao
troops counterattack, push Vang Pao's troops back from outskirts of Muong Soui;
map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              292 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 15, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 2

LENGTH: 118 words

NYC Mayor Lindsay says neither hawks nor doves should use flag for narrow pol
purposes, s, Natl Guard Assn; says flag that should unite US has become 'symbol
of defiant division'; says it is time to declare 'pol amnesty for flag';
appearance is made over objection of anti-Vietnam war group; Lindsay aide says s
is intended to help Lindsay broaden his appeal; says s is opportunity to open up
dialogue with group that is often viewed as being dominated by conservatives;
Lindsay's appearance picketed by anti-Vietnam war group; he had been advised not
to attend by Vietnam Peace Parade Com, which noted that conf would hon Gens
Westmoreland and Hershey and that keynote address would be made by Sen Stennis

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              293 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 15, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 42 words

Rev McIntire says Nguyen Cao Ky will attend rally, news conf, Washington, after
returning from Saigon; predicts Nguyen Cao Ky will 'out-Agnew Agnew'; deplores
what he says are attempts by White House and State Dept to keep Nguyen Cao Ky
away from rally

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              294 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 15, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 214 words

Popular Front says US hostages are being treated on same basis as Israelis and
will be released with Israelis; announcement comes after day-long stream of
threats and counterthreats from several sides, differences among commandos and
release of Dutch TWA purser through informal mediation conducted by Brit Arabist
M Adams; US State Dept says 3 of 37 or 38 US hostages might be considered
Israeli citizens but guerrillas reptdly consider US hostage with Israeli visa
stamp as Israeli; negotiations seen at impasse; IRC and Papal delegations
marking time while waiting to see prisoners; guerrillas express willingness to
talk separately with GB, W Ger and Switzerland; reptdly bar further talks
because their position is known; Popular Front central com meets and its members
reptdly differ regarding treatment of hostages and terms for their release;
differences seen broadening split between Popular Front and Central Com; Popular
Front repr Bassam announces decision to bar outsiders from visiting hostages;
says they are well treated and housed in and around Amman; inclusion among
hostages of US Vietnam veteran K Hubler who suffered minor breakdown noted; most
Palestinians seen angry with Israeli arrests; Palestine Red Crescent exec G
Saudi charges number arrested is over 450

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              295 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 15, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 49 words

US command repts 3,200 Amers were withdrawn from Vietnam last wk, reducing Amer
troop strength to 396,300; Nixon's goal is 384,000 by Oct 15; figure of 396,300
does not include 23,100 Navy and Coast Guardsmen offshore or 45,000 airmen
stationed in Thailand directly involved in war operations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              296 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 15, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

Enemy forces continue attack on Fire Base O'Reilly; US planes have increased
bombing raids in area; S Vietnamese forces end 2-day operation near Hoian; rept
killing 77 enemy; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              297 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 15, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 173 words

Article on S Vietnam's fight against inflation; Min Pham Kim Ngoc seeks to check
econ chaos; says Vietnamization is 'economist's nightmare'; says S Vietnam will
have econ catastrophe without requested $200-million from US; prices have gone
up 50% in last yr; S Vietnam has now drawn up its latest package of measures to
control inflation and increase Govt revenues; steps include belt-tightening and
pay increases for civil servants and soldiers; Nguyen Van Thieu presses Natl
Assembly to approve bill giving him broad emergency powers; once bill is passed,
Govt plans to establish promptly more realistic exch rate between piaster and
dollars spent by Amers; notes new rate will be between 270 and 280 to dollar;
Govt has also decided on major overhaul of interest rates; plans to gradually
lift restrictions on granting import licenses; Govt to abolish arbitrary prov
quotas, end unrestricted sale of US rice and enact other reform measures to cut
corruption, hoarding and speculation; other plans noted; Pham Kim Ngoc comments;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              298 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 16, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 71 words

C L Sulzberger article on US and Soviet use of power discusses setback to peace
talks; holds if chaos occurs, USSR still has option of abandoning present set of
Arab leaders for another set leaving fundamental Soviet position unchanged; says
US hopes USSR pressures may induce N Vietnam to accept reasonable settlement;
says USSR loses nothing by seeing US bogged down in Vietnam while simultaneously
driven by disputes at home

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              299 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 16, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Sen Jackson renominated by overwhelming margin, Washington Dem primary; tally;
Maxey, Negro peace aspirant, had termed contest Vietnam referendum, charging
Jackson is warhawk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              300 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 16, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 69 words

S Vietnamese field comdrs say their forces have withdrawn from Barnett base in
northern sector of S Vietnam and plan to pull out of nearby O'Reilly base
because of approaching monsoon season; Barnett base is 4 mi from Laotian border
and is closest to area where N Vietnamese forces have been reptdly massing;
there is no indication whether other allied bases will be closed; 25 enemy
killed near Barnett base; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              301 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 16, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

State Dept extends restrictions on travel to Cuba, Communist China, N Korea and
N Vietnam for 6 more mos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              302 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 17, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 30 words

Speaker McCormack announces special joint meeting of House and Sen will be held
to deplore N Vietnam's 'inhumane treatment' of US prisoners; says prisoners'
wives sought session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              303 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 17, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 76 words

Pfc M A Berk's challenge to orders sending him to Vietnam on ground war is
unconstitutional is dismissed by Fed judge, Judd, Bklyn; judge rejects
contention that 1787 NYS law prohibits Govt from sending NY servicemen overseas
to fight war not authorized by Cong; says Cong has given authorization for use
of US armed forces; alludes to ruling by another Bklyn judge rejectin Sp/5 S
Orlando contention that war is unconstitutional; other details on decision

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              304 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 17, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 33 words

Article on difficulties of widows of S Vietnamese soldiers and their efforts to
ameliorate situation; widows fight inflation, Govt red tape and housing
shortage; work of widow's orgn noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              305 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 79 words

Humphrey predicts he will win in Minn by good margin and carry entire ticket
including Anderson and HR candidates, int; says he can maintain good
relationship with Dem leaders in Sen although he will be freshman; repts
receiving message from Sen Kennedy; comments on own Pres aspirations; holds
Vietnam war will be over as pol issue by '72; scores Nixon Adm econ policies;
present campaign seen his best organized ever, directed by J Chestnut and Lennen
& Newell ad agency

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              306 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

Over 6,000 Vietnam veterans attend 1st day of 2-day job mart, Suffolk Downs race
track, Boston, aimed at securing jobs for veterans from New Eng

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              307 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 8

LENGTH: 13 words

S Vietnamese officials in Saigon express interest in offer concerning POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              308 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 5 words

Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh biog sketch

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              309 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 23 words

Vietcong proposal statement text at Paris talks; comparison of stands of
Vietcong, Nixon and Nguyen Van Thieu from May, '69, to present

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              310 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 91 words

M Frankel comment on Vietcong proposals; says Adm officials find nothing
promising for negotiation; says most Washington officials read proposals as more
propagandistic in tone than '69 version; says they tentatively conclude
principal purpose is to stimulate protest movement in US at start of new
academic yr and Congressional election campaign; says they wish to suspend final
judgment on proposals until more detailed analses have been completed; says they
react almost with contempt to Communists assurances concerning safety of allied
troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              311 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 295 words

Paris peace talks session; Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh, who returns to conf table for
1st time in 3 mos, issues 8-point statement declaring that in exch for agreement
on withdrawal of all Amer forces from S Vietnam by June 30 of next yr,
Communists would refrain from attacking withdrawing troops; N Vietnam supports
statement; Vietcong spokesman says Communists' attitude toward S Vietnamese
troops would depend on Saigon's reaction; says Vietcong would fight back if S
Vietnam continued hostilities; new Communist initiative is taken as, for 1st
time since last Dec, all 4 delegations are represented by their regular heads;
said to represent 1st substantive initiative in pub talks in more than 16 mos;
Bruce says Communists appear to be offering 'old wine in new bottles' but adds
their statements will be studied carefully; basic Communist demands, presented
as part of over-all 10-point settlement in May, '69, appears to be basically
unaltered; call for total and rapid withdrawal of allied troops and replacement
of present Saigon Govt by coalition govt; Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh says declaration
of Amer intention on withdrawals would be followed by immediate discussions
about safety of allied troops and about release of POWs; stand said to be slight
shift; S Vietnamese spokesman complains Communists offer no elaboration on what
would be done with N Vietnamese forces in S Vietnam; details on Vietcong
statement and implications; Bruce reiterates Nixon's pledge that US will not
impose any govt on S Vietnamese people; S Vietnamese officials in Saigon hold
Vietcong proposals provide no grounds for hope of early settlement; say main
Communists demands remain unacceptable; express interest in mention of specific
withdrawal timetable and offer to discuss POWs; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              312 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 19, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 6

LENGTH: 146 words

Ottinger meets with 15 editors of NYC foreign-language newspapers, restaurant
luncheon; stresses view that US should not be in Vietnam but should play
peace-keeping role in Middle East; concurs on family-separation problems caused
by new immigration law; during day also walks with striking auto workers at
Tarrytown plant, visits Canarsie, Bklyn, Jewish school; helps celebrate safe
return of 2 hostages and joins in prayers for release of remainder, Bklyn
yeshiva; at New Rochelle beach is invested in RC religious soc; campaigns in
Yonkers with Assemblyman McInerney and Repr Dretzin; Ottinger backs efforts of
UAW leaders to discuss pollution-free alternatives to internal combustion engine
with Gen Motors; holds immigration law reforms have caused several serious
problems, including 'heart-rending' separation of families; pledges to work for
'needed changes' if elected

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              313 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 19, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Ed says new flexibility promised by Bruce role in Paris talks is not in evidence
in hasty US reaction to Communist proposals; says there are nuances in proposals
that merit serious attention; notes references to POWs and cease-fire; says even
seemingly rigid Communist position on coalition govt may be negotiable if Adm is
really as flexible as its spokesmen have sometimes hinted; says 'wine' should be
sampled

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              314 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 19, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 27 words

Laotian Min says full div of N Vietnamese troops, which has infiltrated into
Laos during last 2 wks, is now along Ho Chi Minh Trail in southern Laotian
panhandle

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              315 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 19, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7

LENGTH: 76 words

S Vietnamese Foreign Min describes as 'old, oft-repeated, absurd demands'
Vietcong program; spokesmen say program presents 'no initiatives at all'; say
withdrawal proposal is aimed at 'deceiving' world pub opinion; US Embassy
officials say they have no comment on proposals; Tran Van Lam says withdrawal
proposal may be trap and is in any case propaganda move; Min Nguyen Huu Chi
stresses Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh cannot make commitments for N Vietnamese Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              316 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 19, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 25 words

Natl Com for a Pol Settlement in Vietnam, headed by C Kerr, announces 16 Sens
join 14 others in urging Nixon to propose cease-fire; Gore is among them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              317 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 19, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 15 words

US contingent of 1,000 men, composed of Seabees and marines, is withdrawn from
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              318 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 19, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 153 words

S Vietnamese Sen passes bill allowing Nguyen Van Thieu to devalue piaster for
certain transactions, but refuses to give him special econ powers that he has
sought; bill now goes back to House; lets Pres establish more realistic exch
rates between piaster and dollar; is expected to grant rate of 270/280 piasters
to US servicemen; will go back to House where 2/3 majority, deemed virtually
impossible to achieve, is needed to change it; Sens say Pres already has power
to enact many proposals deleted from bill; devaluation of piaster would help
stem corruption and profiteering caused by black mkt exch rate; Sens,
maintaining Nguyen Van Thieu already has necessary power to enact many of his
proposals, deletes from bill many provisions that would have allowed him to
carry out broad reform measures to help stem inflation; Econ and Finance Com
tells Sens that exch rate is only problem that requires quick solution

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              319 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 19, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 103 words

Some 3,000 Cambodian Govt relief troops and supply convoy link up with Govt
force about 40 mi N of Pnompenh; reinforcements sent in by Communists reptd to
be dug in at Taing Kauk on Route 6; major confrontation expected; warplanes,
believed to be Amer, reptdly pound enemy troops blocking Govt offensive; foreign
newsmen barred from scene of action, possibly to prevent them from observing
strikes by Amer jets; S Vietnam turns over nearly 6,000 rifles, other weapons
and ammunition to Cambodia to commem 6-mo anniv of Norodom Sihanouk's ouster,
ceremony, Pnompenh; illus of Cambodian troops relaxing along Route 6; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              320 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Ottinger endorsed by ADA NYS chap, NYC meeting; charges Goodell with having
reactionary Cong record, s; holds his election could contribute to Dem-Repub
deadlock in Sen or even elect Buckley; at earlier news conf outside NYC police
hq urges Nixon speed Govt research on bomb-detection devices; Goodell makes
strong showing at ADA NYS chap conv, NYC, although Ottinger is endorsed; scores
Ottinger attacks on his conservative Cong record as 'ancient history,' s; says
he will not support Nixon re-election if Vietnam war continues; pors

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              321 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 13 words

Mil experts, Saigon, speculate on N Vietnam's moves when moonsoons end; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              322 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 19 words

Comment on Vietcong new withdrawal proposals made at Paris peace talks and US
reaction; Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              323 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 2

LENGTH: 21 words

Natl Com for a Pol Settlement in Vietnam/Negotiation Now! ad urges support for
peace plan offered by bipartisan group of Sens

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              324 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

Thai charter craft hijacked by B Keesee, Amer with prison record in Ariz, hit
hit by ground fire over Laos before landing in N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              325 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 53 words

N Vietnamese official in Paris refuses to comment on rept from Washington that
US efforts to draw N Vietnam and Vietcong into private talks have not been
fruitful; Vietcong spokesman stresses his delegation is ready for such talks;
article in USSR armed forces pub says Vietcong proposals offer US speedy
settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              326 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 109 words

Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh says new peace proposals offered this wk were worked out
after contacts with other groups in S Vietnam, including officials of Saigon
Govt and members of army, int; says Vietcong is regularly in touch with S
Vietnamese groups and individuals; says there is growing opposition to Saigon
regime's policies in S Vietnam; says proposals are declaration of willingness to
talk with Saigon Govt, excluding Nguyen Van Thieu, Nguyen Cao Ky and Tran Thien
Khiem, but expresses willingness to deal with anyone else who declares himself
for peace, independence and neutrality; says Bruce has brought nothing new to
talks; makes other comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              327 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Article on foreigners who are fascinated by mysteries, contradictions and
potentialities of S Vietnam; some meet at US-financed Vietnamese Amer Assn to
discuss 'mystique of Vietnam'; comments of some Amers noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              328 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 21, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 11 words

Govt security forces kill 2 armed Communist infiltrators off Inchon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              329 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 22, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 2

LENGTH: 144 words

Ottinger warns 'massive Repub defections' from Goodell give Buckley
'respectable' chance of winning, int; holds Buckley will also take Dem votes but
himself hopes to attract blue-collar workers on econ issue; holds that, not
Vietnam, is major question, charging opponents both support Nixon Adm policies;
denies running low-key campaign designed to avoid controversy; scorns 'garbage'
of Goodell's liberalism; says some out-of-state Dems may aid campaign to attack
Goodell HR record; S Shriver, at joint news conf, NYC, charges Goodell is
'changeling' and 'opportunist' who worked against antipoverty program which
Shriver headed; Ottinger minimizes Procaccino endorsement of Buckley; Ottinger
and Shriver say they would welcome Lindsay conversion to Dems but urge he speed
decision; visit Lower E Side day-care center; illus; Ottinger s to Bapt Mins
Conf in Harlem

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              330 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 22, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 63 words

Cambodian Premier Lon Nol and top mil leaders visit stalled column of troops,
Skoun; Cambodian top command announces comdr of stalled force, Brig Gen Neak
Sam, has been replaced by Brig Gen Phan Moeung; S Vietnam sends naval force
along Bassac River, about 35 mi southeast of Pnompenh, to destroy enemy base
areas and infiltration corridors between Bassac and Mekong Rivers; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              331 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 22, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 64 words

Revised 'hamlet evaluation system' used by US officials to measure pacification
indicates that as of August 31, 92.8% of S Vietnam's population was under govt
control and only 184,700 people were under Vietcong control; govt control figure
is highest number ever claimed by system; latest rept says 996,600 people live
in areas where neither Vietcong nor govt has decisive control

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              332 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 22, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 61 words

PHS repts malaria cases diagnosed in US in '69 up 50% with preliminary data
showing further sharp rise in '70; rise linked directly to mil cases imported
from Vietnam; Marines suffer highest incidence, possibly because they do not
take antimalarial pills or because they have feeling of invincibility; details;
figures; graph of cases, civilian and mil, '59-69

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHS & CHARTS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              333 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 35 words

S Shriver calls Vice Pres Agnew 'radical rightist' and suggests he and S Vietnam
Vice Pres Ky make nationwide tour when latter visits US, s, Windsor Locks, Conn;
Shriver campaigns; Dem HR nominee Mrs E Grasso

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              334 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 4

LENGTH: 73 words

Rostow says kind of Asia that will exist in yr 2000 is being determined, above
all, by growing sense of regional cooperation that has emerged since US honored
its commitment to S Vietnam in '65; says if US fails to achieve honorable and
stable peace in SE Asia, it could confront dangerous power there; says, in
summation, that at this time in history US cannot safely walk away from its
commitments and interests in Asia; graph; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              335 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

Vietnam combat action is light and scattered; US command repts loss of 2
helicopters

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              336 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh reiterates as 'legitimate demands' deadline for withdrawal
of allied troops and removal of Saigon regime, luncheon meeting of Brit and Amer
correspondents; says deadline is ample time; stresses her side's willingness to
enter immediately into talks with all Vietnamese factions in favor of peace,
neutrality and other conditions; says S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, Nguyen
Cao Ky and Tran Thien Khiem would be exceptions; calls Nguyen Cao Ky a
'traitor'; US rejection of demands noted; Nguyen Thi Binh says there is much
that is new in proposals; gives no support to allied demand that N Vietnamese
forces get out at same time US troops are withdrawn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              337 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 24, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 56, Column 6

LENGTH: 134 words

Cong, with law and order emerging as key campaign issue, moves swiftly to give
Pres Nixon anticrime and drug abuse legis he has sought for long time; action
taken by Cong outlined; Sen unanimously passes bill to let people receiving
unsolicited pornographic mail return it, with original sender paying return
cost; Nixon asks $14.1-million for 1,000 more FBI agents; backed by Repr Mahon;
HR votes, 337-14, to cite Communist party official A S Johnson for contempt of
Cong for refusing to answer House com's questions concerning activities of New
Mobilization Com; case now goes to Justice Dept; 139 HR Dems issue statement
condemning hecklers who tried to disrupt recent ss by Nixon and Agnew; move seen
further indication of growing sensitivity of Dems to Repub attempts to link them
to lawless elements

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              338 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 24, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 117 words

Vice Pres Agnew attends Roudebush rally, Indianapolis State Fairgrounds; scores
Hartke for voting with 'radical-liberals' on Vietnam pullout; implicitly
criticizes W A Harriman who campaigned recently for Hartke; says he does not
believe Nguyen Cao Ky visit will serve 'useful purpose', news conf,
Indianapolis; says visit 'may be a mistake'; McIntire makes pub telegram
inviting Agnew to welcome S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Cao Ky at reception Oct 1 and
to accompany him to rally 2 days later; telegram says Nguyen Cao Ky's rhetoric
may be similar to Agnew's; Agnew spokesman says Agnew has not received telegram;
Agnew says significance of visit is being 'grossly overplayed'; cites free
speech in US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              339 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 24, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

Hq of 5-yr-old USMC pacification program in 5 northernmost provs of Vietnam
disbanded; only 1 of 4 groups controlled by hq will remain in area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              340 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 24, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 48 words

Thai Min Thanat Khoman proposes Big 4 talks on Indochina, s, UN; underscores
need for USSR participation; Thai spokesmen say Thanat Khoman is likely to
pursue proposal in talks with US; Australian Min McMahon says Saigon Govt has
been target of 'biased and totally unfair criticism', s, UN

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              341 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 25, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 1

LENGTH: 138 words

Ed urges focusing of attention on missile build-up in canal zone to revive peace
talks; holds there are now more operational Soviet missiles in zone than in N
Vietnam; holds el-Zayyat raised possibility of rollback to positions prior to
cease-fire and, despite his failure to mention several other factors, statement
could permit negotiated withdrawal of missiles within 20-mi range of canal;
notes el-Zayyat asked US, in return for withdrawal, to either guarantee against
Israeli 'surprise attack' or propose way for UAR to defend itself; holds
conditions imposed by el-Zayyat could make withdrawal impossible but offer needs
to be explored with view towards possible compromise; holds combination of
missile withdrawals and increased arms and econ aid to Israel might 'rectify'
situation and permit resumption of Jarring talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              342 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 25, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 1

LENGTH: 17 words

Excerpts from US brief filed in Sup Ct in reply to Mass bill, which challenge
legality of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              343 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 25, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7

LENGTH: 27 words

W A Harriman, scoring Nixon Adm actions on war, says most action and rhetoric of
Adm has been aimed at 'strengthening a corrupt and repressive govt' in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              344 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 26, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 34 words

Western analysts say N Vietnam has ordered increased conscription and recruiting
for armed forces, rept; say Vo Nguyen Giap told N Vietnamese mil officials conf
that increased recruitment is necessary

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              345 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 26, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 82 words

Cambodian Govt announces capture of Tangkok after enemy retreats; 2-wk enemy
entrenchment marks new tactic for Communists who seldom hold community longer
than several hrs or days; photographer who evaded Govt ban on press in
operations area, repts Govt troops encountered heavily fortified enemy postions
along Route 6; US and Cambodian intelligence officers hold Cambodian drive north
has hampered enemy operations in other areas; unidentified Vietcong gen reptd
captured near Tangkok; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              346 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 26, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 127 words

Kissinger schedules Paris meeting with S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky to
try to persuade him not to attend rally; will also conf with Bruce; reliable
sources within Nixon Adm say Kissinger will try to convince Nguyen Cao Ky that
appearance at rally would not be in his interest or that of S Vietnam; Kissinger
trip viewed as indication of White House's concern over problems that could
arise from appearance; Muskie warns Nguyen Cao Ky visit would 'deepen the
divisions over Vietnam,' Kissinger, in talks with Bruce, is expected to stress
significance of new Vietcong Kissinger schedules Paris meeting with S Vietnamese
Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky to try to between proposals and previous ones; but Adm
will study changes in nuance and emphasis; Kissinger illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              347 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Sen Goodell, Repub-Liberal candidate for Sen from NY, urges groups backing natl
health ins unite to seek swift Cong action next yr, statement on natl health
ins; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              348 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

NYS Dem candidate for US Sen, Repr R L Ottinger, urges US econ aid to S Vietnam
be conditioned on Saigon's willingness to institute govt reforms, news conf;
says only through such reforms can middle force emerge in S Vietnam; says econ
aid should be reduced until S Vietnamese Govt ends corruption and waste and
restores basic rights that will permit S Vietnamese to participate in pol life
of their country; Ottinger tours Westchester shopping centers with Mrs B
Eisenberg, nominee for NYS Assembly

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              349 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 35 words

Comment on Borman s; Lt R Frishman, former N Vietnam prisoner who was released
presumably for med reasons after 22 mos, tells of his experiences, int; tells of
punishment of prisoners; Borman and McCormack illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              350 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 17 words

Comment on malaria cases involving US personnel in Vietnam; map of malaria
incidence throughout world

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              351 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

Ed holds Paris talks show welcome signs of life; says there are several openings
worth exploring in new Vietcong proposals; says key questions are whether
withdrawal dates are negotiable or whether they must be fixed in advance of
settlement; notes aspects of proposals concerning coalition govt and cease-fire;
urges probing of ambiguities in Vietcong proposals and making of new Amer
proposals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              352 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 13 words

Lr urges coalition govt in S Vietnam to solve present deadlock in Paris talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              353 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

Sir R Thompson, Brit counterinsurgency expert, makes brief stopover in Pnompenh
enroute to S Vietnam on fact-finding mission for Pres Nixon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              354 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 28, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky says cease-fire is '1st step' toward
peaceful solution of war, TV int; says he does not know whether Communist
negotiators are interested in negotiating on cease-fire terms; says he returns
to Paris to head S Vietnamese delegation in effort to bring 'new hope' to talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              355 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 28, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 46 words

8 S Vietnamese killed, 33 wounded in Vietcong attacks on 3 villages directed
against pacification program; 12 US soldiers killed, 5 wounded in accidents
involving helicopter collisions and accidental triggering of mines; 2 other US
helicopters downed; other action reptd; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              356 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 28, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

R Ridenhour, whose lr to Army and Congressmen led to investigation of Songmy
incident, is now reporter in Vietnam; is warned by Maj W Gabella that many in
Army would like to 'get' him; has protested that Gabella, in effort to have him
watched, assigned officer to escort him when he joined US troops in field; Maj R
Bromblay says disclosure of Songmy killings was 'bad' for Army; Ridenhour illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              357 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 29, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

Norodom Sihanouk followers watch Vietnam peace talks in Paris as possible key to
pol victory in Cambodia; Thounn Prasith, Min in exile govt, comments; Thounn
Prasith, Min in exile govt of Norodom Sihanouk, says US withdrawal from Vietnam
would lead to collapse of Lon Nol Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              358 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 29, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 37 words

Kent State U students at memorial for 4 students killed by Natl Guard are urged
to pledge selves to nonviolence, but also to engage in resistence to repression
and racism and Vietnam war; about 12 draft cards burned; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              359 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 29, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 79 words

USAF helicopter crashes in Cambodian border prov; S Vietnamese mil hq announces
end of operation along Bassac and Mekong Rivers; S Vietnamese forces reptdly
killed 233 enemy soldiers; spokesman says end of operation leaves about
13,500-12,000 S Vietnamese troops in Cambodia; Vietcong shells Hue; US manpower
drops by 1,400 to 394,100 men; US mil and civilian chiefs meet in Saigon to
assess Indochina situation; McCain and Abrams are among those who attend
meeting; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              360 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 30, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 136 words

S Vietnamese Assemblyman Ngo Cong Duc defies Nguyen Van Thieu and renews call
for formation of provisional govt as step toward peace, news conf; his proposals
and Nguyen Van Thieu's response to them have stirred excitement in S Vietnam; he
1st made proposals 2 wks ago; Nguyen Van Thieu implied he was traitor and said
he would be in jail if not for his legis immunity; petition seeking possible
removal of immunity is being circulated in S Vietnamese House; S Vietnamese
Govt's harsh response to proposals reflects Nguyen Van Thieu's sensitivity to
even hint of concessions to Vietcong demands for removal from power of himself
and other leaders; Govt confiscates all copies of newspaper pub by Ngo Cong Duc;
Ngo Cong Duc says provisional govt should be without members of Nguyen Van Thieu
Govt; makes other comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              361 of 361 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 30, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 5

LENGTH: 20 words

Lr, noting cease-fire proposal in Sept 4 ed, queries whether N Vietnam has
indicated it would be interested in cease-fire

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
