
                               1 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Govt troops retake Sam Thong from Vietnamese Communist troops; reptdly have
surrounded several hundred near Sam Thong and are keeping them hemmed in while
they are being pounded by Laotian fighter-bombers; Souvanna Phouma scores Hanoi

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2; (TLN)

LENGTH: 24 words

Laotian Premier Souvanna Phouma charges Communist regime in N Vietnam seeks 'to
reconstitute Indochina under its own authority', int, Vientiane

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 41 words

Vietnam Moratorium and Peace Parade Coms announce NYC Mayor Lindsay will s April
15 at antiwar rally in Bryant Pk; withholding of tax payments to be urged at Apr
15 rallies protesting Vietnam war; other planned events in NYC and other cities
noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Ed says new troop withdrawal from Vietnam announcement should provide clue to
prospects for fulfillment of hope voiced by Pres Nixon of doing better than
former Sec Clifford's proposal for withdrawing all US ground forces by end of
'70; notes US reductions have not significantly affected mil balance in Vietnam;
says many Amers question whether Nixon Adm will fulfill its promise of 'orderly
scheduled' disengagement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 116 words

US diplomats in Saigon are considerably concerned about S Vietnamese Army's
penetration into Cambodian territory; fear continuation of cross-border sweeps
will threaten neutrality of new regime and complicate US efforts to stay out of
Cambodian crisis; S Vietnamese appear eager to exploit changing situation;
reliable sources say sweep was planned and executed by S Vietnamese alone,
without knowledge or consent of US; US officials are concerned about impact that
future S Vietnamese cross-border operations may have on Amer pub opinion;
details on situation and sweep; chronology of contacts between S Vietnamese and
Cambodian officers noted; S Vietnamese troops returning from sweep illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 69 words

Cambodian Govt discloses it has renewed appeal to USSR and GB to send Control
Comm back into Cambodia to investigate Cambodian charges that N Vietnamese and
Vietcong troops are stepping up their mil activity; charges Communist troops are
attacking openly Cambodian posts and defense forces within Cambodia; Police Comr
Hin Nil, Lon Nol's brother, stabbed to death at his home in Chup by gang of
Vietnamese workers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 58 words

US mil spokesmen rept US jet fighter-interceptor downed N Vietnamese MIG over N
Vietnam, 1st such action reptd since Nov '68 bombing cessation; US officer says
action is 1 of self-defense; another officer refuses to say whether MIG fired at
fighter jet or reconnaissance plane it was escorting; US planes have downed 111
MIGs over N Vietnam; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

Mil ct sentences Lt James Duffy to 6 mos in confinement for involuntary
manslaughter of Vietnamese prisoner; fines him $1,500; Rothblatt comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 2, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 152 words

Unidentified Govt spokesman hints at possible shift in Cambodia's announced
policy which has opposed coordinated mil action between Cambodian and US troops
against N Vietnamese and Vietcong in border region; says in case of need Govt
would accept US mil aid but as yet has made no such request; US aide says he is
not aware of any change in Cambodia's policy or of any joint action; says
Cambodia is still determined to remain completely neutral but cannot be neutral
if N Vietnamese and Vietcong troops remain on her soil in violation of
neutrality; says neutrality is suspended for present; Govt sends indoctrination
teams into countryside to tell population of changes under new regime; repts
about 100 Cambodian soldiers, overrun by thousands of Vietnamese soldiers in
heavy fighting near Vietnam border, suffer heavy losses; Cambodia complains to
UN Security Council on attack inside Cambodian territory

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 2, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 11 words

Brig Gen W R Bond killed by enemy small-arms fire in Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 2, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 119 words

War flares up again after 6 mos of relative quiet; enemy stages 115 shellings
and 13 ground assaults; at least 38 Amers killed; 65 S Vietnamese, 240 enemy
reptd killed; 184 Amers and 176 S Vietnamese listed as wounded; US officers
describe attacks as major enemy effort, expect intensified battle action to
continue for at least 2 or 3 days; few officers expect attacks to grow into
full-scale offensive; details on attacks; top Washington officials view flare-up
as effort by Communists to slow down pacification program and to prevent S
Vietnamese troops from making incursions into Cambodia; conclude tentatively
that attacks are tactical moves related to situation in Vietnam and new
situation in Cambodia; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 2, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 130 words

Army accuses Capt E Medina of being 'reponsible' for murder of Vietnamese
civilians allegedly killed by members of his inf co in Songmy; does not make
details of charges pub, but says they involve 102 alleged victims of Calley, 30
alleged victims of Mitchell and murders allegedly committed by at least 5 other
enlisted men; Medina denies charges, news conf; discloses they accuse him of
premeditated murder of not less than 175 civilians; repeats denials of having
participated in or ordered or seen any mass killings in Songmy; new charges said
to broaden Army inquiry; Army withdraws earlier charge that Medina concealed
from his superiors knowledge of slayings; Army says Medina is not accused of
'all' killings that it believes occurred, but of 'most of them'; Medina illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 2, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 156 words

French Govt calls for gen conf on Indochina to make area 'a zone of neutrality
and peace', statement issued by Cabinet; says Vietnamese war is spreading to
Laos and Cambodia and that all foreign intervention must end if peace and
neutrality are to prevail; L Hamon, Govt spokesman, suggests reconvening Geneva
conf of '54 as 1 possibility; Govt appears to be warning US and N Vietnam; notes
Cambodian Embassy in Paris reaffirms Cambodia's desire to be neutral; Nixon Adm
decides to refrain from any immediate new diplomatic or mil initiatives in SE
Asia pending fuller evaluation of events; Pres Nixon confs with Sec of State
Rogers; French Amb in Peking reptdly conferred with Norodom Sihanouk and
informed him that France would not support him if he set up Govt in exile; other
overt French activity to express French concern noted; statement suggesting gen
conf on Indochina said to imply that such a conf could replace Paris talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 40 words

Cambodian Govt denies that US or S Vietnamese forces have right to pursue enemy
into Cambodia, statement; says Govt will protest all violations of its
territory; repts Vietcong troops are continuing to exert pressure on Cambodian
outposts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 85 words

Student Mobilization Com to End War in Vietnam says it will demand end to
counterinsurgency research and all other forms of 'campus complicity' between
univ and scholars and Govt agencies, as part of schedule Apr 15 demonstration
against US involvement in Southeast Asia; charges advisory aid by US univs,
sponsored by AID, is responsible for escalation of war in Laos; AID spokesman
denies; calls for strike at hss and colls on Apr 15 to force Govt-sponsored
projects involving counterinsurgency off campuses

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 75 words

Wave of heavy enemy attacks ebbs; US says worst of fighting appears to be over;
incomplete repts say 61 Amers, 101 S Vietnamese and 552 enemy killed in 200
shellings and in ground fighting yesterday and today; 3 US helicopters downed;
343 Amers wounded; enemy shellings continue, Danang is shelled for 3d
consecutive night; details on action; 32 civilians killed, 114 wounded in wave
of terrorist attacks; map; US & enemy casualties for last wk listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 93 words

N Vietnam, Vietcong and Saigon delegations to Paris peace talks on Vietnam war
take reserved attitude on French proposal for gen conf; Min Schumann says such
negotiations could take form of formal conf attended by all concerned parties
including France and Communist China, makes explicit implication that gen conf
could replace current talks; s, foreign press assn, Paris; rules out role for
UN; reiterates French concern over gravity of situation; N Vietnamese spokesman
Le Quang Hiep calls on France to support Norodom Sihanouk as legitimate head of
state

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 59 words

Max Frankel discusses US efforts to remain neutral, confusing events and
conflicting forecasts; commenting on Sec of State Rogers testimony, says
Washington does not know how Cambodian situation will eventually affect battle
for S Vietnam or diplomacy to end war; says US policy has not changed, although
circumstances in SE Asia have; notes Fulbright s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 7

LENGTH: 25 words

Philippine Sen com probing use of US funds for Philippine group in Vietnam
agrees to inquire into possible secret accords between US and Philippines

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 132 words

Sen J Fulbright urges Pres Nixon to reach pol settlement in Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia this yr to avoid what he fears will be major disaster in Indochina, s,
Sen; warns on disaster for Amer foreign policy in Asia and wave of
recriminations in US; says this is great price to pay for 'myth' that Vietnam
ever really mattered to US security; urges settlement that will permit gen
neutralization accord embracing all Indochina states; Sec Rogers, in earlier
testimony before Sen com, reptd Adm strives to maintain neutral position and
avoid any entanglement in an Indochina war; Mansfield lauds Adm position; Roger
repts US interested in French proposals, news conf; other officials indicate US
is lukewarm because there has been no sign form USSR or N Vietnam that they
would participate; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

March on Washington, arranged by Rev C McIntire, is scheduled for April 4 to
support 'victory over the Communists in Vietnam'; march will include parade
along Penna Ave; clearance for march follows several days of confusion between
sponsors and Fed Govt; McIntire comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 51, Column 5

LENGTH: 102 words

Chase Manhattan annual meeting; stockholders assail chmn Rockefeller with
assortment of questions and protests dealing largely with internatl affairs; D
Rockefeller rejects implications that his well-publicized visit with UAR Pres
Nasser reflected an anti-Israel stance; says fact that bank does business in S
Africa does not indicate support or approval of S Africa's racial policies; in
response to question raised at stockholders meeting by Business Execs Move for
Vietnam Peace exec A R Appleby, says it is not 'appropriate or proper' for bank
to take position on US involvement; J H Smith elected dir; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 43 words

Mass Gov F Sargent signs bill; directs it become law immediately; explains
purpose of legal test of Vietnam War; Atty Gen Quinn says he will file suit
under law as soon as possible, news conf; Sargent comments on bill; Defense Sec
Laird has no comment; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 193 words

Pres Nixon asks $65-million increase in VA budget to expand med programs for
increasing number of Vietnam veterans, message to Cong; message and various Adm
spokesmen place heavy emphasis on need for improved services in dental care and
care for growing number of veterans with multiple amputations and spinal cord
injuries; appropriations consist of additional $15-million for rest of current
fiscal yr and additional $50-million during fiscal '71; article on VA and mil
hosps difficulties in coping with crush of patients returning from Vietnam; VA,
with 7,000 fewer beds available than in '69 because of acute funds shortages,
has fallen back on nursing homes to handle spillover; repts nearly 7,500 nursing
homes being used, compared with 168 in '65; tight budgets have forced 166 hosps
to remain staffed at '66 levels, at least 10,000 persons short, while admissions
rose by 134,000, '66-69; physical and mental rehabilitation programs discussed;
programs and patients readjustment seen complicated by conflicting attitudes at
home toward war; some patients comment; 13,000 US veterans have suffered wounds
severe enough to merit mil discharge; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 28 words

About 60,000 protest detention of 41 students without trial by staging class
boycott, Saigon, which they say will continue until Govt tries students or
releases them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 99 words

US troops pursuing enemy bn toward Cambodian border meet heavy resistance,
contact continues into night; 10 Amers killed, 62 enemy killed; enemy shells 60
targets; at least 82 Amers killed in 3 days of fighting and shellings; 267 S
Vietnamese have been killed, 800 enemy have been killed; about 100 civilians
killed, about 300 wounded; S Vietnamese troops suffer severe losses for 2d day
in Mekong Delta; illus; US 1st Inf Div, 1st full army div committed to war,
furls its colors for return to US under Pres Nixon's withdrawal program; Amb E
Bunker and Gen C Abrams laud div, farewell ceremony

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 17 words

N Vietnamese Embassy in Laos tells families of 4 downed US airmen that none of
them were ever prisoners

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

Vietnamese Communists reptdly have moved their main pol and mil hq for S Vietnam
from Mimot in Cambodia to S Vietnamese territory; Communists reptdly recd no
supplies from stockpiles in Sikanoukville for nearly 1 yr because of Norodom
Sihanouk's curbs; new sites are in thick jungle areas of Tayninh Prov; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 12 words

S Vietnamese soldiers riding landing craft past Mekong Delta town illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

Cambodian Govt press agency pub transcript of Premier Lon Nol news conf with
group of journalists but changes wording to raise possibility that Cambodia
might call for US troops to help expel Vietnamese Communists; Cambodia officials
say transcript is to be considered as an official statement despite anything Lon
Nol may have said; speculation on reasons for change

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

Commando movement's growing role in internatl affairs discussed; Arafat's trip
to Peking seen reminder to USSR that Arabs could turn to China if USSR remained
reluctant friend or should join US in arms embargo; closer relations between
commandos and Eur New Left, which began 2 yrs ago, have begun to spread to
Communists and Socialists; support for movement in Italy, GB, France and W Ger
cited; commando officials believe Eur Left embraces Palestinian cause as
alternative to Vietnam issue; see Amer leftists still preoccupied with Vietnam,
but believe younger and more radical elements are increasingly interested in
Palestinian cause; also note support of Black Panthers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 51, Column 1

LENGTH: 136 words

Gen Orgn (GO) City Council passes resolution repudiating student coalition group
which drew up student rights bill, on grounds that rights document noted that
included in its preparation were members of City Coll chapters of 3d World Com
and Student Mobilization Com to End War in Vietnam; meeting passes resolution to
dissolve com but does not disown rights proposal; Educ Bd asst G W Castka says
resolution is result of complaint by GO repr that proposal was railroaded
through council by outside factions; GO pres Reeves denies charge; says meeting
was stacked by Educ Bd to condemn proposal; Student Rights Coalition leaders,
including Reeves, announce rally and possible strike Ap 15 to back demands that
bd negotiate proposal; Castka notes council meeting did not consider proposal to
endorse Coalition action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 45 words

Comment on recent upsurge in enemy attacks in S Vietnam says some Amer officers
suggest consequences of steady Amer disengagement may be beginning to appear;
notes many US comdrs believe Pres Nixon is withdrawing too many troops too
quickly; chart shows US withdrawals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHS & CHARTS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 21 words

French bid to participate in settlement of Indochina conflict discussed; French
cultural, econ and religious ties linked

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Comment on new land reform law in S Vietnam, which will prohibit farms larger
than 37 acres during next 15 yrs; Govt hopes law will help it win peasants'
support

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 11 words

Vietnam Moratorium Com ad announces peace fast; asks for funds

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Ed holds French proposal offers Nixon Adm another chance, perhaps last chance,
to move from confrontation to negotiation before erruption of wider war in
Indochina; backs conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 16 words

Lr from Sec D O Maxwell (Penna) scores Tom Wicker's March 15 column on Pres
Nixon Vietnam policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 4

LENGTH: 10 words

Lr on Lt Gen Peers bd findings on Vietnam atrocity charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Div bulldozes strip in jungle NW of Saigon 1-1/2 mi long in form of its emblem;
top mil officials are embarrassed by action, pub relations officers veto
publicity; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 128 words

Student Mobilization Com to End War in Vietnam plans Apr 15 demonstration to
protest US involvement in Thailand and other SE Asia areas; says major issue is
US manipulation of univs and scholars for purposes of counter-insurgency
research which it claims is financed by various Govt agencies; scores 3 programs
which it identifies as Academic Advisory Council for Thailand, Defense Dept's
Project Jason and Amer Inst for Research; claims it has documentary evidence
which reveals extent of Amer involvement; cites '68 contract between Calif Univ
and AID to 'provide coordination between acad community of Thai scholars and
AID'; details other documents it claims shows Amer involvement in supporting
Thai police force and certain politicians; AID spokesman comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 76 words

Hundreds of disabled S Vietnamese veterans build new homes on sidewalks and
other land throughout downtown Saigon as protest against Govt's apparent lack of
concern for their welfare; plight of 1 veteran discussed; his life said to be
typical of 40,000 veterans, who say nobody seems to care about them; about 40
veterans stage demonstration in front of Pres Palace to stress their demands for
housing and increased benefits; some scuffle with police; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 56 words

Patrick Luminello, civilian bur chief of US Army pub Pacific Stars and Stripes,
Saigon, discharged for allowing Army newsman to send article critical of mil
censorship to NY Times Magazine; Luminello is quoted in article as saying US mil
wants paper to become 'pap sheet' to air its views and prevent unfavorable news
about Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 71 words

3 Amer correspondents checking repts of Vietcong presence around Cambodian
border town of Bavet, rept about a dozen men, identified by villagers as
Vietcong, cross into village casually, ignore villagers and head towards S
Vietnamese border; Cambodian prov chief Hang Chan says Vietcong are operating up
to 4 mi inside Cambodia, deeper penetration than ever before; Vietcong intruders
reptdly are testing Cambodian defenses

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 143 words

Allied commands rept heaviest fighting involving Amer troops along buffer zone
in nearly 5 mos and new clashes near Cambodian border; S Vietnamese forces in
and around Danang are on full alert; US forces heighten their vigilance; Hanoi
radio broadcasts threats of impending attack on city; allies reveal recent
nationwide enemy attacks dealt much sharper blow to S Vietnamese forces than to
US forces; allied communiques list 319 S Vietnamese troops killed, 88 Amers
killed, 931 S Vietnamese wounded, 469 Amers wounded; about 200 civilians said to
have been killed; 6 Amers killed, 40 wounded in 8-hr battle near buffer zone; S
Vietnamese troops kill 23 enemy near Cambodian border, 16 S Vietnamese killed;
Cambodian official says Cambodian forces near border have been supported by Amer
air strikes inside Cambodia in last few days; details on mil activity

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 108 words

About 50,000 march up Penna Ave to Washington Monument rally to advocate
'victory' in Vietnam war; their activities are marked by Biblical references;
distinct right-wing sympathizers and segregationists are in group; McIntire is
organizer and leader of march; proclaims 'holy crusade', s; few security
measures taken; details on march and rally; Repr Rarick and Gov Maddox s;
segregationists participating in Washington, DC, rally advocating victory in
Vietnam, protest busing to achieve racial balance; Gov Maddox scores Nixon Adm's
$1.5-billion appropriation for improvement of segregated schools as bribe for
local officials, s at rally; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Vietnamese families living in Cambodia are fearful for their lives in wake of
present crisis; many have bribed their way out of Cambodia, sold everything
possible and returned to S Vietnam; Vietnamese population put at about 400,000;
hatred between Vietnamese and Cambodians is long-standing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 101 words

Tex millionaire H Ross Perot returns to Vientiane in jetliner full of
journalists to continue his campaign, begun in '69, to induce N Vietnamese to
improve treatment of US POWs; seeks permission to fly to Hanoi; has spent wk
visiting camps for enemy POWs in S Vietnam to show he is interested in prisoners
in gen; seeks to deliver gift packages to families in N Vietnam of enemy
prisoners in S Vietnam and to deliver mail from enemy prisoners; he and
journalists publicize good treatment they say enemy prisoners receive in S
Vietnam, contrast it with harsh treatment they say prisoners in N Vietnam
receive

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 2

LENGTH: 23 words

Ed lauds Nixon Adm decision to stay out of Cambodian pol; warns on risks of
recent cross-border harassment mounted by S Vietnamese Army

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 4

LENGTH: 53 words

Lr holds new phase in war points up importance of Cambodia as sanctuary for N
Vietnamese and Vietcong troops; warns US against widening conflict in
authorizing US field comdrs to cross borders from Vietnam in response to enemy
threats; lauds Pres Nixon announcement concerning response to enemy threats in
Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 86 words

Patrick Luminello, civilian bur chief of Army pub Pacific Stars and Stripes,
Saigon, dismissed and reassigned apparently because he allowed army writer to
submit article critical of mil censorship to Times Magazine; Times accepted but
has not yet published article; Col W V Koch, ed-in-chief of Stars and Stripes,
says Luminello's dismissal and reassignment to Tokyo is 'routine change';
declines to comment on Luminello's charge that dismissal was result of
dissatisfaction with article written by Sp/4 R Hodierne

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 82 words

S Vietnamese troops penetrate nearly 10 mi into Cambodia; S Vietnamese spokesman
says nearest actions involving Govt and guerrilla troops took place 2 mi inside
S Vietnam; about 40 B-52s stage raids along buffer zone; N Vietnamese troops
battle allied forces for 2d day along buffer zone and Laotian and Cambodian
borders; 3 US aircraft downed; enemy shells 56 targets; 11 S Vietnamese soldiers
killed, 30 wounded when hey are mistakenly fired at by US helicopter gunships;
details on action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 2

LENGTH: 49 words

H Ross Perot is denied entrance into N Vietnamese Embassy in Vientiane; stages
7-1/2 hr sit-in; is joined by 5 Amer women whose husbands are believed to be
prisoners and 3 aides; Profs N Chomsky, D Dowd and Rev R Fernandez, who have
been invited to N Vietnam, arrive at embassy for courtesy call

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 143 words

Former Army helicopter pilot David Bressem charges that Army major killed 33
unarmed civilians as they ran across open field in '67 incident in central
highlands, hearing conducted by Natl Com for a Citizens Comm of Inquiry on US
War Crimes in Vietnam, Springfield, Mass; says he did not see shooting, but
heard conversations relating to it on his aircraft radio; among members of
policy-making bd of comm are Prof N Chomsky, R Schoenman, D Gregory and others;
other hearings are scheduled; former Army Capt R B Johnson and former Pfc P
Fossill also speak at hearing; Johnson says individual soldiers should not be
blamed for atrocities; says more than 1/2 of his West Point graduating class has
left Army because of US policy and that Defense Dept will not make figures pub;
Fossill says he saw Vietnamese civilians die during forced march in '67 N of Hue

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 44 words

Scores of disabled veterans battle police near S Vietnam's Pres Palace after
march to demand improved benefits; Mayor Do Kien Nhieu and Min Pham Van Dong
talk with men about their grievances; Pham Van Dong presents proposals for bill
to improve benefits; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 74 words

Japanese newsmen Akira Kasaka and Yujiro Takagi captured by Vietcong while on
Govt-sponsored tour to show extent of Vietcong infiltration; Cambodian Army
sends large force of airborne troops, arty and armored cars toward S Vietnam to
head off Vie cong who crossed into country 90 mi SE of Pnompenh; Amer
photographers Dana Stone (CBS) and Sean Flynn, son of late film actor E Flynn,
and French photographer C Arpin captured in separate incident

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 34 words

French diplomats in world capitals press moves to advance French proposal for
gen peace negotiations; find Cambodia and Laos favorable, GB and US not
unfavorable, S Vietnam cool and Communist China hostile

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 128 words

Student protest movement is rapidly gathering momentum in S Vietnam despite Govt
efforts to stifle it; police seal off office of students' 'struggle com', which
is directing gen strike of Saigon U students; also attempt to block planned mass
meeting and march on Pres Palace; students at other S Vietnamese univs offer
support to Saigon students; leaders of movement say 20 students have volunteered
to disembowel themselves and 5 have offered to commit suicide by fire if
students' demands are not met; students demand Govt respect civil rights and
allow univ autonomy; demand spurred by March 10 arrest of student leader accused
of being Communist and Vietcong agent; students seek to force Govt to give
arrested students speedy trials by independent civilian cts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

Enemy stages 4 ground assaults; shells 41 targets; most combat action results
from attacks by allies; 7 Amers killed, 4 wounded in battle in Tayninh Prov 3 mi
from Cambodian border; 62 enemy killed by S Vietnamese troops in southern part
of prov; 30 enemy killed in Kontum Prov; US planes raid; details on action; US
command announces US troops strength dropped by 9,200 men last wk to 439,400;
map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 49, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 20 words

White House says Pres Nixon will announce withdrawal decision next mo; last
contingent of 1st Inf Div leaves Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 80 words

Pres Nixon presents Medal of Hon to families of 21 servicemen killed in Vietnam;
names listed; pors; Cpl T W Bennett, Cpl M J Crescenz, Sp/4 N J Cuthina, Sp/4 E
A DeVore, Lt Douglas Fournet, Pfc James Fous, Sp/4 P M Guenette, Sp/5 J J
Kedenburg, Pfc G M Langhorn, Pfc Milton Lee, Pfc P G McDonald, Sgt Ray McKibben,
Pfc David Nash, Sp/4 Kenneth Olson, S Sgt Laszlo Rabel, Sgt Anund Roark, Sp H
Santiago-Colon, Sgt William Seay, Sgt Lester Stone Jr, Sgt R J T Yano, Sgt
Marvin Young

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Enemy's upsurge on battlefield appears to be waning after 6 days of intense
fighting; details on action; S Vietnamese mil spokesman says more than 900 enemy
have been killed near Dakseang Special Forces camp since April 1; recent B-52
raids noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 8 words

Saigon police again clash with disabled veterans

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 116 words

Vietnamese Communists intensify pressure on border prov of Svayrieng; focus
attack on Chiphou after departure of visiting newsmen; Cambodia repts 20 of its
soldiers dead, 30 wounded and 30 missing; estimates Communist force at 3 bns,
puts losses at 40 dead and many wounded; Japanese, French and Amer Embassies
weigh possible approaches to Vietcong for release of captured newsmen; French
photographer G Caron also seized by Vietcong; Flynn (Time) and Stone, captured
after leaviang Govt tour, are well-known for their daring; Cambodian pilots
flying fighter-bombers at treetop level rake Communist positions with machine
gun fire in Svayrieng mil region; comment on missing Amer newsmen; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3; (GP)

LENGTH: 68 words

Gallup poll, in survey conducted Mar 20-22, finds pub approval of Pres Nixon's
performance has dropped to new low of 53%, down 3% from early Mar and down 13%
since early Feb; dissatisfaction with his handling of Vietnam war and gen
feeling he has been 'passive Pres' seen factors in drop; his rating in East
drops below 50% (to 49%) for 1st time; gets 51% in Midwest, 56% in South, 60% in
Far West; table

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

Ed hails new S Vietnamese law as most ambitious and progressive non-Communist
land reform measure in 20th century; holds it should end tenant farming

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 1

LENGTH: 127 words

Arthur J Goldberg, candidate for NYS Dem Gov nomination, urges NY legislators
support bill questioning right of Nixon Adm to send conscript troops to Vietnam;
has said he would have vetoed Mass bill had he been gov of that state; E H
Nickerson and H J Samuels, contenders for nomination for NYS Gov, and Sen
aspirants P O'Dwyer and R L Ottinger, join bill's sponsor Assemblyman A J Stein
in calling on Gov Rockefeller and Assembly Speaker Duryea to 'allow' debate in
Legis on bill; score Goldberg statement that he would have vetoed Mass bill;
Stein's bill limits conscript service in combat zones to wars declared by Cong;
he says bill is designed to test constitutionality of war; Procaccino says he
withholds any candidacy announcement for tactical reasons

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 67 words

Premier Tran Thien Khiem tells S Vietnamese Sen Nguyen Van Thieu intends to send
legis to Parliament enabling him to govern by decree; says such legis is
necessary; adm procedures hamper legis to alleviate problems of veterans; urges
Sen to include streamlined procedures in legis proposed to aid veterans; S
Vietnamese press agency says Nguyen Van Thieu accuses Communists of creating
disturbances

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 63 words

Time Inc and CBS ask news orgns to aid in release of 5 of newsmen but do not
mention Caron; also ask Vietcong to recognize that captured men are 'civilian
noncombatants', appeal to all concerned govts to help; CBS News pres R S Salant
hopes 'reason will prevail'; US State Dept spokesman assumes men were 'captured
or lost'; says it is trying to get information about missing men

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 88 words

S Vietnamese hq announces 754 S Vietnamese were killed last wk, highest wkly
toll in more than 2 yrs, 2d highest of war; informed sources say US casualties
will be announced later and they will include at least 150 dead; 3,336 enemy
forces killed last wk; S Vietnamese hq says enemy troops are moving to reinforce
besiegers of Dakseang camp; enemy shells 33 targets; N Vietnamese newspaper says
US lies in contending Vietcong can no longer launch big attacks; says recent
attacks shatter US policy contentions; other figures

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 62 words

Souvanna Phouma reptdly has proposed that peace talks proposed by Pathet Lao be
preceded by cease-fire and halt in US bombing except against Ho Chi Minh trail;
US State Dept says it has never been asked to halt bombing in Laos; Govt troops
still hold off enemy attacks against Sam Thong and Long Tieng; many Long Tieng
residents who fled earlier reptdly are returning; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 78 words

Selling battlefield scrap has become multi-million dollar business for US Army;
Army runs 9 property disposal depots in S Vietnam; usable scrap is repaired for
US or S Vietnamese and other forces under mil aid programs; Nationalist Chinese
team in S Vietnam vies with S Korean team for getting best of battlefield scrap
US sells; Philippines is 1 of nations that gets from US reconditioned Vietnam
battlefield war material; Lt Col H K Donnell comments; details; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 81 words

Cambodian Govt troops reptdly kill 300 Vietcong soldiers after ambush between
towns of Svayrieng and Prasot; Cambodians press efforts to push Vietcong out of
area called Parrot's Beak which juts into S Vietnam and to recapture border
posts of Bavet and Chiphou; map; Cambodian and S Vietnamese authorities reptdly
are cooperating in efforts to crush Vietnamese Communists inside Cambodia with
Amer troops blocking or supporting troops on S Vietnamese side of border; US
State Dept silent

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

US Defense Dept spokesman, in response to query about an Amer officer seen in
Cambodia, says mil advisers in S Vietnam have been authorized to cross border
into Cambodia for 'protocol' meetings; says they have not been authorized to
enter into planning discussions with Cambodians or with S Vietnamese operating
in Cambodia or to accompany S Vietnamese units into Cambodia for combat
operations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 4 words

B-52s raid S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

Allied forces suffered highest number of combat deaths last wk in nearly a yr;
138 Amers were killed, 754 S Vietnamese; 3,336 enemy killed; other figures;
41,274 Amers have been killed in war, 272,281 wounded; high statistics for
casualties last wk reflect sharp upsurge in enemy attacks; 2 fierce battles
noted; S Vietnamese forces battle near Dakseang in drive to try to break 9-day
enemy siege

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 28 words

Le Duc Tho to return to N Vietnam without having made contact with Amer
delegation during his stay of more than 2 mos in Paris; US spokesman repts no
progress in talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 27 words

US Amb J H Holland arrives, Stockholm; met by scores of police and some 100
demonstrators against Vietnam war; Premier Olof Palme returns from official
visit to GB

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

Ed says participation of Amer-trained, equipped and advised S Vietnamese troops
in Cambodian conflict raises questions about Washington's determination to stay
clear of new extension of SE Asian war, especially in light of admission that US
officers cross border; warns of danger of pursuing objective of attacking
Communist sanctuaries in Cambodia; urges Pres Nixon to keep US mil planners and
S Vietnamese troops out of Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Ed on recent downing of MIG by US plane over N Vietnam warns of danger of
escalating war; notes US mil spokesman described incident as 'protective
reaction' based on 'self-defense' right

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 17 words

World Council of Chs contributes $25,000 toward shipment of med supplies and
equipment to Vietcong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 42 words

Newsmen covering Vietnam peace talks in Paris appeal to 4 participating
delegations to help establish whereabouts and release of missing newsmen; NBC
repts that its news cameraman D Bellendorf apparently was captured by Vietcong
while on assignment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 64 words

Cambodian troops withdrawn from Parrot's Beak, half of civilian population,
estimated at 30,000, withdrawn from embattled border region; Cambodian strategy
of choosing line that runs through Prasot and Chiphou discussed; mil authorities
view town of Svayrieng as likely Vietcong target; link withdrawal from Parrot's
Beak and other moves to army's inadequacy in men and supplies; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 74 words

White House press sec announces Pres Nixon will rept to nation on Vietnam in
natl TV s April 16; says Nixon will announce decision on further troop
withdrawals; Adm officials speculate Nixon will announce further withdrawals,
which would overrule recent recommendation from Joint Cs/S to Laird that any
decision or announcement concerning further withdrawals be delayed up to 60
days; views of Sec Laird and Gen C Abrams on withdrawals noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 77 words

S Vietnamese relief bn fights its way into Dakseang camp; N Vietnamese troops
attack outpost led by Green Berets near buffer zone; S Vietnamese officer says
situation at Dakseang has eased up; mil officials say 1,193 N Vietnamese have
been killed in fighting around Dakseang; number is questioned because of
relatively few enemy weapons found on battlefield; allied casualties noted; at
least 29 N Vietnamese reptd killed in attack on camp near buffer zone; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 39 words

H Ross Perot returns to US; says he believes US pub opinion could change N
Vietnam's views and might even obtain release of some Amer POWs, news conf; says
N Vietnamese leaders view prisoners and their treatment as secondary matter

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 25 words

Le Duc Tho, N Vietnamese Politburo member, warns France against supporting new
Cambodian leadership; indicates his Govt is still studying proposal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 19 words

Difficult life in village of Phuhoi contrasted with prosperity and cheer in
Nhonthanh; mil situation linked; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Murray J Gart of Time-Life News Service repts N Vietnamese and Vietcong reprs in
Paris agree to inquire into disappearance of newsmen; Japanese Embassy says
Vietcong rept 2 Japanese cameramen are still alive but receive no word of others

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 3

LENGTH: 56 words

Prof A M Schlesinger Jr article on 25th anniv of Roosevelt's death discusses
Roosevelt's foreign and domestic policies; notes his '43 proposal that Indochina
be prepared for independence rather than returned to France; suggests war would
not have happened if Pres F D Roosevelt's recommendations concerning Indochina
had been followed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 89 words

Sen Foreign Relations Com unanimously approves repeal of 2 of series of cold war
resolutions, Tonkin Gulf resolution of '64 and Mideast resolution of '57;
Fulbright says action is part of continuing rev of commitments and to 'clear
away underbrush that is out of date'; acknowledges repeal now of resolution may
have little or no practical or legal effect; repeal resolution is adaptation of
broader one by Sen Mathias; Nixon Adm contends it does not rely on resolution
for its mil actions in Vietnam; has taken neutral stand on repeal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 124 words

At least 89 Vietnamese civilians, including many women and children, killed,
many wounded during what Cambodian mil sources call Vietnamese Communist attack
on Prasot; Cambodia claims civilians were mowed down in crossfire by Cambodian
troops; other sources who visited scene, dispute account; Vietnamese civilians
had huddled together in field at agr co-op where they were being held as
Vietcong suspects; Cambodia mil officials rept Prasot is still in Govt hands;
Vietcong provisional Govt and N Vietnamese reptdly have indicated through Polish
embassy that they are considering reopening their embassies in Pnompenh;
Cambodian inf co battles Vietcong force at village of Poi Meau, drives them
back; illus of dead Vietnamese civilians; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 6 words

Cartoon on expansion of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 9 words

Comment on recent upsurge in enemy action, Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 6 words

Lr urges US pullout from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

T B Sollis cites legal opinions on culpability of high comdrs for criminal
actions of troops, lr on US Army charge that Capt E L Medina may be responsible
for murder of Vietnamese civilians allegedly killed by members of his inf co in
Songmy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 0

LENGTH: 104 words

Robert Hodierne article on censorship of news produced by Army for US personnel;
says newspapers and broadcasts that reach US personnel, with exception of Stars
and Stripes, are so controlled by mil that little objective repting gets into
them; says Stars and Stripes is about to be 'toned down' by Koch; says Vietnam
coverage of US papers does not satisfy demands of soldiers in war zone;
discusses news decisions at Armed Forces Vietnam Network; says news is not
censored but seems censored; discusses censorship of unit newspapers by US
command; notes controversies involving Sp/5 R Lawrence and Col J Campbell; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 90 words

Seymour M Hersch, in article which will appear in Harper's (pub), repts Amer
unit involved in Songmy incident began mistreating prisoners and was 'less
discriminating' about who was or was not a Vietcong mos before alleged massacre;
reconstructs in great detail events at Songmy from accounts of Amer soldiers in
Co C; quotes 1 soldier as saying Songmy was 'end of a vicious circle that had
begun mos earlier'; article is taken from forthcoming book; Pentagon spokesman
says Army will not comment; article quotes Haeberle and others; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

Several hundred Vietnamese civilians in Svayrieng Prov flee to S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 227 words

A Doak Barnett, Asian specialist, holds evolving balance in E Asia between US,
Japan, USSR and Communist China will reduce chances of big-power confrontation
in area, s, Amer Acad of Pol and Soc Science; notes new balance contrasts with
'bipolar' stance between Communists and non-Communist powers which resulted in
threat of major war in '50s; traces developments that ended 'bipolar' stance;
says new balance affords US an opportunity to try to evolve new approach to E
Asia 'as a whole'; holds main danger to SE Asia will come from pressures by N
Vietnam against its neighbors; US State Dept Foreign Service Inst dir P T Hart
says friction between Greek and Turkish communities poses greater short-term
peril than Arab-Israeli confrontation because of danger Greece and Turkey will
go to war over island; United World Federalists pres Clark holds 'some form of
world order' is necessary before pollution problem can be solved; Asia Soc pres
Talbot urges US 'not to turn our backs' on Indian-Pakistani subcontinent; calls
on US to join internatl insts to aid and accelerate development programs on
subcontinent; United World Federalists pres J S Clark holds problems of peace,
population and pollution require some form of world order for their solution,
sees it stemming from disarmament and formation of insts with power to 'prevent
violence and adm justice'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 83 words

Cambodian Govt leaders stage mass rally, Natl Stadium, Pnompenh; air of intense
nationalism and martial resolution is prevalent; illus; Lon Nol s; Govt imposes
6 PM to 6 AM curfew on Vietnamese sec of floating houses on Tonle Sap River;
links rise in subversive actions by Vietcong sympathizers; says Vietcong and N
Vietnamese forces attacked Prascot; lists casualties; Vietnamese residents
concern for their safety again discussed; some who have sought refuge in S
Vietnam describe abuses and fears

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Antiwar rallies set for this wk; Vietnam Moratorium Com, New Mobilization Com
and Student Mobilization Com are sponsors; IRS offices to be focus of antiwar
rallies set for Apr 15 tax filing deadline to protest use of taxes for Vietnam
War

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

Lt Gen Lu Lan (S Vietnam) warns N Vietnamese may stage new attacks at Dakseang;
N Vietnamese still have 1,500 soldiers around camp; 1,200 are around base 4 mi S
of Dakseang; details on fighting; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 3; (GP)

LENGTH: 53 words

Gallup Poll shows pub confidence in Pres Nixon Vietnam policy has been declining
since Jan; current survey shows 48% approve policy,; 41% disapprove; details;
figures; shows 58% of Amers backed Nixon's handling of wage dispute; table;
shows 55% approve of way Nixon is handling job, 33% disapprove, 12% have no
opinion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 13, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Maj H A Davis is found innocent of smuggling opium from Thailand but is
convicted of illegal possession of over $2000 in US currency; servicemen are not
permitted to have US currency in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 13, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 3

LENGTH: 37 words

Article on 'rest and rehabilitation' trips by US soldiers to Hawaii, favorite
place for such trips; soldiers are entitled to single 6-day trip during yr stay
in Vietnam; are often met by wives, other relatives and friends

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 13, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 49, Column 3

LENGTH: 163 words

Sen C Goodell says he is not bound by 'any Repub consensus,' will speak out on
any issue, TV int and press conf; stresses he is unsure about backing Pres Nixon
re-election if Vietnam involvement is not cut, urges Cong vote to get out of
war; deplores US role in Cambodia and absence of Vietnam stand in state Repub
platform; says all US troops might be withdrawn by end of '70 but it seems very
unlikely; holds repeal of Tonkin resolution will not accomplish anything; says
Cong should vote to get out of war; says Nixon has only succeeded in quieting
the 'surface waters' and that he will lose in '72 if war is escalated; says he
will campaign against war; other comments; demands NY Gov Rockefeller s on such
major issues; hopes to get Lindsay and Liberal support; notes his resolution
seeking to bar use of US troops in Cambodia has met with support from other
Sens; rejects Rockefeller charge that A J Goldberg is Gov candidate of Dem
bosses; gives pro-Israel views; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 13, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 81, Column 8

LENGTH: 16 words

Group of Newton, Mass, housewives plans not to pay telephone tax, holding it
supports Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 13, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 47 words

Fighting moves to eastern edge of Svayrieng as Vietcong guerrillas approach
abandoned village; area described; absence of Cambodian defenders discussed;
Vietnamese guerillas approach Prasot; war in Parrot's Beak area said to be 1
without real front lines; Cambodian soldiers illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 13, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 76 words

N Vietnamese troops open heavy attack on US Special Forces camp at Dakpek 5 mi
from Laotion border and 17 mi N of besieged Dakseang camp; both camps are used
as intelligence bases for activity in Laos and Cambodia; fighting erupts on 2
sides of Dakseang camp; 1 US helicopter downed near camp, 2 others downed
elsewhere; US planes reptdly drop napalm to drive back N Vietnamese troops
attacking US camp at Dakpek; details on fighting; casualties noted; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

Bressem issues statement modifying his allegation about Vietnam mass murder;
says he is not accusing anyone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 59 words

4 enemy rockets plunge into heart of Saigon; 2 persons killed, 42 wounded;
details on damage; enemy troops launch new attacks in central highlands and
northern sec of country; 5 helicopters downed; Lt Gen J J Ewell says he thinks
flare-up of enemy activity should not affect continued withdrawal of US troops;
says substantial pullout will cause problems

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 52 words

Lt Gen J J Ewell says he thinks flare-up of enemy activity should not affect
continued withdrawal of US troops from Vietnam; says substantial pullout will
cause problems; redeployments virtually complete 3d phase of Pres Nixon's
withdrawal program; accelerated withdrawals reduce Amer troop strength to
429,200

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 1

LENGTH: 97 words

Taft-Rhodes contest for US Sen nomination revd; Repr R Taft's shyness and
stiffness while campaigning contrasted with Ohio Gov J Rhodes gregariousness;
both stress pollution issue, back Nixon Adm on Vietnam war, although Rhodes, who
did not support Nixon nomination, questions Taft loyalty to Adm now; Rhodes
emphasizes his support for repeal of Tonkin resolution and Taft calls for Pres
Nixon promise that there will be no re-escalation under any circumstances; party
leaders seen fearful that bitter contest will aid Glenn, probable Dem nominee,
and hurt Nixon re-election bid

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 2

LENGTH: 24 words

Ed scores abduction of newsmen; holds Vietcong have focused attention of world
press and its readers on their illegal presence inside Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 6

LENGTH: 7 words

Lr scores destruction by US in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 141 words

Officially inspired campaign of hatred against Vietnamese residents reaches
fever pitch throughout Cambodia; results in detentions, disappearances and in
case of Prasot, a mass killing; campaign has seriously diminished open sympathy
that many foreign diplomats felt for new regime; Cambodians insist foreigners do
not understand extent of Vietnamese Communist penetration, make no effort to
halt propaganda campaign; 1 member of each Vietnamese family in certain secs of
Pnomphenh reptdly has been seized and held as hostage; many Vietnamese have been
dismissed from their jobs, many detainees reptdly are disappearing from
detention centers; Norodom Sihanouk accuses his successors of killing nearly 500
people in 2 wks, condolence message to N Vietnam S Vietnamese 'people's
delegation' plans visit to Pnompenh to probe repts of mistreatment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnamese troops beat off N Vietnamese attack from across Cambodian border,
killing 110 enemy; recapture Dakpek camp; bodies of 25 enemy found in camp;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Article describes visit to French family in war zone who live in constant fear
of Vietcong attack

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 20 words

Vietnamese Communists open drive north of Parrot's Beak, cut off an interior
area with capture of village of Krek; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 151 words

Leonid Brezhnev holds USSR would welcome 'reasonable agreement' with US on
limiting strategic arms but indicates doubt US Govt is sincere in wanting
accord, TV s from Kharkov; stresses USSR will not permit US to gain mil
superiority; calls prospects for Vienna talks favorable if Amer pub opinion
succeeds in overcoming 'resistance by arms mfrs and the mil'; remarks are
strongest indication so far of Soviet uneasiness over US decision to proceed
with deployment of expanded Safeguard and MIRVs; Brezhnev says USSR-Chinese
relations are being damaged by continuing anti-Soviet war hysteria in Peking, s,
Moscow; says USSR has been trying to restore good border relations at Peking
talks; says propaganda about possible Russian attack has been artificially
created around border talks and cannot promote their success; lauds Vietnamese
people, s, Moscow; reaffirms USSR support; scores US policy; excerpts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 83, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

Pres Nixon delays his rept to nation on Vietnam because of Apollo 13 flight's
problems

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 157 words

Antiwar rallies held throughout nation, including some outside IRS offices, to
protest taxes that help pay for war; demonstrations coincide with tax filing
deadline; demonstrators in Chicago, Boston and Des Moines emulate Boston Tea
Party, dump tea bags into water; Columbia U radical students and supporters
stage campus disorders in support of Panthers; 200 policemen called to scene;
anti-war demonstrators at Harvard set fire to trash cans and smash windows on
campus; witnesses say most were non-students; 100,000 people jam Boston Common;
demonstrators cause damage at Harvard U and vicinity; Calif U (Berkeley)
students clash with police; details on demonstrations in NYC, Washington and
other cities; black and Puerto Rican students and some white supporters occupy
Wagner Coll adm bldg to press demands for increased black and Puerto Rican
enrollment; say they 1st presented demands in Nov and vow to remain until
demands are met

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 74 words

S Vietnamese troops, operating with token force of Cambodians, destroy N
Vietnamese base camp inside Cambodia in 1st major combined operation reptd in
war; S Vietnamese hq repts 179 N Vietnamese killed, 30 persons detained; says
operation took place entirely in S Vietnam; Nguyen Van Thieu denies S Vietnamese
troops crossed border; witnesses say at least 2,000 S Vietnamese and 100
Cambodians pushed at least 1 mi inside Cambodian territory

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 67 words

Hundreds of bodies of Vietnamese, apparent victims of mass killing, float down
Mekong River; illus; many have their hands tied behind them; some few women are
among those slain; Govt's drive to whip up anti-Vietnamese campaign against
600,000 Vietnamese living in Cambodai, as well as N Vietnamese and Vietcong,
noted; Saigon Govt asks Cambodia for permission to let its inspection teams
enter country

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 17 words

Fed and local authorities confiscate 2-lb brick of marijuana mailed to girl in
Dayton, O, from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 66 words

Saigon sources rept fighting between Vietcong and Cambodian forces near Chaudoc;
say 2 of 4 Cambodian patrol boats on Mekong River that were involved in
operation were sunk; US command repts 25 Amers killed, 54 wounded yesterday, 1
of yr's highest 1-day casualty tolls; Vietcong gunners shell Saigon; 14 Amers
killed in booby trap explosion; 24 enemy killed near Danang, 61 killed in Mekong
Delta

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Seaman Priest trial for soliciting desertion and sedition opens, Washington (DC)
Naval Station; witnesses testify that copies of his antiwar newsletter critical
of Govt policy and high-ranking mil officials were found at Ft Myer, Va; Navy
calls 1st witnesses in Priest ct-martial; judge permits prospective members of
panel hearing charges to be questioned by defense lawyer D P Rein on their views
on Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 18 words

Pnompenh sources rept indications of impending major Vietnamese Communist
offensive in Parrot's Beak region

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 49 words

Allied troops have greatly intensified operations near Cambodian border W of
Saigon in last 3 wks, with S Vietnamese forces occasionally crossing over to
battle enemy troops in their border sanctuaries; cross-border operations are
advised, supplied and supported by US command; details on action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

S Vietnamese villagers at Khanhbinh describe exch of fire between S Vietnamese
and Vietcong across narrow channel of Bassac River separating countries; rept S
Vietnamese troops patrol Cambodian shore and guide Vietnamese refugees; other
incidents described; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

Cambodian Govt informs chiefs of diplomatic missions in Pnompenh of its appeal
for arms aid; Min Trinh Hoan repts France has indicated readiness to supply aid,
that Communist China was 1st nation to be officially informed of appeal; Adm
sources say Pres Nixon has made no decision on supplying arms; State Dept
reptdly opposes aid, Pentagon officials believe such aid will benefit war effort
in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 29 words

Bank of Amer chmn L B Lundborg testifies that Vietnam war is 'tragic mistake'
that has distorted US econ, Sen com hearing; says end of war would be good for
Amer business

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 59, Column 5

LENGTH: 38 words

Dr G Hauge (Mfrs Hanover Trust) predicting little or no econ expansion this yr,
says it may take all of next yr before price increases fall back to acceptable
levels, s and int, Paris; blames Vietnam war primarily for inflation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

Wife of Comdr D W Cockfield testifies she distributed Priest's antiwar
newsletter because she felt Vietnam war was 'terrible mistake' for US; other
details on ct-martial; Dellinger is spectator at session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 49 words

S Vietnamese troops again seen entering Cambodia at border crossing on hwy
connecting Pnompenh and Saigon; S Vietnamese mil spokesman denies correspondents
are being barred from border area because of troop incursions S Vietnam is
trying to hide; answers charge of CBS correspondent G Sheppard

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

Vietnamese Communist troops said to have scored gains in Svayrieng area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 181 words

State Dept spokesman R McCloskey discloses US has recd specific request for arms
and mil supplies, news conf; says Nixon Adm is examining list submitted by
Cambodia; tries to clarify conditions under which S Vietnamese troops can cross
border ito Cambodia and US arty and air strikes can be used against enemy
hideouts; Sen Mansfield urges Adm to reject arms request, s, Sen; mil spokesmen
rept Vietnamese Communist invaders stage raid in Takeo, prov capital; rept 6
Communists killed, many injured; situation map shown to newsmen indicates
intruders, now estimated at 54,500, have advanced throughout southern densely
populated border regions, made major gains in area of Svay Rieng; CBS TV newsman
repts seeing S Vietnamese troops crossing border into Cambodia but says he was
ordered away from S Vietnamese border post where he was filming crossing; S
Vietnam denies correspondents are being barred from border areas because of
troop incursions that Govt is trying to hide; N Vietnamese and Vietcong reprs at
Paris peace talks accuse US of helping new regime to 'massacre' Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

S Vietnamese Min Tran Van Lam repts Saigon Govt has offered to repatriate all
Vietnamese nationals living in Cambodia, news conf; has asked permission to send
in mission to arrange repatriation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

US command announces 141 Amers killed last wk, highest toll since last Sept;
other allied and enemy casualty figures listed; S Vietnamese Govt announces it
recorded 530 incidents of Vietcong terrorism for wk that ended April 8; total of
383 S Vietnamese, mostly civilians, killed in incidents; enemy shells Saigon;
other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 105 words

USSR Amb Malik says situation in Indochina 'is not matter for UN' but one for a
new Geneva conf, news conf, UN; statement surprises Brit diplomats; they note
USSR has, over last 4 yrs, rejected Brit moves for conf; Amb Malik says Soviet
defense system is adequate to protect against any attack, cites Brezhnev
statement; says USSR would welcome moratorium on deployment of nuclear weapons,
stresses Vienna talks are ind of UN but holds USSR firmly in favor of
disarmament and in halting spread of strategic arms; says he sees no hope for
progress by Big 4 toward peace settlement unless Israel withdraws from all
occupied areas

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Analysis of indications that Pres Nixon has ceased to be unqualified asset to
Repubs and that various candidates may run campaigns ind of White House; drop in
Nixon's popularity, Judge Carswell episode and Vietnam war cited as factors;
speculation on impact of Carswell's defeat in becoming Supreme Ct Justice and
Nixon's denunciation of 'Sen hypocrisy' on Repubs in Nov elections

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 47 words

Chicago trial Judge Hoffman grants Govt request to put off until June riot
conspiracy charges against Black Panther leader B G Seale because he is awaiting
trial on charges of conspiracy to commit murder in Conn; he is 1 of original
Chicago 8 but mistrial was declared in his case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 87 words

Mass killings by Cambodians stir deep anger in S Vietnam, present Saigon Govt
with major problem; newspapers headline stories on murders; prominent Natl
Assembly members demand Govt action; Min Tran Van Lam notes Govt seeks
permission from Cambodia to send official mission into country to arrange
repatriation, news conf; says S Vietnam will accept all refugees regardless of
their pol views; some observers fear S Vietnam may begin to carry out reprisals
against hundreds of thousands of ethnic Cambodians in Mekong Delta

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 16 words

More S Vietnamese troops stream into Cambodia; US forces take up blocking
positions in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 57 words

Khim Tit, new Cambodian Amb to UN, presents credentials to Sec Gen Thant, voices
concern over repts of atrocities; says it is not policy of Cambodia, a Buddhist
country, to kill; says some few Cambodian soldiers may be guilty but primarily
Vietcong are responsible, news conf; says Cambodia will call in UN if Control
Comm is not reactivated

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 73 words

Cambodian mil spokesman repts Vietcong have more than doubled their area of
control in Cambodia in past 2 wks; says they have complete control over 3 of
nation's 17 provs and almost control 5 others; fears Pnompenh may be cut off
from other provs; more S Vietnamese troops stream into Cambodia ready to battle
Vietnamese Communists; US forces take up blocking positions on S Vietnam side of
border; map shows area of Communist control

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 43 words

French officials are encouraged by Malik statement; foreign diplomatic sources,
commenting on French proposal for internatl conf, say N Vietnam has indicated it
can see no way to break talks deadlock and, therefore, negotiations must be held
in another forum

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

White House repts it is interested in exploring with USSR the possibility of
convening an internatl conf; foreign diplomatic sources say their govts have
been assured by USSR of its genuine interest in French proposal for
negotiations, that change in its attitude reflects change in N Vietnam; say N
Vietnam was stunned by overthrow of Norodom Sihanouk and consequent threat to
its mil sanctuary in Cambodia; French officials promoting idea of gen conf are
encouraged by Malik's statement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 107 words

About 100 Vietnamese civilians, including about 30 children, shot to death by
Cambodian soldiers in school bldg where they were under detention, Takeo;
survivors, about 40 to 50, detail shootings, beg newsmen to save them; many are
badly wounded and close to death; accounts of visitors to school prior to
slayings confirm survivors repts on number killed; bodies described as those of
Vietnamese continue to float down Mekong River from point below Pnompenh; dead
are now estimated at about 1,000 and are believed to have been on Govt's
blacklist of Vietnamese as Vietcong suspects; fear rises among Vietnamese
residents in Pnompenh; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 3

LENGTH: 117 words

Young Women's Christian Assn (YWCA) delegates accept plea by unit, Black Women
of YWCA, to make elimination of white racism orgn's primary goal, conv; Mrs D
Height, dir of YWCA Office of Racial Justice and also pres of Natl Council of
Negro Women, led successful drive against population control resolution,
charging it was aimed at black population; conv approves resolution urging
abolition of nuclear weapons; approve resolution asking Cong to make Martin L
King's birthday, Jan 15, natl holiday; delegates urge Fed Govt to provide
adequate safeguards against all forms of environmental pollution, passes
resolution asking Pres Nixon to act to insure US disengagement in Vietnam
without further delay

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 3

LENGTH: 71 words

Hs students G Gottlieb, J Katz, C Marvin, I Resnick and their parents bring
suit, Fed ct, against Ardsley School Bd and Dist Supt, challenging school bd's
ban on distribution of leaflets and raising of funds for Chicago 7 defendants on
school property; NY ACLU provides counsel; over 200 parents sign petition
objecting to suit; parents of protesting students say they have been harassed
with phone calls and anti-Semitic lrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 21 words

Article on harassment of annual meetings by militant radicals; advice in Amer
Soc of Corporate Secretaries pub discussed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 2

LENGTH: 11 words

Lr offers Vietnam peace plan for US to follow in Paris talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 5

LENGTH: 19 words

Lt Gen R G Stilwell lr, noting NY Times limited coverage of Bond's death to AP
dispatch from Saigon, lauds Bond

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12, Column 0

LENGTH: 7 words

Lr on Lukas Mar 29 article on Chicago trial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

Some high Adm officials urge Pres Nixon to adopt formula for troop reduction in
Vietnam that would serve as compromise between desire of civilian officials to
move faster and warnings of mil advisers that to do so could court serious
dangers; factors in withdrawal decision noted; opinions of officials discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

US and diplomatic sources indicate US and S Vietnam have recently reached
understanding that would permit S Vietnamese troops to mount limited attacks on
suspected enemy sanctuaries in Cambodia; understanding marks shift in Nixon Adm
attitude; details on mil situation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 11 words

Maj Gen E B Wheeler is injured in helicopter crash near Danang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

On US; predicts progress in arms control talks stake' in reducing arms and
tension and that this will be reflected in Vienna talks, int on recent visit to
USSR; repts Soviet officials better informed about US than they were under
Khrushchev and less hostile than at height of Vietnam war in '67, was invited to
USSR by USA Inst, an acad inst for research on US; predicts progress in arms
control talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 29 words

Prof Chomsky, Prof Dowd and Rev Fernandez (clergy and laymen concerned about
Vietnam) leave Hanoi after meeting with Premier Pham Van Dong and other N
Vietnamese officials

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 11 words

Activity at US base in Tayninh Prov S Vietnam stirs duststorms

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 146 words

S Vietnamese forces smashed 2 enemy base camps inside Cambodia this wk, killing
450 enemy and seizing huge munitions stockpiles; S Vietnamese hq repts
operations as having taken place on Vietnamese side of border, obviously because
of pol implications; Amer troops served as blocking forces on Vietnamese side;
13 S Vietnamese were killed in operations, 104 wounded; Amb Bunker and Pres
Nguyen Van Thieu meet to discuss cross-border action; Cambodian authorities rept
Vietcong forces have encircled Takeo, moved to within 22 mi of Pnompenh; Govt
soldiers conduct house-to-house search in Takeo for Vietcong; most Cambodian mil
men admit they consider all Vietnamese to be Vietcong; Vietcong try to recapture
village of Prasat which they had voluntarily abandoned earlier; Vietcong
spokesmen at all-party Patriotic Front conf, Hanoi, score slayings of Vietnamese
civilians; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 144 words

Sec Rogers repts US is attempting to find out whether USSR is ready to make any
specific proposals on new conf, s, NYC; says he has instructed C W Yost, US Amb
at UN, to see if Malik will give further 'clarification and explanation' of his
comment; stresses current threat to Cambodia and Laos; calls Vienna talks among
most important internatl discussions in history, expresses belief in serious
purpose on part of USSR, stresses US negotiates seriously and hopefully, but
warns that long discussion is likely; Malik says convening of new Geneva conf is
'unrealistic at present time', TV int; Thant terms it 'encouraging' that
Communist China has not yet reacted to Malik's comment on holding conf; Malik's
new comment detailed; he says GB and USSR, Geneva conf co-chmn, have no right to
intervene in Indochina; US State Dept silent on Malik's new remarks; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 20, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

Sen (Symington) subcom releases Oct '69 testimony disclosing that US stationed
air observers in northern Laos, in '66, to help guide bombing of Pathet Lao and
N Vietnamese forces by Royal Laotian and Amer planes; reveals that since '62
about 100 Amer civilian and mil personnel have been reptd killed in Laos and
that about 1/2 have been stationed in Laos; Deputy Asst Sec Sullivan, ex-Amb to
Laos, outlined to com procedure under which US Amb in Vientiane approved or
disapproved bombing targets recommended by Govt or US Air Force; discrepancies
in testimony and Pres Nixon repts on Amer deaths in Laos discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 20, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

Hundreds of S Vietnamese troops, supported by armored vehicles and arty fire,
return to Chaudoc, S Vietnam, after extensive 2-day operation in Cambodia;
informants say Amer mil advisers witnessed operation, participated in planning
from command post overlooking Cambodia but did not accompany Vietnamese across
border; S Vietnamese officer repts capture of 6 Communist Chinese advisers to
Vietnamese Communists; US sources doubtful

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 20, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 84 words

Vietnam Moratorium Com announces it is disbanding; says, in lr to thousands of
supporters, that there is little prospect for immediate change in Nixon Adm
policy; small 'farewell' party held; leaders say money sources have run dry and
that 'pol fad' of large demonstrations has run its course; acknowledge Pres
Nixon withdrawal policy has knocked legs from under nonradical movement; say
they plan to continue antiwar activities on their own; S Brown comments; some
activities of com noted; Brown illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 20, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 78 words

Amer officials in Saigon become growingly pessimistic over Cambodian situation;
now believe that Vietnamese Communists have effectively secured their
sanctuaries in eastern Cambodia during recent fighting; harbor growing doubts on
capacity of new Govt to control Cambodian people and to stabilize domestic pol
situation; are divided over whether US should grant mil aid to new regime;
pessimism linked to poor showing of army and repts of mass murders of Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

Ed deploring Amb Malik retreat from mention of Geneva conf on Indochina problem,
urging US to encourage France to continue peace initiative

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 87, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

TV networks offer instant commentaries after Pres Nixon s on Vietnam; 2-part CBS
TV series Health In Amer revd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 6

LENGTH: 49 words

Special mil ct trying 21 Univ of Saigon students on treason and other charges
unexpectedly grants defense appeal for delay in proceedings pending S Vietnamese
Sup Ct ruling on constitutionality of trial; 10 defendants released pending
decision; student demonstrations against arrest of 21 grow

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 2 words

Transcript

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Nhan Dan (N Vietnamese pub) calls on Communist forces to inflict heavier combat
losses on US; US officials see tactical shift

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

Pres Nixon scores Vietnamese Communists 'adventurism', TV s; voices concern over
their overt aggression; notes 'with interest' Malik's support for conf on
Indochina; says very significant advances have been made in pacification; says
Adm seeks pol solution; does not insist on free elections; says US is flexible;
text; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

2,000 S Vietnamese troops thrust into Cambodia in 3d major cross-border
offensive in last wk; kill 144 enemy; 20 S Vietnamese killed, 70 wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 7

LENGTH: 15 words

Prime Min Gorton expected to announce Australia will withdraw 1 of 3 bns now in
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 24 words

Pres Nixon pledges to withdraw 150,000 more US troops from Vietnam over next yr,
appeals to N Vietnam to undertake serious negotiations, TV s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 114 words

Vietcong reject French proposal for new internatl conf on Indochina; Min Nguyen
Thi Binh says proposal 'could not contribute to solving problems', news conf,
Paris; holds solution to problems requires only that US end 'its policy of
aggression'; scores mass killings of Vietnamese; Soviet delegation at UN
circulates 'clarification' attributing to Malik the opinion that a new conf is
'unrealistic at this time'; move stirs new speculation on USSR intentions; Tass
repts neither Malik's original statement apparently backing conf nor his later
apparent retraction; Soviet sources direct questioners to 2d statement; move
indicates Malik exceeded his authority in backing conf idea

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 7

LENGTH: 51 words

United Meth Ch bishops score racism in US as plague which afflicts all persons
despite legis against practice and agencies working to end injustice, message to
ch's gen conf; call Vietnam war a 'fiasco impossible to justify' and urge
immediate acceleration of troop withdrawals and stepped-up peace talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 31 words

Univ of Saigon student delegation calls on S Vietnam Premier Tran Thien Khiem to
determine whether 21 were tortured while awaiting trial; some defendants alleged
they were mistreated

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 5

LENGTH: 27 words

Repr Boland introduces resolution calling on Nixon Adm to accelerate troop
withdrawals so that all US combat forces will have been withdrawn from Vietnam
in a yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 2

LENGTH: 30 words

Ed on Pres Nixon s announcing US forces in Vietnam will be reduced by 150,000
during coming yr; says Nixon peace 'plan' has been made operative, but question
is whether it will work

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 3

LENGTH: 38 words

J Reston comments on Pres Nixon s; says Nixon makes clear he 'consulted' his
comdrs but did not get their 'approval' for Vietnam troop withdrawal decision;
notes Abrams opposition and risks for Nixon in pursuing withdrawal plan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 3

LENGTH: 78 words

Yale U pres Brewster says student unrest is increasing because of students'
misgivings about govt hypocrisy on issues of Vietnam war and racial equality and
notes discouragement of dissent has pushed constructive radicals into ranks of
those who seek to destroy system, s at ANPA Ad Bur dinner; San Francisco Coll
pres Hayakawa says liberal arts students have aristocratic, elitist attitude and
consider themselves educ to rule and have contempt for democracy; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 90, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 44 words

Prime Min Holyoake says NZ will not reduce its mil force now; says he hopes some
soldiers will be withdrawn from Vietnam this yr; opposition Labor party leader N
E Kirk comments; Prime Min Gorton will make statement about possible withdrawal
of Australian troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 91, Column 1

LENGTH: 189 words

NET pres J Day says IRS agent has been spending time in NET screening room to
determine whether any noncommercial programs in '69 advocated legis that might
affect NET's tax-exempt status; says he accepts visitation as 'routine' but
admonishes staff that any inquiries by agent are to be referred to him or NET
counsel in charge of tax matters; agent seeks to ask questions about series Your
Dollar's Worth; former NET pres J F White says he never heard of IRS agent
looking at TV programs as part of his duties; says there were routine audits
when he was in office between '62 and '68 but never an inquiry into TV content;
speculation that IRS seeks to check Pub Broadcast Lab (defunct) programs for any
signs of advocating legis noted; WNDT exec vp W J Lamb comments; says that after
station's Mar 19 program, when 3 defendants had confrontation with 2 newsmen and
a law prof, FBI asked for confidential transcript; says he told FBI that such
transcript could not be made without notifying all parties concerned and FBI
apparently decided to drop issue; during program, Rubin contended he was smoking
marijuana rather than cigarette

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 4

LENGTH: 64 words

NJ Sen Williams formally announces re-election candidacy, news conf; says US
needs Dem Cong to demand more than token withdrawals from Vietnam and elsewhere
in Indochina; says Nixon withdrawal pledge is uncertain and unsatisfactory;
repts Hudson County Dem orgn has pledged support if he defeats Guarini in
primary; sees difficult fight against Gross; is endorsed by ex-Gov Hughes; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

Calm returns to U of Calif campus following funeral services for Moran, but many
students feel polarization will continue as univ does not give students large
enough role in decision making; students alleged police harassment, bad living
conditions and anger over natl issues such as Vietnam to continued student
violence

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 31 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, commenting on Pres Nixon s, says S Vietnam can
gradually assume greater mil responsibility but it needs more aid from its
allies; Vietcong score Nixon s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 5

LENGTH: 28 words

Ct-martial session; Prof R A Falk says many internatl lawyers believe US role in
Vietnam war is illegal; testimony of 4 witnesses ruled irrelevant; defense rests
case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 19 words

A L Knoppert, who was born in Netherlands and was killed in Vietnam war in '69,
gets US citizenship posthumously

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 110 words

Le Duan, N Vietnamese Communist party leader, says people of Indochina will
unify their efforts against 'Amer imperialists,' s, Lenin centennial ceremonies,
Moscow; hints that Hanoi Govt considers united mil front against US and other
anti-Communist forces in area; scores Nixon Adm policies; N Vietnamese Amb Ngo
Thuyen says leaders of 'socialist and progressive govts and movements in
Indochina' will hold conf to coordinate strategy in fight against US
'imperialism and its lackeys', news conf, Peking; Truong Chinh, Natl Assembly
chief, repts people of Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam have formed 'Indochinese
People's United Front,' s, Tokyo Lenin celebration

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 11 words

S Vietnam asserts its forces killed 144 enemy near Cambodian border

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 32 words

Navy Personnel Chief Vice Adm Duncan tells HR subcom that more than 3,800 Navy
men have been discharged in last yr for illegally using or pushing drugs; says
problem is not centered in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7

LENGTH: 13 words

Senior Amer officers in Saigon hail Pres Nixon decision on troop withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 64 words

Defense Dept sources say most senior mil and civilian Pentagon leaders learned
of Vietnam withdrawal plans only when Pres Nixon announced them, but after
getting over their surprise, most planners agreed that move will probably result
in removing most Amer units from direct combat assignment, relegating remainder
of Amer forces to supporting role; comments of some officials noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 163 words

Cambodian Premier Lon Nol sends urgent appeal to Pres Nixon for aid, lr;
requests mil equipment and arms and active intervention in Cambodia of
Amer-trained and equipped Cambodian mercenaries who are believed to be working
for Amer Special Forces in S Vietnam; high Cambodian sources describe mil
situation as critical; Cambodian troops planning to launch counterattack on
Saang withdraw; instead, mil authorities decide to send in about 100 Vietnamese
to persuade Vietcong to leave city; tactic ends in disaster; civilian Vietnamese
are caught in subsequent cross fire; about 10 reptd wounded, several missing;
Cambodian authorities say Vietnamese volunteered for mission; member of group
denies it; says they were prodded into it by Cambodian soldiers; Gen Sostehene
Fernandes, local Cambodian comdr, stresses benefits of strategy; Vietnamese
Communists strike inside Takeo, cut rd between it and Pnompenh; Australia weighs
Cambodian request for aid; Cambodian troops illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 93 words

Ct frees Hilliard and Douglas after they and defendant Seale apologize for
courtroom disorder; Seale says controversial note was not 'smuggled out' to
Hilliard but was outline of book he gave to his lawyer; defense lawyer Garry
says he asked Hilliard and Douglas to attend trial to help him maintain
courtroom order; 2 other persons who were jailed for disorders outside courtroom
are also freed after apologizing to ct; about 25 youths, mostly black hs
students, are arrested for disorders in downtown New Haven; many had attempted
to attend ct proceedings

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 23, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 7

LENGTH: 29 words

Members Commission on Government procurement sworn in; Pres Nixon takes part;
Nixon meets with head nurse of children's hosp near Danang built by
contributions from US marines

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 23, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 113 words

Sampling of newspaper editors and publishers attending Amer Newspaper
Publishers' Assn conv indicates pub temper on Vietnam issue has cooled in last
yr; comments of W Friedenberg (Cincinnati Post and Times Star) and C B Kelley
(Palm Beach Times) noted; publishers say their regions are accepting racial
integration with increasing equanimity; C A Jones, publisher of Johnson (Tenn)
Press-Chronicle, scores Vice Pres Agnew's attacks on media, takes 'dim view of
anyone who tries to discolor our profession'; hold environment has become
biggest story; say liberalism is increasing in their regions rather than being
ground down by extremism; see violent demonstrations, etc, waning

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 23, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 6

LENGTH: 25 words

J B Crumb replies to April 6 lr on Font case; says fully half of West Point
classes of '63-'65 have left service because of Vietnam war; lauds Font

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 23, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

Antiwar activists force Gen M Taylor to terminate s on Vietnam war, Monmouth
Coll

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 23, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

Prime Min Gorton announces Australia will withdraw from Vietnam 3 bns and some
support troops; Thailand is looking into possibility of withdrawing some of its
troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 23, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

US Command, Saigon, repts loss of 4 Amer planes over SE Laos, 3 helicopters lost
over S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 23, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 167 words

US officials disclose Nixon Adm agreed to supply several thousand rifles to
Cambodia but cautioned against 'inflated expectations' of further Amer mil aid;
decision transmitted in Apr 17 cable to US charge d'affaires Rives; Rives told
to inform Cambodia that no ammunition is available for rifles and to suggest
Indonesia be queried on possibility of supplying some; rifles will be automatic
weapons of Soviet design captured from Communist forces in S Vietnam; Lon Nol
subsequently sent personal plea to Nixon for extensive mil equipment and for
help in fighting from Cambodian mercenaries; lr viewed as reflection of his
disappointment over aid offer; US Govt agencies indicate US does not wish to
start large aid program but feels compelled to show new regime that it has
friends; US officials puzzled by complaint from ethnic Cambodian living in S
Vietnam that Lon Nol regime rejected his offer of 3 bns of troops to fight
Communists; Cambodia makes new appeal to UN for help in fighting invaders

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 2

LENGTH: 89 words

Ed on Schultze rept and finding that even if US withdraws completely from
Vietnam and achieves steady, noninflationary growth in next 5 yrs, resources
will still be extremely short to meet domestic needs; says growth of programs
already in Pres Nixon's budget, plus revenue losses under '69 Tax Reform Act,
will severely limit funds available for new or expanded domestic programs; says
if additional resources are to be found for high-priority soc needs, only major
possibilities are reallocation and cut in mil spending and tax rise

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 31 words

Lr from J C McNaughton on French peace proposals questions glorification of
negotiation as an internatl panacea and if cessation of foreign intervention
will result in 'just' settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

J Reston comments on possibility that Pres Nixon, in his recent s, offers to
accept coalition govt of existing non-Communist and Communist orgns in S
Vietnam; holds position of S Vietnamese Govt is key

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

N Vietnam charges US recently carried out 'fresh air raids on a number of
populated areas'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 13 words

UAR agrees to raise Vietcong diplomatic mission in Cairo to ambassadorial level

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 50 words

US command announces 5 US planes have been downed in 2-day period; details; S
Vietnamese forces, estimated at about 5,000 troops, now operate 20 to 25 mi S of
Svayrieng; allied and enemy casualties for wk and war listed; 41,516 Amers have
been killed in war, 104,543 S Vietnamese, 624,573 enemy; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Paris Peace Talks 64th session; Min Xuan Thuy is expected to return to Hanoi
soon; Vietcong hint Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh may also leave Paris; Habib confines his
formal remarks to reiterating Pres Nixon statements

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 209 words

Pres Nixon weighs decision on further mil aid to Cambodia; gets conflicting
pressures from many sources; Adm staff agrees that total collapse of Govt will
pose threat to operations in S Vietnam and have other far-reaching effects on
area; some sr mil officials contend that allied mil success in S Vietnam is
dependent on survival of new Cambodian regime; other sources warn on increased
US involvement; influential Sen Dems demand acctg from Adm on extent of aid
given to Govt; indications seen that USSR is being urged to restrain Communist
forces in Cambodia lest all chances of achieving negotiated settlement for area
are spoiled; notes some mil comdrs believe war can be won if they are allowed to
attack Communist troops in Cambodia; says reptd diplomatic discussions with USSR
are believed to be based on newly evident pattern of N Vietnamese mil activity
throughout Indochina; M Frankel notes Sec Rogers assures Sen critics that giving
weapons to Cambodia is relatively minor development involving no breach of his
promise to consult legislators on new aid shipments; says Sen Fulbright has
asked for account from Rogers; White House remains publicly noncommittal;
Nixon's press sec says rifles are being supplied by S Vietnam with approval of
US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 177 words

Cambodian sources rept 3 cargo planes have landed at Pnompenh airport with
shipment of weapons; say arms are Amer-made; shipment is believed to have
originated in either Saigon or Bangkok; US Embassy, Pnompenh, says no Amer
planes have arrived, declines to speculate on shipment; diplomatic sources
speculate that US does not wish to respond to appeal for arms on its own, that
shipment marks start of an unofficial program to help Govt until an official and
pub aid effort can be arranged; Cambodian mil leaders cheered by news that
Vietnamese Communists have withdrawn from Saang; Ang Tasom taken by enemy;
battle illus; Indonesian Min Malik repts ASEAN has agreed to sponsor an Asian
conf to try to maintain Cambodian neutrality; Cambodian Govt reprs arrive,
Paris, for confs with Cambodian diplomats in Eur, Africa and Latin Amer; US
State Dept confirms shipment of captured Soviet-designed weapons has arrived in
Pnompenh; says they were supplied by S Vietnam with US knowledge and approval;
denies any knowledge of arrival of Amer-made weapons; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 25, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 16 words

New fighting reptd at Dakseang camp; 16 S Vietnamese killed, 56 enemy killed; US
plane downed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 25, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 17 words

Communist China opposes any reconvening of Geneva conf, accuses USSR of
betraying peoples of Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 25, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 32 words

Cambodian mil acknowledges receipt of arms shipment consisting of USSR-designed
and Chinese-mfrd rifles and ammunition captured from Communist forces;
acknowledge shipment comes from Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 25, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 74 words

Cambodian mil authorities rept rise in number of local attacks throughout
frontier areas occupied by Vietnamese Communists; fear enemy may be preparing
offensive designed to divide country in two; some clashes detailed; about 5,000
S Vietnamese troops withdraw from Cambodia after attacking enemy bases; Saigon
Govt believed to be preparing for even larger operations within Cambodia; map;
illus of Cambodian militiamen at battle near Ang Tasom

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 25, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

About 5,000 S Vietnamese troops have withdrawn from Cambodia after attacking
enemy bases, but Saigon Govt appears to be preparing for even bigger operations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 25, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Vietnamese refugee describes his flight to S Vietnam; says he saw 2 Vietnamese
monks and nun stabbed to death on Pnompenh st; others describe their experiences

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 25, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 127 words

US and USSR publicly disagree over character of fighting but reptdly maintain
private contacts on possibility of broad Indochina peace conf; White House press
sec says situation results from 'foreign invasion of neutral country'; USSR Tass
statement says 'imperialist circles in US are fanning flames of fratricidal
civil war'; Nixon Adm continues to weigh aid role; some officials fear even
slimmest chances for peace conf might be jeopardized through any US involvement;
Sec Rogers and other top officials reptdly 'take cautious attitude' on regime's
arms request; USSR breaks its silence on events with bitter attack on US and
warning on attempts to widen 'imperialist aggression'; makes no concrete
proposals; France reptdly will reject request for mil aid

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 62, Column 5

LENGTH: 25 words

Amer specialists on Vietnam view recent s by Vietcong official Brig Gen Tran Do
as strongly suggestive of Communist concern over Vietnamization program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 72, Column 5

LENGTH: 137 words

Ill Sen gets rept from Ill Crime Investigation Comm calling Weathermen
'immediate and long-range threat' to US internal security; proposals include
stiffer penalties for youths who participate in mob disorders, and regis and
investigation of radical youth groups on campuses; rept links Weathermen to
internatl Communist movement; comm exec dir Siragusa says comm found no evidence
of Communist financing of Weathermen or SDS; rept charges SDS is among most
violent and destructive of militant youth groups; says it seeks to foment
discontent and revolution among youth; gives detailed account of Weathermen's
4-day rampage in Chicago; Siragusa lauds Chicago police for restraint; rept made
pub despite legal protests for defendants facing trial; says $112,443 in
deposits were made in '69 to SDS account in Chicago bank

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 77, Column 3

LENGTH: 200 words

Article on increasing number of clergymen who are seeking natl or statewide
elective office in what appears mainly to be their growing impatience with
Vietnam war and pace of antipoverty efforts; at least 12 clerics, including 4 RC
priests, will seek office this yr; Rev L R Gigante, running for HR in 16th Dist,
is 1st RC priest to seek Fed office in history of NYS; agrees in principle with
recent RC Bishops resolution that priests not seek pub office but declines to
give up own race; Methodist Min G D McClain is Liberal candidate; Rev J R Lucas
is 1 of 13 seeking Ohio Dem HR nomination, 13th Dist; Rev R F Drinan, RC priest,
challenges Repr Philbin for Mass Dem HR nomination, 3d Dist; Harrington
candidacy discussed as 1 of several races undertaken in US by activist clerics;
Rev J Duffey Conn Sen candidacy noted; Rev H H Bates challenges Repr Hanley for
NYS Dem nomination; Rev H G Carmichael, Episc min, challenges Repr Dulski for
NYS Dem nomination; Rev A Young, Negro min, runs for Ga HR, 2th Dist; Rev T B
Allen challenges Repr Gude for Md Dem HR nomination, 8th Dist; Rev s McClean
challenges Repr Gubser for Calif Dem HR nomination, 10th Dist; Repr Michael
Kirwan retiring from HR

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 93, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 61 words

USAF Maj D Fleener sentenced to 16 yrs at hard labor, ordered dismissed from
service with forfeiture of all pay and allowances, Saigon, S Vietnam; sentence,
subject to automatic review, comes 1 day after ct-martial found Fleener guilty
of illegally possessing $3,539 and of smuggling more than 850 lbs of opium from
Thailand into S Vietnam aboard Air Force planes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

M Frankel revs Cambodian situation; stresses problems confronting Pres Nixon;
map shows US, domestic and Communist mil strenght; comment on Nixon withdrawal
plan; Nixon illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 42 words

Comment on Pres Nixon Vietnam withdrawal plan; says it recognizes mil and pol
realities; speculation on likely impact of Cambodian and Laotian situations on
Nixon Adm plan to withdraw more US troops from Vietnam; graph shows US troop
strength, '60-71

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHS & CHARTS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

H Willens, in lr on L Lundborg statement on ill effects of Vietnam war on US
econ, calls cold war 'ancient history' and urges US seek prosperity as best
anti-Communist tool

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Lr holds Defense Dept desire to maintain $80-billion post-Vietnam budget is
'institutionalized impulse to seize power'; scores practice of keeping dossiers
on individuals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 5

LENGTH: 8 words

Cartoon on N Vietnamese encroachment into Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 0

LENGTH: 18 words

Lrs on Nizer Apr 5 article on attacks on judges criticize some of his
statements; Chicago 7 defendants illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 21, Column 0

LENGTH: 14 words

Prof J F Wohlwill lr on Lukas article lauds jury in Chicago 7 trial; jury sketch

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CRITICAL REVIEWS & APPRAISALS

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAMS & DRAWINGS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 149 words

Amer Educ Council study group, Special Com on Campus Tension, headed by S M
Linowitz, finds faculty, students, admrs and trustees are dissatisfied with
current functions of colls and univs and see each other as cause of unrest, but
notes everyone agrees on need for campus reforms; says key issues in student
disorders are student power and Vietnam war; urges formation of effective
community to air grievances, and formation of joint adm-faculty-student coms,
which are seen as fair by all parties, to settle disputes; also recommends that
insts re-examine existing disciplines, seek faculty with diverse background,
eliminate sex discrimination and experiment with new educ forms; com is composed
of 5 former or present coll presidents, 4 student leaders, 4 faculty members,
univ trustee and 4 influential private citizens, who conducted visits and ints
at over 50 campuses; members listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 24 words

Enemy fires rockets into S Vietnamese arty base near besieged Dakseang camp in 1
of 41 shellings during 2-day period; 1 US helicopter downed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

Sec Rogers charges USSR flouts its internatl obligations in failing to help
reconvene Geneva conf, s, Amer Soc of Internatl Law; terms current N Vietnamese
invasions as flagrant violation of '54 and '62 Geneva accords guaranteeing
Cambodian independence

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7; (UPI)

LENGTH: 89 words

Cambodian Govt troops repulse 3-day Communist attack at Ang Tasom, win 1st major
test against Vietcong; push enemy back about 1/2 mi from town; Govt tightens
measures against Vietnamese in Pnompenh; Vietnamese residents concern heightens
as Govt soldiers cut ropes that tie their floating houses to shores of Tonle Sap
River, push them, with most families still inside, around peninsula out of sight
of Pnompenh; illus; US says it has had no request from Cambodia for attacks by
US planes against Communists; Cambodian soldiers illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 27, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 53 words

A Lewis comments on view held by some Amer officials that US should intervene in
Cambodia as means of gaining greater chance to win Vietnam war; says Nixon faces
'siren appeal' to win war by escalation; notes actions US has taken in Vietnam;
warns against enlargement of war; sees conflict as racial, not political

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 27, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 55, Column 5

LENGTH: 29 words

NICB study finds savings in spending for Vietnam war will help finance increases
in domestic programs, but large part of savings is being used for non-Vietnam
defense spending

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 27, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Ed says any chance of negotiating an Indochina settlement would be compromised
if US sends further arms aid to Cambodia; says de-escalation and Vietnamization
might give way to wider conflict; says mil victory in Indochina is mirage

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 27, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Missing Vietnamese men mourned in Cambodian village of Chrui Changwar; entire
male population had been taken away without warning on night of Apr 12, are
believed to have been in group of dead floating down Mekong River; Vietnamese
refugees illus arriving in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 27, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 11 words

Vietcong kill 4 Amers in attack on US arty base 46 mi NW of Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 27, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 49 words

Ousted Cambodian leader Norodom Sihanouk meets with N Vietnamese Premier Pham
Van Dong, Pathet Lao leader Souphanouvong and Vietcong chief Nguyen Huu Thao at
undisclosed place; N Vietnam and Communist China score Min Malik's proposal for
conf of Asian nations; Malik to conf with ASEAN reprs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 27, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 64 words

Nixon Adm officials say 1 reason for delaying Cambodian mil aid decision is
lingering hope that USSR may be able to persuade N Vietnam and possibly
Communist China to participate in internatl conf; recent statements by N Vietnam
and China said to suppress hopes; Pres Nixon and top advisers continue to weigh
US policy; issue expected to be taken up at Natl Security Council meeting

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 27, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 104 words

Cambodia claims to have captured Angtassom; reliable sources rept Vietcong
forces still occupy school, other bldgs, and rds and are being reinforced from
dist capital of Tani which they hold and in which they have set up adm
apparatus; Communist forces continue to harass Takeo; S Vietnamese delegation
arrives in Pnompenh reptdly to arrange for repatriation of Vietnamese; Saigon
Govt has offered visas to all who wish to return; about 80% expected to ask to
be repatriated; Amer bombers over Laos reptdly are disrupting movement of
supplies from N Vietnam for its troops in Cambodia; map; improvised ambulance
illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

Adm George W Anderson apptd chmn, Pres Foreign Intelligence Advisory Bd; Pres
Nixon hon by Amer Vets of World War II; receives Gold Helmet award

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Honeywell Inc listed as leader among 105 cos mfg antipersonnel weapons for use
in Vietnam, study by Council on Econ Priorities, private orgn recently formed to
evaluate performance of corps in various fields; dir A R Tepper comments on aims

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 52 words

USSR publications Pravda and Izvestia criticize Indonesian Min Malik's proposal
to organize ASEAN conf; detail Norodom Sihanouk conf with Communist leaders;
move suggests that USSR policy towards Cambodia will remain allied to that of N
Vietnam; USSR press continues attacks on 'Amer involvement' in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

S Vietnamese Min official Pham Huy Ty confs with Cambodian Min Yem Sambaur,
Pnompenh; urges Cambodians to preserve lives and property of Vietnamese
minority; gets pledge that Cambodia will act to halt all acts of violence
against them; expresses S Vietnam's interest in reopening diplomatic relations
which were broken by Norodom Sihanouk in '63; Cambodian mil sources rept
continuing Communist attacks on small Cambodian units, stepped-up level of
activity in rubber plantation region in Kompong Cham and Kratie provs; Cambodian
soldiers illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 114 words

Sec Rogers testifies before Sen Foreign Relations Com in closed session; reptdly
said Nixon Adm has made no decision on Cambodian aid request but suggests it has
authority to send at least ltd amts of mil equipment without seeking Cong
approval; reptdly suggested Communist control of Cambodia will interfere with
success of Vietnamization program and withdrawal of Amer forces from S Vietnam;
Fulbright repts com members 'were virtually unanimous and firmly opposed to
sending any mil aid under present circumstances'; bipartisan opposition from Dem
Sens and sr Repubs Aiken and J J Williams noted; Dem Sen McGee expresses
reservations to majority view; Fulbright and Rogers illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 35 words

US command, Saigon, repts plane downed over Laos, 6 crewmen killed, 1 rescued
and 4 missing; US command announces US troop strength increases by 1,500 to
427,200 because of 'normal fluctuations' in manpower

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 15 words

Over 200 Vietnamese refugees from Cambodia arrive, Saigon, at start of organized
air exodus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 104 words

Hanoi radio repts leftist Indochinese leaders and Norodom Sihanouk at conf
pledge mutual support in their fight against US and other forces that oppose
them in Indochina; adopt declaration denouncing US as 'imperialist aggressor'
bent on prolonging and widening war in Indochina, calling on Indochinese people
to step up fight against common enemy until total victory; declaration does not
rept any decisions about common action; puts emphasis on independence of each of
countries concerned; conferees agree to further meetings; declaration also
demands total and unconditional withdrawal of US and other foreign soldiers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 59 words

Talk of White House article comments on Pres Nixon's trip to Honolulu to meet
returning Apollo 13 astronauts as providing tonic for him after 6 most
troublesome wks of his Presidency; problems he encountered during period noted;
Nixon's Vietnam decisions as outlined in s surprise his closest assocs; said to
still be major subject of debate in Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 4

LENGTH: 49 words

Capt J J McCarthy's appeal of conviction for killing member of Cambodian Khmer
Serai sect employed by US mil forces in S Vietnam in '68 argued, Pentagon,
Washington; Army atty Capt E W Hieronymus warns pub disclosure of evidence in
murder case involving Green Berets will threaten US security

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 83, Column 3

LENGTH: 52 words

Sen Goodell charges programs to aid elderly have been neglected because of
Vietnam war, s, Vacations for the Aging tea; NYC Comr Grant urges older persons
to unite and maintain 'their involvement in life'; NYC Consumer Affairs Comr
Grant is mistress of ceremonies; Mrs A H Sulzberger gets Founder's Award Scroll

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

Defense Sec Laird says '70 draft calls may be cut to as low as 150,000, 100,000
below original plans, because of troop withdrawals from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 2

LENGTH: 43 words

French Govt opposition leaders score France's continuing mil intervention in
Chad; call country 'France's Vietnam;' Govt reticent about its role but admits
1,538 mil personnel are deployed there; cites Pres Tombalbaye requests for aid
against rebels; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 57 words

S Vietnamese artists said to have unusual freedom in protesting war and
influence of foreigners in their country; comment on antiwar and anti-Amer
painters in S Vietnam notes they sell most of their works to US mil and Govt
employes; 1 painting by Phan Cong Hau shows huge GI boot being cleaned by
ghostlike Vietnamese shoeshine boys; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 41 words

US Amb to Sweden Holland opens US cultural center, Stockholm; is target of
egg-throwing demonstrators protesting US mil involvement in Vietnam; US State
Dept holds demonstrations 'insulting and uncalled for'; hints diplomatic action
might be taken

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              260 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 43 words

US Command announces 10 S Vietnamese militiamen killed, 20 wounded in accidental
bombing by US planes; 6 Amers killed, 2 injured in crash of helicopter gunship
at Tansonnhut air base; announces downing of 3 US helicopters; announces downing
of plane over Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              261 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

Pnompenh Mayor Chhe Kim Hong takes Pham Huy Ty on tour of Chrui Changwar, where
over 100 people suspected of being Vietcong are held in RC Ch, to reassure S
Vietnamese visitor on how well Vietnamese are treated in Cambodia; illus; most
prisoners remain silent when mayor accuses Vietcong, not Cambodians, of killing
Vietnamese residents; Pham Huy Ty reassures Vietnamese on their welcome in S
Vietnam; N Vietnam pub names of 129 Vietnamese and Chinese allegedly massacred
in village of Prasault on Apr 9 by Cambodian soldiers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              262 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 30, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 211 words

US announces it provides combat advisers, tactical air support, med evacuation
teams and some supplies to S Vietnamese troops attacking Communist bases in
Cambodia; S Vietnamese offensive involves thousands of troops; Asst Sec Henkin
makes announcement of 'expansion' of US involvement in SE Asia; says enemy
troops operating in Cambodia pose 'increasing threat' to Amer and allied troops
in S Vietnam; Nixon Adm action is unexpected; brings immediate outcry in Cong;
Nixon will discuss move in TV s April 30; decision that offensive be staged in
Cambodia said to be primarily an Amer one, even though pub statements stress S
Vietnamese initiative; some sources stress limited nature of decision; Adm
officials decline to give legal basis for support of mil action in Cambodia; say
it will be clarified by Nixon; Henkin says Washington was consulted before S
Vietnam launched offensive and that S Vietnam had requested Amer aid; White
House press sec says decision should not be viewed as Nixon's answer to
Cambodian Govt's request for aid; possible effects Adm sources say offensive may
have listed; Henkin reads policy paper that states decision is made to save Amer
and other free-world lives and to strengthen Vietnamization program; some
details on US aid

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              263 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 30, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (NAN)

LENGTH: 29 words

Budget Bur ex-Dir Schultze testifies before Sen Foreign Relations Com on Vietnam
war impact on econ; says Vietnam war will cost US $12-billion to $13-billion in
fiscal '71

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              264 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 30, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 125 words

High Nixon Adm sources say it was late Monday (April 27) when Pres Nixon decided
to approve and assist S Vietnamese operation with objective of destroying enemy
sanctuaries; indicate move eliminates need for US to supply direct aid to
Cambodian Nixon said to have weighed series of risks; Nixon's decision reptdly
based on belief that fall of new Govt and possible Communist rule in Cambodia
would lead to intolerable threat to US troops in S Vietnam and to successful
continuation of war there; US State Dept repts new shipment of 2,500 captured
Soviet-designed rifles have been sent from S Vietnam to Cambodia; possibility of
Chinese Communist involvement stressed when Hanoi repts that Premier Chou En-lai
attended last session of leftists conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              265 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 30, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 31 words

Indonesia invites N Vietnam and 19 other Asian and Pacific nations to conf on
Cambodia; Malik to announce site later; says conf will be held even if Communist
nations do not attend

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              266 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 30, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

Sweden's Premier Palme and Min Nilsson score demonstrators as 'scoundrels' who
damage Sweden's reputation, but reiterate Govt's opposition to US policy in
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              267 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 30, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 150 words

NYC Mayor Lindsay gives semiannual Connaissance Lecture, Penna U, where daughter
Kathy and fiance, R Schaeffer, are students; is accompanied by wife; Mayor
Lindsay calls Agnew's criticism intemperate, s, Penna U; says it is difficult
for blacks to believe in fairness of judicial system when bail for black
defendants appears more severe than bail for white defendants; praises students
who refuse to serve in Vietnam despite consequences of draft resistance; says
confidence in judiciary has suffered in 'aftermath of tawdry j1dicial parody
enacted in trial of Chicago 7 trial that was fundamentally exam i(to pol
beliefs; holds confidence in judiciary has suffered in aftermath of 'taw:ry
judicial parody enacted' in Chicago 7 trial; says that because of 'polarizat2on
and hostility...for 1st time in 100 yrs sane men worry about violent end of
Amer; scores Agnew's attack on Yale Pres Brewster

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              268 of 268 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 30, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 74 words

T Wicker comment on liberal tendencies of Mass Gov Sargent, who has antagonized
conservative Repubs by taking anti-Adm stands on Vietnam and other issues and by
selecting M A Linsky, young liberal state legislator, for Lt Gov running-mate;
comment on state's problems, with rising costs of anti-pollution and other pub
projects; on indications that NE and major indus states still form 'Achilles
heel' of Pres Nixon and his Southern strategy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
