
                               1 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 69 words

Officials in Vientiane say they have had no official word of reptd incursion by
S Vietnamese troops into Laos; reptdly will oppose such incursions and protest
even though protest would probably be only matter of form; believe that S
Vietnamese attack in Laos would be related more to allied concerns in S Vietnam
than in Laos; area of Luang Prabang cited as possible enemy objective in light
of recent raids in area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Calif Repub State Central Com hails Nixon Adm decision on Calif Rural Legal
Assistance program as victory for Gov R W Reagan, resolution; Central Com meets,
Sacramento; G Luce, Gov Reagan choice, elected vice chmn; P Livermore chmn;
Reagan s; lauds Nixon Adm record on econ; lauds Nixon Adm record on Vietnam;
says he will lead Calif delegation to Repub Natl Conv pledged to Nixon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 6

LENGTH: 73 words

Sen E S Muskie, apparent front-runner for Dem nomination for Pres in '72, scores
Nixon Adm for latest developments in Indochina, s, Hartford, Conn, at
fund-raising rally for unsuccessful Dem Sen candidate last yr, Rev Joseph
Duffey; says it is wrong to increase level of mil activities; reiterates his
earlier appeal for 'fixed and definite' withdrawal date; accuses Adm of using
transition to peacetime econ as scapegoat for unemployment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 24 words

Laos role as part of Indochina battleground for past 2 decades discussed;
current pol set-up, population and other aspects of nation described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 258 words

B-52s continue to bomb enemy supply bases in southern Laos around the clock;
State and Defense Dept officials refuse for 3d consecutive day to comment on
speculation that allied attack at or across Laotian border is imminent or under
way; sustained bombing has been concentrated in area immediately W of old marine
base at Khesanh, where, in last yr, N Vietnamese have built up heavy troop
concentrations; Vietcong radio cites Western news repts that S Vietnamese
troops, backed by Amer aircraft, are about to invade Laos; denounces expected
invasion as 'bold intensification' of war; warns Vietcong will respond with
'appropriate blows'; US command continues to impose embargo on all news repts
from northern part of S Vietnam; confusion over what is happening extends to
Laotian capital of Vientiane, where Premier Souvanna Phouma is reptd trying to
determine if allied forces have in fact launched operation into Laos; importance
of Ho Chi Minh Trail to N Vietnamese noted; Pentagon issues advisory asserting
at least 3 unspecified news orgns have breached embargo and that Defense Dept
would 'seriously consider' disaccrediting Saigon correspondents involved in
event of further violations; stresses embargo is to keep enemy from getting
intelligence data; says its advisory should not be pub; White House press sec
says Nixon is aware of what is going on in Indochina; Mansfield says he senses
'feeling of apprehension' among his colleagues that US overextends itself and
that troop withdrawal program will have to be slowed as result; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

US command says Pfc J D Moyler has been charged with murder in shooting of his
commanding officer Capt W F Reichert in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 22 words

Min Vo Nguyen Giap, addressing N Vietnamese troops in Hanoi and urging them to
be 'combat ready' and to win 'bigger victories', illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 77 words

Mil sources in S Vietnam rept US pilots say they destroyed or damaged nearly
2,000 enemy trucks on Ho Chi Minh Trail in Jan, probably most successful mo of
air strikes against trucks on record; these trucks would represent 2/5 of entire
fleet; US officials believe many of trucks have been replaced; US planes stage
heavy raids on trail; US command makes no mention of B-52 raids in S Vietnam
although such attacks have been reptd regularly through yesterday

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

Fighting between S Vietnamese soldiers and their Cambodian allies erupts at
outpost of Vealthom, 2d such clash; Vietcong attacks soon afterwards

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AFP)

LENGTH: 25 words

Informed sources in Vientiane say US Embassy told Laotian Premier Souvanna
Phouma that nothing is known of incursion by S Vietnamese troops into S Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 166 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu uses in his re-election campaign natl surveys
of Vietnamese pub opinion prepared and analyzed by US mission in Saigon; monthly
surveys, known as Pacification Attitude Analysis System, are taken in all 44 S
Vietnamese provs by trained Vietnamese research teams; special questions in
surveys are now being asked to enable Nguyen Van Thieu to measure more clearly
his own appeal with voters, popularity of his pol rivals, and what issues most
concern Vietnamese; answers to questions are made available to Vietnamese Govt;
some Amers working in pacification program object to surveys, which they hold to
be 'meddling' in elections; pacification aide says questions were not requested
by Nguyen Van Thieu or S Vietnamese Govt; pacification worker, who asks that his
name be withheld, says some of questions are designed to insure Nguyen Van
Thieu's re-election; R Winslow resigned as pacification aide because of surveys;
details on surveys; Nguyen Van Thieu illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

US said to have imposed curb on all news about particular mil operation from
time to time in its 10-yr involvement in Vietnam for reasons described as
security; longest embargo was imposed in '68 on operations in Ashau Valley;
embargo policy discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 53 words

US command repts 6 soldiers killed, 26 wounded in upsurge of enemy attacks on
Amer positions in S Vietnam; enemy forces stage 6 shelling attacks; B-52s raid
over Ho Chi Minh Trail; USAF observation plane is missing over Cambodia that
search-and-rescue efforts have failed to find any trace of it; details on action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 18 words

Amb Ellsworth Bunker leaves Saigon for wk of consultation with Pres R M Nixon
and officials at peace talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 61 words

Laotian mil spokesman Gen Thongphan Knoksy reiterates that Laos will oppose any
mil incursion by S Vietnamese troops; says he has received nothing to confirm or
deny repts about incursion; US Embassy spokesman makes similar statement;
Laotian Govt sources say Premier Souvanna Phouma is ready with statement
explaining Laotian position if there is an incursion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 57 words

Rightist Laotian Army gens, with approval of Premier Souvanna Phouma, reptdly
have secret agreement with S Vietnamese that would permit S Vietnamese troops to
cross into southern Laos, penetrate 35 to 50 mi, and in div strength if S
Vietnam considers it necessary; some sources say that Premier was not aware of
accord until after it was made

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3; (AFP)

LENGTH: 86 words

Nhan Dan (newspaper) says N Vietnam expects huge intervention in southern Laos
shortly by S Vietnamese Army, backed by USAF; says 'several thousand Thais' and
S Vietnamese commandos have been preparing ground for such drive by operating in
Laos since beginning of Jan; repts US steps up bombing on both sides of buffer
zone; says US prepares to displace entire S Vietnamese population of provs near
buffer zone and regroup it in south in order to create 60-mi-wide 'free bombing'
area on both sides of 17th parallel

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 347 words

Washington officials rept major new allied operation involving thousands of S
Vietnamese and Amer troops is under way in NW corner of S Vietnam; say thrust is
aimed at concentrations of enemy troops and supplies in area W of Khesanh;
indicate decision remains to be made on whether S Vietnamese units will cross
Laotian border; Laotian mil spokesman repeats his country's opposition to any
mil incursion but indicates Laotian troops are in no position to do anything if
it should take place; news blackout noted; Premier A N Kosygin charges
'outrageous invasion' of Laos is under way; USSR press agency Tass repts Kosygin
denounces US; N Vietnamese delegation in Paris charges US escalates war in Laos;
describes Indochinese situation as 'extremely tense'; Nhan Dan, official Hanoi
pub, says US and S Vietnam expand and escalate war in Laos; Sen G D Aiken says
he was told by State Dept that allied troops are massing on Laotian border for
'large operation' that might be undertaken; says he was assured no US soldiers
will cross border; S Vietnamese troops reptdly will carry thrust of assault;
will be backed by US fighter aircraft and helicopter gunships; officials say
principal role of Amer ground troops will be to provide internal security in S
Vietnam; Pathet Lao, Communist-led group in Laos, in broadcast on Hanoi radio,
accuses US and its allies of massing 'tens of thousands' of troops in northern
part of S Vietnam; charges intelligence forays have already been conducted deep
into southern Laos to prepare for invasion; State and Defense Dept spokesmen
refuse to comment on any Communist charges or to discuss repts of new allied
operation; State Dept spokesman says there has been no change in US policy since
Rogers made his recent statements; Pentagon spokesman J Friedheim acknowledges
mil command has imposed embargo on Saigon correspondents; says N Vietnamese
troop strength in Laos is up to 70,000 men; Sen H Scott says he expects Adm to
make disclosure on Laotian situation fairly soon; says allied troops operating
near border are largely S Vietnamese; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 151 words

Ed says S Vietnamese drive into Laos would have profound implications for future
of war, none of them encouraging for prospect of Amer disengagement; says
extension of fighting would represent admission of failure of earlier sorties
into Cambodia and of massive US air interdiction throughout Indochina to achieve
decisive results; says 'still unconfirmed allied action' could be beginning of
effort to choke off Communist supply routes by throwing defensive line across
Laotian panhandle; holds 'Vietnamizing Cambodia and Laos will not speed the
withdrawal of Amer troops from Vietnam'; says best hope for restoring neutrality
of Cambodia and Laos lies in moving more positively than Nixon Adm has yet done
toward pol solution in S Vietnam; says repts that US mission in Saigon actively
supports Nguyen Van Thieu's efforts to predetermine results of coming S
Vietnamese natl election are hardly encouraging

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 4

LENGTH: 30 words

Assemblyman P A Berle lr clarifies remark that S Mall project is NYS 'Vietnam,'
charging Mall misallocates state resources and should be brought to conclusion
as rapidly as possible

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 4

LENGTH: 32 words

Elias M Schwarzbart lr on J C Thomson's Jan 16 article on US policy urges
reconvening of an enlarged Geneva Conv, including Communist China, to try to
reach pol settlement to end Indochina war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

James Reston on gamble Pres R M Nixon is taking by assuming that GNP will rise
by 9% in '71, that unemployment will drop to 4.5% by mid-'72, that inflation
rate will drop to 3% by mid'72, that all US combat ground troops will be out of
Vietnam by mid-'72; notes repts that Nixon enjoys consternation caused by his
latest mil adventure in Laos; notes Washington confusion; discusses Nixon's
apparent pol strategy to gain re-election in '72

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 107 words

C L Sulzberger says recent N Vietnamese and Chinese hints of some nervousness
about chances that US might introduce tactical nuclear weapons in Indochina is
obviously part of psychological warfare preceding possible offensives by both
sides; says repts of planned massive evacuation of civilian population in
northern S Vietnam apparently set off N Vietnamese and Chinese inquiries into
possible US move; says he cannot possibly imagine any 'scenario' bringing
nuclear weapons into Indochina; says 'dreadful logic adduced by worried
Communist strategists...is exaggerated by misanalysis of US studies'; notes
study by US aide E O Stillman

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 96 words

Comment on possible Laotian incursion; US comdrs have unsucessfully requested
authority to mount ground thrust into Laos in past to cut Ho Chi Minh Trail;
senior strategists in Washington hold arguments for such a move have become more
impelling and objections less so; say primary objectives of drive into Laos
would be to keep N Vietnamese off balance as US troop withdrawals continue and
to improve S Vietnam's ability to protect itself in future; there are growing
indications Nixon Adm may approve limited forays into Laos; operation now under
way in S Vietnam discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 8; (AFP)

LENGTH: 28 words

Thousands of mil trucks move along 2 S Vietnamese hwys leading toward Laos and N
Vietnam; troops move in uninterrupted columns; Quangtri is crowded with mil
vehicles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 29 words

Sr Cambodian officers rept Vietcong are returning to sanctuaries cleared by
allied incursion into Cambodia in '70, building new ones; Cambodian barbed-wired
barricades illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 3; (AFP)

LENGTH: 51 words

Nhan Dan rept on recent meeting of N Vietnam's Central Com of governing Workers
party says Com calls on N Vietnamese armed forces and people to make new efforts
'for ultimate victory and the progress of socialism' in N Vietnam; says Com
links victory with development of N Vietnamese econ; details on rept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 6 words

3 Amers killed in ambush in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 39 words

Allied comdrs rept series of small ground clashes and surge in enemy shellings;
say battle action in S Vietnam is at its highest point in about 10 mos; 7 Amers
killed, 26 wounded; enemy and S Vietnamese casualties reptd; other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 165 words

Soviet Premier A N Kosygin says latest developments in Indochina demonstrate
that despite repeated statements about peaceful intentions, US 'still advances
along the road of aggression', s, Moscow at luncheon hon Assad; says news repts
show 'S Vietnamese puppets' with 'support of their Amer masters' widen mil
actions in Laos; USSR role as co-chmn of '54 Geneva conf on Indochina and '62
Geneva meeting of Laos revd; his remarks are echoed by USSR media, which accuse
allies of seeking to extend war into Laos; Western diplomats say they believe
USSR is worried about effect of invasion of Laos on N Vietnamese; Moscow is also
said to be frustrated by N Vietnam's apparent veto of internatl conf on
Indochina; USSR diplomats privately blame China for Hanoi's refusal to
participate; USSR also acknowledges war stretches N Vietnam's capacity; Soviet
pub Izvestia charges large S Vietnamese force, under direct command of US
officers, have invaded Laos, that US aircraft supports operations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 28 words

French Pres G Pompidou voices concern over expansion of Indochina conflict,
Cabinet meeting; stresses France's particular interest in Laotian independence
and neutrality

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 95 words

Repts of possible incursion revive differences within Laos over conduct of war;
Souvanna Phouma and his supporters reptdly oppose any such incursion which might
compromise Govt's neutralist position; mil leaders reptdly back incursion and
have private agreement with Thai gens and advisers; Sisouk na Champassak says
Laos will object to an incursion; believes that as long as Govt adheres to
neutralist position, Laotian Communists will not attack Govt base areas in
Mekong Valley; says Govt would be justified in accepting outside help if
Communists do attack that area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 351 words

Pres R M Nixon calls meeting of his leading mil and diplomatic advisers at White
House, apparently to rev progress of major new allied operation under way in
northwestern S Vietnam; announcement may be forthcoming on details of operation;
White House spokesman only confirms meeting takes place and that it is attended
by Sec of State W P Rogers, Defense Sec M Laird, Adm T Moorer, CIA Dir R C Helms
and Nixon aide Henry Kissinger; declines to confirm or deny repts that meeting
was called to decide on whether S Vietnamese troops, supported by Amer air
power, will strike across Laotian border; informed sources rept decision to
order such a strike is up to Nixon; Cong sources say operation was launched last
weekend and involves about 25,000 S Vietnamese and 9,000 Amer troops; have swept
up to Laotian border, that decision remains to be made on whether S Vietnamese
should cross border to try to cut enemy supply lines; Sen Foreign Relations Com,
frustrated by news blackout, asks Nixon Adm to provide rept as soon as possible;
agrees to petition Rogers and Laird to discuss new action in pub sessions 'as
soon as security considerations permit'; Fulbright comments; State and Defense
Dept spokesmen continue official silence on mil operations; Scott confirms major
allied assault is under way in northwestern S Vietnam; estimates operation will
run from 7 to 10 days; heavy Amer bombing of Ho Chi Minh Trail is reptd for
117th consecutive day; Japanese news agency repts from Saigon that 4,000 to
5,000 S Vietnamese airborne troops have already been airlifted into the Boloven
Plateau in southern Laos; USSR pub echoes rept; charges major force of S
Vietnamese troops 'under direct command of Amer officers' has invaded Laos;
several Sens, including Cooper, ask Adm about repts; are told no S Vietnamese
troops have as yet entered Laos; Sen Aiken says he has been assured by Rogers's
office that Cong ban against use of Amer ground troops in Laos will be
respected; says he still does not know what is happening; Laird confirms no Amer
troops will be used in Laos; denies substance of USSR rept; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 62 words

Laotian Defense Min Sisouk na Champassak says N Vietnamese appear to have
started major offensive in northern Laos; repts their capture of 2 Laotian
positions on fringe of Plaine des Jarres, Muong Soui and Phou Soui and 4 small
positions guarding Luang Prabang; says there has been no confirmation of repts
by Japanese news agency that S Vietnamese units have entered Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 6

LENGTH: 34 words

Sec Melvin R Laird, in Quotation of Day about growing involvement in Vietnam
war, says 'We will not open any credibility gap. There will be and there are no
American ground combat forces operating in Laos'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Antiwar movement proclaims itself reunited and announces it will hold
demonstrations in spring to protest expansion of Amer air action in Indochina;
Natl Peace Action Coalition says spring demonstrations will culminate in march
and rally in Washington on April 24, with simultaneous march to be held in San
Francisco; coalition reprs say Pres R M Nixon 'is mounting a desperate all-out
effort to win' war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

USSR press agency statement scores 'armed invasion by US and Saigon puppet
troops' in Laos; says incursion will cause serious complications in Indochina;
treats repts of incursion as if it were an accomplished fact

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 24 words

Hanoi newspaper repts 8 N Vietnamese musicians sentenced to prison terms of up
to 15 yrs for having played what was termed capitalistic music

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 38 words

US command repts continued raids over Ho Chi Minh Trail; enemy forces shell 3 US
installations in S Vietnam; other action reptd; US fighter-bomber crashes in
Cambodia; US Air Force bomber crashes in Ratanakiri Prov; pilot killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 48 words

US Repub Sens M Mansfield, G D Aiken and R C Byrd criticize embargo on news
repts from Saigon; USSR, for 3d consecutive day, charges S Vietnamese troops
have invaded border; N Vietnamese troops overrun several Laotian positions on
fringes of Plaine des Jarres and near Luang Prabang; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 184 words

US command announces US and S Vietnamese troops have launched major operation
into NW corner of S Vietnam; way is cleared for possible S Vietnamese strike
against Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos; operation has been going on since Jan 30;
operation involves 9,000 Amers from 3 divs and 20,000 S Vietnamese troops; vast
Amer mil machine has been moved to area in round-the-clock airlift operation,
stands poised to provide air and logistical support for any S Vietnamese effort
to attack trail; US mil command's news embargo ends; US troops reopen base at
Khesanh; their other actions noted; Saigon sources say Pres R M Nixon has not
yet decided on whether to order assault across border; Nixon has received
advance approval from Nguyen Van Thieu to order assault; some informed sources
say Nixon is apprehensive over furor incursion would create among antiwar
critics in US even though Amer support would not include ground troops;
operation is called Dewey Canyon II; is largest mil effort in nearly 3 yrs in S
Vietnam and largest in Indochina since Cambodian incursion last spring; details
on operation; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 107 words

S Vietnamese officials rept 10,000 S Vietnamese troops are engaged in new
campaign in Cambodia to clean out what is described as enemy border sanctuaries;
say US provides full air support; note 2,500 fresh troops are involved, 7,5000
were already operating in Cambodia; say operation has been under way for about a
wk but no major fighting has been reptd; Washington officials say sweep is under
way in Fishhook area; stress sweep has no connection with operation in NW corner
of S Vietnam; Lt Gen Do Cao Tri leads sweep; speculation on objectives; illus of
Cambodian soldiers protecting convoy of fuel trucks on Route 4; details on sweep

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 131 words

Ed says strategy of widening war territorially in order to reduce Amer
involvement defies all logic; says benefits of mil action in S Vietnam have
always loomed larger to Pres R M Nixon and L B Johnson than risks that might
follow; holds neither air attack nor in-and-out ground incursions can deprive
Communists of essential supplies because supplies from N Vietnam consumed by
Communist forces in S Vietnam are small in total daily tonnage; says danger is
that Communist reaction will force allied troops to return again and again;
holds Vietnamization of war in Cambodia and Laos will hamper rather than aid
Vietnamization of war in S Vietnam; says fact that S Vietnamese forces may be
entrapped changes matters little when S Vietnamese units depend on Amer air and
logistical support

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 80 words

James Reston says main issue in latest allied offensive is not news blackout,
but policy question of why S Vietnamese still rely on massive US air support to
break up enemy troop concentrations and supplies; says it is not hard to
reconcile strategy of withdrawal with strategy of preventive strikes in Cambodia
and Laos; queries scope of US air power; says reaction to news blackout is
indication of element of mistrust that still 'poisons' all discussions of war in
Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 2

LENGTH: 148 words

Sen G S McGovern says he hopes NY Legis will approve primary in time for '72
campaign, s, NYC Dem Com dinner; holds primaries are best way for parties to
pick Pres candidate; questions Nixon's programs; at press conf before dinner, he
says he does not regard Ramsey Clark's statement as endorsement; he says Clark
should be considered also for nomination; is int by Dem Com; ex-Atty Gen Clark
toastmaster; Sens McGovern and Birch Bayh s; Controller A Beame hon; McGovern
says he hopes NY Legis will approve primary in time for '72 campaign; Bayh
stresses need for loyal and united opposition; McGovern charges that Pres R M
Nixon, instead of ending war in S Vietnam as he pledged to do, has 'succeeded in
extending it across the face of Indochina'; says Nixon's plan is for reducing US
ground forces while accelerating bombing and encouraging S Vietnamese to do
killing and dying on ground

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 35 words

Actions and opinions of some Amer soldiers involved in operation near Laotian
border discussed; soldiers said to be confident that they are preparing way for
Vietnamese to follow where Amers will not go; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 5; (AFP)

LENGTH: 57 words

Communist China, in statement condemning allied troop buildup along Vietnam-Laos
border, says it will not absolutely allow US to 'do whatever it pleases in
Indochina'; notes its duty to give aid to Indochinese until victory is won
against 'US aggression'; Hanoi reptd calm despite repts that S Vietnamese troops
are massed on Laotian border

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

US command repts 29 Amers were killed in action last wk; repts 244 Amers were
wounded; 44,384 Amers have been killed in war, 294,362 wounded; S Vietnamese and
enemy casualties for last wk and war listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Ho Chi Minh Trail described as spidery, constantly shifting route; Communists'
use of trail to send down men and supplies and allied effort to attack base
areas discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 60 words

US command's 6-day embargo on news from NW corner of S Vietnam discussed;
correspondents were barred from mentioning mil operations and were also
forbidden to mention that there were news restrictions; US officials, in
justifying embargo, suggested possibility of enemy assaults against Amer forces
if their positions became known; details on news briefings

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 146 words

S Vietnam defends operations into Laos and Cambodia by accusing N Vietnam of
threatening its security through aggression in those countries, 101st Paris
peace talks session; each side says the other intensifies war rather than seeks
peace; Pham Dang Lam says N Vietnam has never respected Laotian neutrality; says
N Vietnam tries to take advantage of gradual reduction of Amer forces to
reconstitute its mil stocks in Cambodia; he and Bruce face barrage of criticism
by N Vietnamese and Vietcong; Bruce, in response to question by newsmen after
session, says US position at peace talks would be neither stronger nor weaker
because of new mil operations since US would not have any troops involved; US
spokesmen say Gen C W Abrams, comdr of US forces in Vietnam, made decision to
lift embargo; White House press sec concedes embargo caused confusion but says
it saved lives

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

Cambodia announces that its troops are participating in new S Vietnamese sweep
centered in Kompong Cham prov; Col Am Rong discusses objectives

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 32 words

Mil action at Khesanh, S Vietnam, in '68 recalled; illus; rapidity of Amer
build-up at Khesanh described; views of some Amer soldiers at base cited;
current mil action at Khesanh discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 40 words

Laotian Premier Souvanna Phouma to protest to GB and USSR, Geneva Conf co-chmn,
over new offensive launched by Pathet Lao and N Vietnamese in northern Laos;
Pathet Lao have also filed protest claiming S Vietnamese have launched mil
incursion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 36 words

Saigon mil spokesmen rept 11,000 S Vietnamese troops have pushed into Fishhook
region of Cambodia; 1,500 S Vietnamese enter Parrot's Beak region; S Vietnam is
said to have total of 21,5000 troops operating in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 192 words

US officials continue to hold open possibility of S Vietnamese strike against Ho
Chi Minh Trail; caution against repts that White House has ordered 20,000 S
Vietnamese troops along Laotian frontier not to cross border; White House press
sec declines to say whether S Vietnamese might enter Laos; notes operations in
Mil Region I are in 1st stage; says enemy has been concentrating supplies and
troops throughout Laotian panhandle and these pose threat to security of Mil
Region I; says, as matter of gen policy, US air power will be used to support S
Vietnamese forces 'when they take action to prohibit the re-establishment of
enemy sanctuaries'; says no US ground forces will be used; spokesmen still
refuse to address themselves to central questions raised by operation; say
decision to lift news embargo was made by Gen C W Abrams; insist blackout was
imposed for purely mil reasons; White House press sec concedes embargo caused
confusion; says fact that there was no loss of lives 'justifies' Abrams's
judgment; Mansfield says strike in Laos might extend war into Thailand; says new
campaign sounds like 'tired replay' of earlier period in war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

Khesanh, S Vietnam, abandoned by US Marines in July '68, transformed into combat
base for allied forces massing near Laotian border; described; soldiers illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

Enemy use of Ho Chi Minh Trail discussed; trail said to be sole remaining major
artery supplying enemy units in S Vietnam and Cambodia; eyewitness accounts
indicate US bombing against trail has been ineffective; Communists reptdly have
about 50,000 troops and supervisors administering trail and force of 75,000
Laotian coolies making repairs; US command says indications N Vietnamese were
preparing last fall for supply operation were picked up in Sept; says 90% of
enemy supplies reaching S Vietnam enter through Mil Region I; US officials are
reluctant to claim significant success for bombing campaign against trail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 159 words

Thousands of Amer and S Vietnamese troops, supported by armored columns and
planes, move near Laotian border in NW corner of S Vietnam; official S
Vietnamese spokesmen say none of their forces have crossed border, but refuse to
comment on 'future operations'; Amer officers say they expect S Vietnamese
troops to move directly against Ho Chi Minh Trail; Saigon sources say Nixon has
received advance approval from Nguyen Van Thieu to make decision on whether to
send S Vietnamese troops into Laos after Amer troops have cleared way; some mil
spokesmen say they have begun to suspect Pres R M Nixon is having 2d thoughts
about risking pol furor in US; Nguyen Van Thieu and Amb Berger discuss
situation; details on Dewey Canyon II Operation; 1st 2 Amer deaths in operation
are reptd unofficially; S Vietnamese operations in Fishhook and Parrot's Beak
regions reptdly meet little enemy resistance; 2 Amers killed in mine and bobby
trap incidents; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 48 words

Lr, noting US command has ordered stepped-up bombing raids in Vietnam, Cambodia
and Laos, says no further assertions of mil might will succeed in stabilizing
US's 'untenable position' in area; notes Rogers's indication that US air power
may be used to support S Vietnamese invasion of Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 4

LENGTH: 5 words

Lr criticizes US policy in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

Arnold C Brackman, noting Feb 7 marks 6th anniv of US massive intervention in
Vietnam, says many aspects of war may be faulted, but it is misleading
oversimplification to write off former Pres L B Johnson's decision to intervene
as 'mistake'; says stake 6 yrs ago was more than Vietnam; discusses events
leading up to decision; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

USSR TV stresses condemnation of 'Amer and S Vietnamese puppet invasion' of Laos
over news of US spacecraft Apollo 14's moon flight

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Foreign Correspondents Assn, Saigon, scores Amer command's order barring mention
of 6-day news embargo on mil operation near Laotian border; charges news
correspondents were deprived of exercising their professional responsibility

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 28 words

N Vietnamese and Pathet Lao troops continue pressure on Govt forces in northern
Laos with small-scale attacks and aggressive patrolling near Sam Thong and Long
Tieng

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 26 words

Allied operation in S Vietnam code-named Dewey Canyon 11 after '69 campaign in
same area in which US Marines seized several hilltops inside Laotian border

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 29 words

Saigon mil spokesmen say S Vietnamese and Cambodian troops searching suspected
enemy sanctuaries in Cambodia rept killing 69 Communists; 7 S Vietnamese killed,
28 wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 278 words

Strong indications emerge in Washington that Nixon Adm has decided to go ahead
with strike by S Vietnamese troops against enemy supply lines in Laos; Adm
spokesmen refuse any pub comment on possibility of strike, but officials not
directly concerned with planning say they believe White House decided within
last 2 days to go ahead; officials say timing of strike will depend on how
quickly allied soldiers massed along Laotian border can complete 1st stage of
Dewey Canyon II Operation; Army engineers attempt to rehabilitate Khesanh
airstrip and strengthen bunkers; little enemy resistance has been encountered in
operation; White House sources say operation was conceived as 2-stage project,
with final decision to go into Laos hinging, among other considerations, on
amount of fighting encountered in 1st stage; 2d concern of Adm is said to be pol
ramifications of strike; reliable source says this question was discussed at
length at White House meetings during wk, and that consensus gradually emerged
that so long as US troops were not committed on the ground, Amer pub would
accept strike as permissible within context of Vietnamization program; State
Dept spokesman describes operation in briefing for newsmen; says operation has
to do with 'guaranteeing of the freedom of the Pres to continue his program of
withdrawing US soldiers from S Vietnam; Amb Bunker meets with Pres R M Nixon;
they are joined by Henry Kissinger; 7 Congressmen introduce bill designed to
prevent Amer air support for S Vietnamese incursion into Laos; Repr Harrington,
a co-sponsor, comments; illus of US soldiers posting sign at Laotian border
forbidding US forces to cross border

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

Brig Gen Nouphet Deoheueng, comdr of Laotian forces in center of Laotian
panhandle, says mil situation is critical, that he doubts if he can hold out
under mounting Vietnamese pressure; says his poorly equipped soldiers, half of
whom are in their early teens, have recd no reinforcements from Laotian Govt or
tactical support from US Air Force; believes that war is lost, as far as Laos is
concerned, because Communist troops now control about 2/3 of country

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 151 words

Preparations are reptd under way in NW corner of S Vietnam for S Vietnamese
attack on Ho Chi Minh Trail; informed sources say assault is imminent; assault
would be aimed at crippling N Vietnam's system of infiltration and supply
trails; informants say obstacles to going ahead with assault have now been
cleared; S Vietnamese reconnaissance patrols have long been reptd crossing into
Laos; S Vietnamese and US troops continue to move into position along border;
B-52s continue bombing trail; US planes attack N Vietnamese positions in
Quangtri Prov in support of allied troops operating there; also attack targets
in Cambodia; US command discloses USAF fighter-bomber, flying missions over
trail, staged 'protective reaction' missile strike against AA positions in N
Vietnam; Dewey Canyon II Operation discussed; 5 enemy soldiers killed near
Khesanh; movement of S Vietnamese forces remains secret; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 26 words

Comment on drive into Laos, objectives and outlook for their achievement; on
recent mil activity in NW corner of S Vietnam, at Laotian border and in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 61 words

Comment on resurgence of Indochina debate in Washington because of recent mil
developments; statements by Sens F Church, M Mansfield and W Fulbright, and
decision by Sen com to hold hearings noted; Adm stand discussed; debate among US
officials over whether Adm's policy will speed disengagement from Vietnam or
lead to still deeper entanglement discussed; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 2

LENGTH: 161 words

Ed, noting recent mil developments, says rapidly growing numbers of Amers are
beginning to feel Pres R M Nixon's Vietnamization program follows strategy of
'dangerous war games' that threaten to involve US more deeply than ever in wider
conflict throughout SE Asia; notes Adm launched operation in NW corner of Saigon
under 'cloak of secrecy' that kept from Amer people and Cong information that
was common knowledge in Saigon; queries whether S Vietnamese will be able to
hold Khesanh after Amers are withdrawn; says only logical reason for operation
is to prepare way for thrusts into Laos; holds thrusts would be 'serious
mistake'; says Amer pub has been remarkably patient with disappointing results
of Vietnamization program and risky mil actions launched in attempt to make it
viable; says Cong has 'leaned over backward' to give Nixon benefit of doubt;
says support for McGovern-Hatfield amendment grows; urges US to focus on ways to
achieve pol settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 58 words

John B Harrison lr holds Pres R M Nixon's last 2 press confs were campaign
oratory designed to manipulate rather than enlighten viewing pub; lr, revg US
involvement in Indochina, notes that leading Pres candidates call for winding
down of an unpopular war and that latest pol strategy is to draw voters'
attention away from war to domestic issues

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14, Column 0

LENGTH: 290 words

Richard H Rovere article on ex-Pres D D Eisenhower and his Adm; disputes view of
those who, until recently, were his critics but are having 2d and 3d thoughts
about him and Adm; cites revisionism of Murray Kempton, I F Stone, and
particularly Garry Wills, who now calls Eisenhower 'pol genius,' and Walter
Cronkite, who now calls him 'brilliant'; holds most important thing about
Eisenhower is that US was not involved in war under his Presidency; holds US
benefited from his 1st term, during which he ended Korean War and helped bring
about late Sen J McCarthy's downfall, but would have been better off if he had
not had 2d term; disputes Nixon view that Eisenhower exercised moral authority;
discusses reasons why he thinks exec branch under Eisenhower was mediocre; notes
thinness of literature about Adm and says Amers know less about it than about
most recent ones; concludes Eisenhower presided in most literal sense_he
occupied seat of authority, but he exercised authority only when there was no
other choice; credits him with averting war between Communist and Nationalist
Chinese in '54 and '55; says he was under great pressure from his own mil and
diplomatic advisers to help Nationalists prepare for an attempt to return to
mainland;discusses his tenure as period of peace and credits both his
stewardship and luck, with perhaps heavier emphasis on luck; discusses his role
in Korean War settlement; holds his principal strategy seems to have been
nuclear blackmail; notes that decision to sponsor '62 Bay of Pigs invasion was
Eisenhower's, not Kennedy', although latter took responsibility for fiasco;
discusses his policy on Indochina during his Pres; Eisenhower illus with Pres
Kennedy, with Pres R M Nixon and Sec Dulles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 80 words

About 100 veterans participate in forum sponsored by orgn called Vietnam
Veterans Against the War, group financed largely by actress Jane Fonda; some of
veterans, who say they saw and took part in atrocities, insist burden of guilt
should be passed upward; hold tactics of war led to atrocities; details on their
accounts of atrocities; some veterans predict charges of war crimes will grow as
more soldiers return to US; lawyer MarkLane is listed as major contributor to
forum

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

Pfc Matias Yzaguirre convicted of negligent homicide in shooting of Vietnamese
teen-ager last Dec that touched off 2 days of anti-Amer rioting in Quinhon and
Saigon, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 41 words

Nixon Adm refuses all comment on charges that S Vietnamese forces have invaded
Laos; informed Adm sources continue to indicate that thrust is imminent on basis
of decision reptdly made by Pres R M Nixon and Saigon Govt; their comments noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 68 words

Pathet Lao Col Soth Phethrasy charges S Vietnamese troops have invaded southern
Laos and have reached Tchepone, 20 mi inside country, int, Vientiane; claims
Pathet Lao forces in Boloven Plateau have killed at least 20 S Vietnamese
troops, shot down 4 helicopters and intercepted advance contingents of S
Vietnamese forces; Japanese news service repts Pathet Lao charges S Vietnamese
troops have invaded Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 145 words

Thousands of S Vietnamese troops mass along main hwy to Laos, only a few mi from
border; allied officials in Saigon and at scene remain silent on operation's
objective; informed Saigon sources say attack against Ho Chi Minh Trail could
come any day; details on troop movements; mil spokesmen rept 1st Amer battle
death of operation; enemy shells several US positions near Khesanh; allied
comdrs continue to express surprise at lack of enemy resistance in operation; S
Vietnamese spokesman denies any S Vietnamese have crossed border; armored
personnel carriers, trucks, arty pieces and troop carriers move from base at
Langvei, S Vietnam, to Laotian border; Amer armored unit shelled on Route 9, 1
Amer killed, 1st Amer battle death of operation, 3 wounded; map; rept 91 enemy
soldiers were killed, 1 captured in Cambodia; put S Vietnamese losses at 10
killed, 37 wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 2

LENGTH: 51 words

Natl student conf on 'people's peace treaty', Ann Arbor, Mich, ends with calls
for demonstrations in Washington during 1st wk of May and nationwide local
strikes Feb 10 to protest what conf calls invasion of Laos; treaty was
negotiated by delegation from Natl Student Assn that recently went to Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Nixon Adm says no US ground troops or advisers will be involved in Laotian
incursion; Asst Sec D Z Henkin issues statement; refers to past statements by
Sec of State W P Rogers and Sec of Defense M R Laird in announcing use of Amer
air power; White House and State Dept refuse to comment on S Vietnamese Pres
Nguyen Van Thieu statement; refer inquiries to Pentagon, which confines itself
to Henkin's statement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnamese troops pour across Laotian border beneath an umbrella of Amer
helicopter gunships; 1st armored personnel carrier crosses after nightlong arty
barrage

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 12 words

Text of S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu message on operations in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 255 words

Thousands of S Vietnamese troops, supported by US planes and arty, cross Laotian
border to strike at Ho Chi Minh Trail; Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, announcing
operation in statement, calls attack 'act of legitimate self-defense' that will
be ltd in time as well as space'; asserts S Vietnam has no territorial ambition;
says it will be limited in time as well as in space and that S Vietnamese forces
will be completely withdrawn when operation is completed; denies move is
aggression against a friendly nation; notes N Vietnam has long violated accords
against presence of foreign troops in Laos; US mil command emphasizes that no US
ground combat troops and no US advisers will go into Laos; says US will provide
arty support from S Vietnam and virtually unltd air power; attack is launched
from Quangtri Prov and possibly other points; US helicopters fly S Vietnamese
troops across border while S Vietnamese armored columns and infantrymen move
across border on Route 9, which was cleared last wk by US troops; mil policemen
prevent correspondents from crossing border; it is understood in Saigon that
Nguyen Van Thieu gave Nixon right to decide on strike; Nguyen Van Thieu says his
troops will withdraw when operation is finished; operation said to represent
dramatic reversal of past policy; details on Nguyen Van Thieu statement; his
talks with Bunker noted; US mil command justifies use of Amer support as in line
with objectives of helping to protect lives of US mil personnel in S Vietnam and
enhancing Vietnamization; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 7

LENGTH: 14 words

Activity at Laotian border point and on S Vietnamese access route to it
discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Communist China describes Laotian incursion as 'grave provocation' against
Chinese people as well as the people of Indochina and the whole world; accuses
US of 'wildly plotting' to launch attack on N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

Cambodians voice hope that S Vietnamese attack in Laos will take pressure off
Cambodia; Cambodian Govt statement says Cambodia fully approves measure taken by
S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu; some Cambodians fear Communist troops will
retaliate in Cambodia for prestige they might lose in Laotian operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 2

LENGTH: 21 words

Communist delegations to Paris peace talks join with French Govt in condemning
Laotian incursion as extension of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

UN Sec Gen Thant expresses fear operations in Laos by N Vietnamese and S
Vietnamese may be death blow for Geneva accords; deplores incursion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 28 words

GB terms S Vietnamese incursion into Laos 'fully understandable'; Govt spokesman
says Brit Govt is in constant touch with S Vietnamese and US Govts on SE Asian
situation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 3

LENGTH: 95 words

Max Frankel says rationale of widening Vietnam war to shorten it is offered by
US and Saigon to justify allied thrust into Laos; notes allies hold time can be
bought by S Vietnamese by pushing combat frontiers into Laos and Cambodia; says
idea for Laotian thrust is said to have been S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van
Thieu's, but Nixon takes clear responsibility for his own endorsement and
appears to have managed affair in way that minimizes his own risks; discusses
reaction in Washington to incursion; says there was much less excitement than
during previous escalations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 4

LENGTH: 42 words

S Vietnamese cameraman working on assignment for NBC says Amer helicopter
crewman forcibly took his camera away from him and threw it from helicopter as
helicopter flew S Vietnamese combat troops over Laos; says crewman said he was
acting under orders

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 98 words

UPI repts Pres R M Nixon aide Herbert G Klein, during Columbia Univ Journalism
School panel discussion of Nixon policy on news confs and information, spent
much of his time answering students angry questions about Laos; other panel
members are E Abel, dean of school, and P Lisagor (Chicago Daily News); Klein
says Amers get more details on Vietnam war than on any other war; defends news
embargo on Laotian operation as needed to protect lives of US troops; says there
is no censorship of newsmen's dispatches in Vietnam and newsmen are free to
accompany troops anywhere in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 2

LENGTH: 150 words

Ed says State Dept statement that Laotian incursion is not enlargement of
Vietnam war is 'so patently at variance with the facts that it undermines the
credibility of everything else Washington asserts' about invasion; says it is
more probable this 'significant escalation' of war will have effects directly
contrary to those Adm spokesmen 'so glibly promise'; notes 'sober judgment' in
past not to invade Laos has been overruled by White House; notes experience in
Cambodia is constructive; notes S Vietnamese presence in Cambodia; queries if
Laos will be different; says S Vietnamese army has improved, but it is
'straining credibility' to suggest that it can now accomplish in S Vietnam, Laos
and Cambodia what it has been unable to accomplish in its own country with
massive Amer aid; says no amount of 'sophistry' in Washington can conceal fact
of escalation, which points to unending conflict

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 6

LENGTH: 9 words

State Dept text on S Vietnamese incursion into Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 40 words

Downed US helicopter pilot repts heavy enemy fire in Laos; size of S Vietnamese
force in Laos put at 5,000; more than 200 planes said to have flown support
missions; S Vietnamese mil comdr says principal objective of incursion is
Tchepone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 7

LENGTH: 138 words

S Vietnamese incursion into Laos generates only scattered protests in US;
situation said to be in marked contrast to outbursts last spring following
Cambodian incursion; 14 youths break into S Vietnamese Embassy in Washington;
cause no damage; 8 are arrested; no guard had been posted at embassy; State Dept
has no explanation; about 300 students stage march on Stanford Univ campus,
breaking windows and causing estimated $13,500 damage; about 200 students look
several trustees and adm officials in business school, demanding that trustees
sign separate peace with Vietcong; Natl Peace Action Coalition, which claims
membership of 35 antiwar groups, calls for large demonstrations; antiwar
activists David Dellinger and Renard Davis address small rally near White House;
call for demonstrations, including 'mill-in' in Times Sq

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 28 words

S Vietnamese mil spokesman says S Vietnamese troops engage in 1st battle with N
Vietnamese forces in Laos; 3 S Vietnamese killed, 20 wounded; 14 N Vietnamese
killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 366 words

US portrays US-backed S Vietnamese invasion of Laos as limited operation to
protect 'security and safety of Amer forces in S Vietnam', State Dept statement;
contends 'limited operation is not an enlargement of the war; sources at White
House and State Dept say operation plans call for S Vietnamese to remain in Laos
up to 3 mos to disrupt flow of N Vietnamese supplies along Ho Chi Minh Trail for
rest of dry season; say no Amer ground forces will enter Laos, even if mil tide
begins to turn against S Vietnamese; statement, amplified in briefings at White
House and State and Defense Depts, seeks to justify use of Amer air power;
statement and spokesmen stress operation is intended to buy time for S
Vietnamese armed forces to improve themselves and facilitate withdrawal of Amer
troops; US contends invasion of Laos is 'fully consistent with internatl law',
based on right of S Vietnam to protect itself against threatened attack; Saigon
submits declaration to that effect to members of UN Security Council; spokesman
says US considers submitting parallel statement; group of Dem and Repub Sens
challenges contention that operation does not constitute widening of war, but
initial reaction on Capitol Hill is mild compared with furor that followed
incursion into Cambodia last spring; statements by Sens Mansfield, Scott,
Humphrey, Hughes and others noted; White House press sec says basic decision to
invade Laos was made in Jan after intelligence reptd unusually heavy
concentration of N Vietnamese troops and supplies in southern Laos; says final
decision was made last wk; insists there were no delays in planning and
execution of operation; says news blackout was designed for security reasons in
connection with operations in NW corner of S Vietnam; US officials say Laotian
operation will be revd from wk to wk; State Dept spokesman says Rogers was aware
that S Vietnamese might strike in Laos when he testified before Sen com Jan 28,
but, because of continuing reassessments of plans, 'it would not have been
possible' for Rogers to say more before com than he did in pub at his news conf
the next day; says US considers Geneva accords on Laotian neutrality to still be
in effect

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6; (AFP)

LENGTH: 27 words

Laotian forces reptdly recapture some positions they had lost in northern Laos
above Luang Prabang; N Vietnamese attack on Sam Thong and Long Tieng seen
imminent

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 162 words

S Vietnamese troops move into some areas of enemy's supply-route network in
Laos, hrs after sweeping across border; 1 regiment of S Vietnamese 1st Inf Div,
numbering 3,000 soldiers, lands 20 mi S of key enemy supply center of Tchepone;
US helicopter is downed in southern panhandle of Laos, killing all 4 crewmen
aboard; another helicopter was downed earlier with 2 crewmen listed as missing,
2 injured; repts from field say other helicopters have been hit by enemy ground
fire; US command announces 1 Amer killed, 8 wounded in ambush near Khesanh;
initial enemy resistance in Laos is light; Nguyen Van Thieu's statement noted;
details on action; S Vietnamese command spokesman says newsmen will be barred
from witnessing operation in Laos until security can be assured; S Vietnamese
Govt spokesman says he 'thinks' Souvanna Phouma agrees to S Vietnamese action;
mil spokesman says he is not aware of any coordination between S Vietnamese and
Laotian forces; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 189 words

Gen feeling in Laos reptd to be that if S Vietnamese incursion goes well, it
will deal serious blow to N Vietnamese; Laotian Govt's formal displeasure with S
Vietnamese drive is voiced in statement issued by Premier Souvanna Phouma, who
says N Vietnamese violation of Laotian neutrality cannot justify entry of other
'protagonist' troops; Souvanna Phouma demands withdrawal of all foreign troops
from Laos; urges powers responsible for insuring respect for Geneva stipulations
to take necessary measures to compel all signers to respect them; notes S
Vietnamese incursion occurs over 'illegal route of access and infiltration
called the Ho Chi Minh Trail'; his protest said to be aimed at Saigon Govt and
US; says he was not informed or consulted either by Pres R M Nixon or South
Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu on incursion; it is understood in Saigon that
Souvanna Phouma knew in advance S Vietnamese plans; Souvanna Phouma is visited
by S Vietnamese Amb Hoang Co Phuy, who expresses hope that new drive will not
damage S Vietnamese-Laotian friendship; S Vietnamese troops on way to Laos
passing US tank bound for Khesanh illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 422 words

US portrays US-backed S Vietnamese invasion of Laos as limited operation to
protect 'security and safety of Amer forces in S Vietnam', State Dept statement;
contends 'limited' operation is not an enlargement of the war; sources at White
House and State Dept say operation plans call for S Vietnamese to remain in Laos
up to 3 mos to disrupt flow of N Vietnamese supplies along Ho Chi Minh Trail for
rest of dry season; say no Amer ground forces will enter Laos, even if mil tide
begins to turn against S Vietnamese; statement, amplified in briefings at White
House and State and Defense Depts, seeks to justify use of Amer air power;
statement and spokesmen stress operation is intended to buy time for S
Vietnamese armed forces to improve themselves and facilitate withdrawal of Amer
troops; US contends invasion of Laos is 'fully consistent with internatl law',
based on right of S Vietnam to protect itself against threatened attack; Saigon
submits declaration to that effect to members of UN Security Council; spokesman
says US considers submitting parallel statement; group of Dem and Repub Sens
challenge contention that operation does not constitute widening of war, but
initial reaction on Capitol Hill is mild compared with furor that followed
incursion into Cambodia last spring; statements by Sens Mansfield, Scott,
Humphrey, Hughes and others noted; Sen Mansfield and other Sens challenge
contention that invasion does not constitute widening of war; Sens Humphrey and
Hughes voice like view; Sen Scott backs operation; says he had been briefed on
details by Pres adviser Kissinger; Govt spokesmen seek to justify US role; White
House press sec says basic decision to invade Laos was made in Jan after
intelligence reptd unusually heavy concentration of N Vietnamese troops and
supplies in southern Laos; says final decision was made last wk; insists there
were no delays in planning and execution of operation; says news blackout was
designed for security reasons in connection with operations in NW corner of S
Vietnam; US officials say Laotian operation will be revd from wk to wk; State
Dept spokesman says Rogers was aware that S Vietnamese might strike in Laos when
he testified before Sen com Jan 28, but, because of continuing reassessments of
plans, 'it would not have been possible' for Rogers to say more before com than
he did in pub at his news conf the next day; says US considers Geneva accords on
Laotian neutrality to be still in effect; revives Nixon suggestion that
all-Indochina peace conf be convened

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 11 words

Text of State Dept statement on S Vietnamese incursion into Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 144 words

Old plan for ground attack on Ho Chi Minh Trail took on new life in Saigon at
least 3 mos ago in talks between US and S Vietnamese officials; idea suddenly
seemed feasible after nearly 5 yrs of being advocated by allied comdrs and S
Vietnamese leaders and rejected by White House; S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van
Thieu favored plan in private talks with Amb E Bunker, who reptdly endorsed it;
well-informed source says Pres R M Nixon was really behind it; crucial meeting
took place Jan 29 when Bunker and Gen C W Abrams spent more than an hr with
Nguyen Van Thieu; Bunker met with Nguyen Van Thieu subsequently and then left
for Washington to meet with Nixon; Deputy Amb Berger took over final phases of
negotiations; Nguyen Van Thieu meeting with Laird noted; other details on
discussions prior to Laotian incursion, which was proposed by Gen Westmoreland
in '68

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 1

LENGTH: 118 words

James Reston, saying we are being told once more that Laotian incursion will end
'long agony' of war, discusses previous actions in war and in other wars that
underscore lesson concerning unpredictability of war; notes mil logic of
incursion; queries what would happen if enemy retreats into jungle and regroups
later in N Vietnam; says Nixon has clearly won battle of pub opinion in US;
notes popular view that it is all right to attack neutral country occupied by
enemy as long as US casualties are not too high, that if enemy invades neutral
country, it is reasonable for US to do same; queries what would happen to logic
of US assumptions if USSR and China gave air support and other aid to N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 6

LENGTH: 44 words

Gen L W Walt, discussing and lauding USMC role in war, claims dramatic upsurge
in S Vietnamese confidence and morale became apparent after allied operations
against enemy sanctuaries in spring; says other gains will become increasingly
apparent in the future; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 69 words

S Vietnamese troops pressing into Laos are slowed by bad weather and by craters
gouged in road by US bombers; Tchepone is reptd almost deserted; other details;
S Vietnamese command repts enemy makes 3 attacks against S Vietnamese troops
advancing in Cambodia; repts 73 N Vietnamese killed, 10 S Vietnamese killed, 42
wounded; forest fires reptdly set off by allied air strikes, rage in huge Chupp
rubber plantation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 3; (AFP)

LENGTH: 49 words

N Vietnamese press and radio warn US and S Vietnam that 'liberated zone of Laos'
will be 'tomb of the Amers and their agents'; commentators accuse Pres R M Nixon
of directing operation by remote control; charge operations were mounted with
'cooperation of the Gen Staffs of Saigon and Vientiane'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 2

LENGTH: 96 words

Laotian missions act on worldwide basis to explain Laotian objections to S
Vietnamese incursion; spokesman says missions will present view expressed by
Prince Souvanna Phouma; says Laos will not file protests directly with USSR and
GB, co-chmn of '62 Geneva Conf; Laotian Govt said to feel no sense of crisis;
Laotian and Amer officials in Laos said to be not unhappy that neither Souvanna
Phouma nor US Embassy in Laos were informed before incursion began; Laotian Govt
qrs indicate no sense of crisis over incursion; their attendance at temple
festival in southern Laos noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 98 words

Heavy rains and dense fog slow S Vietnamese drive into Laos, virtually halt US
helicopter supply flights and air support; advance Saigon units reptdly are 15
mi inside Laos; map; Amer units in S Vietnam begin arty fire across border into
Laos; 4 Amers killed, 11 wounded in shelling attacks by Communists that moved up
into mortar range; illus of US helicopters at Khesanh to ferry supplies and S
Vietnamese troops into Laos; S Vietnamese drive into Cambodia runs into fierce
resistance; 4 Amers killed, 11 wounded in 3 enemy shellings near Laotian border
and Khesanh; details on action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

USSR continues to score US for incursion into Laos but gives no indication that
it will act; Pravda devotes front-page ed to 'stepped-up imperialist
aggression'; Western analysts see no change in USSR's aloof attitude toward
events; speculate that a N Vietnam victory will increase Communist Chinese
influence in area, permit Hanoi to extend itself in area and prove offensive to
USSR

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 14 words

N Vietnamese troops open attacks against Laotian Govt positions around long Tien

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 40 words

Well-informed Amer sources in Laos say Laotian incursion will not cut N
Vietnamese off from food supplies; say Laotian officials are selling enough rice
to Communists to supply N Vietnamese div for a yr; cite other instances of
corruption

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2; (AFP)

LENGTH: 11 words

N Vietnam will hold its 1st legislative election since '64 in April

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 34 words

US command announces name of Operation Dewey Canyon 11, code name for Laotian
operation, has been changed to Lam Son 719, name of area where Vietnamese won
decisive victory over Chinese in 17th century

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 52 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky warns against treating Laotian incursion as
game of double or nothing, s, Saigon reception marking 5th anniv of 1st air raid
over N Vietnam; suggests best way to make sure of winning is to invade N
Vietnam; says Laotian operation is strategically and militarily justified

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 285 words

Defense Sec M R Laird explains Laotian incursion to Sen and House Armed Services
Coms, Sec of State W P Rogers explains it to Sen Foreign Relations Com; Laird
and Rogers say incursion will insure Amer troop withdrawals and shorten war;
leave Congressional Vietnam critics, while still skeptical, disarmed for the
moment over incursion; seem to modify previous Adm commitment that US troops
will be largely removed from combat role by May; Laird predicts Adm will meet or
beat goal of withdrawing 50,000 more troops by May 1; Rogers predicts Amer
troops 'by and large' will be out of combat role by middle of this yr; White
House press sec says 40,000 to 50,000 combat troops will remain in Vietnam after
scheduled withdrawals are completed in April; Sen H Scott explains it will be
midsummer before Amer troops are largely withdrawn from combat role; some State
Dept officials hold Adm's apparent move to soften commitment on troops
withdrawal stems from concern that Laotian operation may prove more prolonged
and less successful than hoped; Laird says operation is going forward on
schedule; Sens J Stennis and H M Jackson, after briefing, warn S Vietnamese
troops may run into 'real trouble' in Laos; Laird and Rogers say Adm has no
intention of sending Amer ground troops into Laos if S Vietnamese run into
trouble; Laird's explanation of operation gets gen approval of Sens; Rogers says
he gets 'very constructive' response from Sen Foreign Relations Com; Fulbright
says Rogers makes point that Nixon has made very clear Adm acts in way
considered to be in natl interest; says he has 'very grave reservations' that
operation is in natl interest, but refrains from further criticism; battle scene
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 206 words

Nixon Adm planners assert privately that Laotian incursion can buy 1 yr or
possibly 2 yrs during which it will be extremely hard for N Vietnam to mount
effective offensive in either S Vietnam or Cambodia; say result can be achieved
not only through temporary destruction and disruption of enemy mil supplies, but
also by establishing precedent for S Vietnamese operations in southern Laos;
Pentagon and State Dept officials cite these aims as specific objectives of
Laotian campaign; Rogers and Laird, in Cong appearances, say goals of Laotian
incursion are to improve S Vietnam's security and facilitate continued
withdrawals of US troops; Laird insists incursion, rather than widening war,
shortens it; Sen Aiken repts drive should permit US to withdraw men more safely
and at earlier date than would have been possible otherwise; Adm's analysis is
based on contention that N Vietnamese cannot mount major offensives unless they
are able to move supplies along Ho Chi Minh Trail; officials say heavy Amer
bombing throughout war has achieved destruction of considerable enemy supplies;
note enemy is dependent on overland routes now because of closing of Cambodian
ports to N Vietnam, which took place last yr; details on Adm's analysis

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 126 words

Protest rallies and marches by students opposed to Laotian incursion are
scheduled for various places across US; indications are that they may be more
subdued than those over Cambodian incursion; NYU undergrad student govt calls
for univ strike; NYU Chancellor Dr A M Carter comments; demonstrations have been
set in Washington, Boston, Philadelphia and other cities; coalition of antiwar
groups has sceduled march near White House; Student Mobilization Com to End the
War in Vietnam plans to hold rally on George Washington Univ campus; announces
itself as opposed to more militant activities planned by People's Coalition for
Peace and Justice, which is headed by Dellinger and Davis; antiwar factions call
for strikes at Penn State and Stanford Univs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (TGM)

LENGTH: 16 words

Cambodian Prince Norodom Sihanouk, exiled leader, returns to Peking after visit
to N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 216 words

Sec of State W P Rogers says US will give unqualified support to 'any kind of
conf in any format' that will bring peace to Indochina, news conf; says US would
back reconvening of '62 Geneva Conf or any activity of Internatl Control Comm in
Laos; also endorses Sen G D Aiken proposal for peace conf convened by all SE
Asian nations involved in fighting, plus Communist China; says after May 1, US
forces in S Vietnam will be employed 'outside combat role'; says no assault of
any kind is contemplated against N Vietnam; says US and Nguyen Van Thieu do not
share Nguyen Cao Ky view that such an attack may be necessary; earlier, US
Defense Dept officials declined comment on possibility of such an attack by S
Vietnamese troops; Rogers denies news agency rept that over 100 Amer soldiers
entered Laos; scoffs at Chinese assertion that US considers use of tactical
nuclear weapons against N Vietnam; illus of S Vietnamese arty crew watching US
helicopter lowering supplies to Vietnamese inside Laos; Rogers says US is
encouraged by Israel's stated willingness to talk about reopening Suez Canal
before formal peace settlement, news conf; says UAR proposal for withdrawal of
Israeli troops from canal front and Israeli counterproposal for mutual reduction
of forces are both 'worthy of consideration'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 174 words

Sen J K Javits offers bill to 'regulate undeclared war' by limiting Pres
initiation of hostilities abroad, in emergency situations, to 30 days unless
Pres obtains Cong authorization; says US experience in Indochina shows that
pendulum has swung too far in the direction of Pres war-making power, news conf;
holds US-supported S Vietnamese operation in Laos demonstrates how such curbs as
Cooper-Church amendment impose only ltd restraints on Pres; bill co-sponsored by
Dem Sens C Pell and W B Spong and Repub Sen C McC Mathias; shift in legis
climate to some conservative support for bill, introduced but not acted upon in
'70, noted; Sen Stennis now advocating Cong restraints on Pres actions as Comdr
in Chief; Nixon Adm seen possibly assuming cooperative attitude toward bill if
it commands considerable bipartisan support; Javits relates bill to current
situation in Indochina and US support of S Vietnamese operations in Laos; Repr J
B Bingham and about 50 other HR members reintroduce in HR as separate bill
McGovern-Hatfield proposal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 19 words

Enemy gunners fire rockets into Pnompenh, Cambodia, and its outskirts; attack
Cambodian Navy hq on Mekong River

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Nguyen Ngoc Luong, part-time correspondent of NY Times who accompanied S
Vietnamese troops into Laos, describes their high spirits, repts reactions of
individual soldiers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 76 words

S Vietnamese engineers in Laos reptdly begin rebldg Tchepone abandoned airstrip
to enable S Vietnamese to fly in supplies and troops; Lt Gen Hoang Xuan Lam says
S Vietnamese destroyed 2 large ammunition depots in Laos; Saigon hq repts 3,000
to 5,000 S Vietnamese remaining in northern part of S Vietnam were sent eastward
to coastal area south of demilitarized zone to guard against a N Vietnamese
drive across frontier in retaliation for thrust into Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

US seen having written off for the next few mos any possibility of serious
negotiation at Paris peace talks; move into Laos seen reinforcing N Vietnamese
reprs' rigid tactics; mil response by Communists to move seen more likely;
another factor seen likely to keep talks at standstill for a while is pres
elections in S Vietnam scheduled for end of Sept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 33 words

S Vietnamese incursion into Laos fails to overcome torpor in Vientiane; Govt and
residents mark Buddhist holiday in usual fashion; neither press nor radio have
commented on S Vietnamese operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 104 words

US helicopter carrying several newsmen downed over Laos leaving no sign of any
survivors; missing men include Larry Burrows (Life magazine), Henri Huet (AP),
Kent Potter (UPI) and Keisaburo Shimamoto (Pan-Asia Newspaper Alliance); check
indicates that 4 did not leave craft when it stopped at base earlier and they
had opportunity to do so; 2d S Vietnamese helicopter shot down over Laos at same
time, at least 4 crewmen killed; field repts say both crafts had apparently lost
their way and flown into area of enemy's heaviest AA defense concentrations; 28
newsmen have been killed since '65, 21 in Vietnam and 7 in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 41 words

Some Amer soldiers in S Vietnam say 100 or more Amer ground troops have been in
Laos during past 3 days and have fought Communists; US issues denial; says there
is great latitude on steps that might be taken to rescue downed Amer helicopter
crews

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 173 words

Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky says S Vietnamese forces will probably stay in Laos
until dry season ends in May and predicts they will go in again next yr, int;
says S Vietnamese will undertake 'continuous actions' against Ho Chi Minh Trail;
says objectives are to destroy enemy sanctuaries, blow up supply depots and 'cut
the trail'; says it may be necessary to bomb enemy rear bases in N Vietnam;
Saigon mil spokesman says that over 10,000 soldiers crossed into Laos; says some
moved about 6 mi from the border; intense US air support and strong enemy AA
fire noted; spokesman repts 4 brief mil engagements, 41 enemy killed, 7 S
Vietnamese killed and 21 wounded; US mil spokesman declines to disclose new
figures on extent of US participation; US casualties in support of role will now
be included in wkly figures instead of being given separately; US Command will
supply cumulative figures on use of US planes after the operation; map; illus of
S Vietnamese soldiers jumping from US helicopter on hilltop about 15 mi inside
Laotian border

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 21 words

Lr says it should be evident to N Vietnam that US is leaving field of battle,
suggests it is time N Vietnamese forces stay home

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

Lr proposes, as a fresh pol initiative and as a vehicle for Vietnam peace
development, expansion of Mekong River Project, co-op regional development
project started under umbrella of UN

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 5

LENGTH: 14 words

Lr deplores deepening and widening of Vietnam War by US in the name of ending it

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 55, Column 3; (AFP)

LENGTH: 11 words

N Vietnamese Foreign Min charges US planes bombed Huonglap area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 20 words

US command repts 24 Amers killed last wk in Vietnam; other US and S Vietnamese
casualty figures for wk and war listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 24 words

ABC and CBS broadcast repts that US ground troops take part in S Vietnamese
drive into Laos; US Defense Dept and Pres press sec R Ziegler denial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

US official sources in Saigon say US reconaissance teams operate inside Laos,
but only in intelligence-gathering role; deny presence of US combat troops in
Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnam repts its troops in Cambodia have killed 164 enemy soldiers in 6
engagements at points along Routes 1 and 7; repts 21 S Vietnamese killed, 67
wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

Illus of Cambodian civilians taking cover during recent shooting incident
between S Vietnamese sailors and Cambodian soldiers in Pnompenh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (AFP)

LENGTH: 35 words

N Vietnamese Foreign Min charges US warships invaded N Vietnamese waters off
Quangbinh Prov, shelled civilian vessels and killed and wounded a number of
persons; charges US arty shelled Vinhson and Vinhgiang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 62 words

102d session of Paris peace talks; Communist reprs charge 10 US bns fight in
Laos; David K E Bruce charges other side with hypocrisy by condemning allied
action in Laos and Cambodia without mentioning N Vietnamese presence there, news
conf; Xuan Thuy indicates at talks session that N Vietnamese troops are in both
countries; US rejects their charges that it widens war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 109 words

S Vietnamese forces reptdly push deeper into Laos in 5th day of drive; enemy AA
fire on Ho Chi Minh Trail is heavy; at least 8 Amer, 2 S Vietnamese helicopters
downed; US casualties are 8 killed, 2 missing, 5 wounded; 15 on S Vietnamese
craft are all missing and presumed dead; 20 S Vietnamese, 60 enemy reptd killed
in combat; US mil spokesmen still silent on extent of US support; Tchepone is
reptdly near capture by S Vietnamese; US effort is centered in Quangtri Prov
just below N Vietnamese border; new dirt airstrip at Khesanh does not work out;
resulting increase in cargo truck traffic on Route 9 causes delays and losses
from enemy attacks; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 51 words

Mass State Atty Gen R Quinn sues in US Dist Ct, Boston, on behalf of 12 Mass
soldiers challenging const authority of Sec Laird to send them to fight in
'unconst war'; asks ct to give Fed Govt 90 days, if it finds war unconst, to
seek either a Cong declaration of war or end its involvement in Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 7 words

Ed warns on widening US role in Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

Laotian troops capture Phalane but are driven out soon afterwards; illus of S
Vietnamese soldiers boarding helicopters for flight to Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 31 words

Personality and biog sketch of Lt Col R F Molinelli, comdr of US helicopter
squadron based in Khesanh which plays key support role in S Vietnamese drive
into Laos; biog; Molinelli por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 86 words

Communist China says it 'will not remain indifferent' to drive into Laos by 'US
and puppet forces', statement transmitted by Hsinhua; says it will take all
effective measures to aid Communist forces in Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam; calls
incursion into Laos a grave provocation against China as well as the peoples of
Indochina and the whole world; US officials see no indications that China
intends to intervene in fighting in Laos; brush aside rept that Souvanna Phouma
is worried about possible Chinese intervention

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 86 words

White House insists again there are no US combat forces or advisers committed to
S Vietnamese operations in Laos; insists US reconaissance and intelligence
operations in Laos, known to exist for some time, are not connected with S
Vietnamese drive; Press Sec Ronald Ziegler restates Pres R M Nixon pledge not to
involve US troops in S Vietnamese drive; illus of US arty unit at base in S
Vietnam near Laotian border; picture was on last roll of film taken by AP
photographer Henri Huet, 1 of 4 missing photographers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 77 words

Polish Govt, as member of Internatl Control Comm for Laos, issues memorandum to
GB and USSR, as cochairmen of Geneva Conf on Laos, to use their influence to
prevent further increase of US mil operations in Indochina and particularly in
Laos; GB reptdly has rejected USSR charge that Laotian neutrality has been
violated by saying N Vietnamese have been violating the neutrality for yrs;
Polish Amb to US Jerzy Michalowski reptdly revd situation with US officials

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 154 words

US command repts 2 US helicopters downed in Laos and near Khesanh; returning US
pilots rept 8 US helicopters downed in 1 day in Laos; 14 helicopters officially
listed as lost, but pilots rept more losses; 12 crewmen killed, 11 wounded in 14
reptd crashes; S Vietnamese mil spokesman repts 205 enemy killed in 1st 4 days
of drive into Laos; repts 35 S Vietnamese killed, 124 wounded; repts uncovering
large arms cache, destruction of arms, capture of materiel; results so far
appear to be less than were expected before drive began; Nguyen Van Thieu, in
Khesanh to consult on drive, calls results 'encouraging'; S Vietnamese
officially reptd 13 mi inside Laos; some units unofficially reptd 25 mi inside;
spokesman repts 10,000 of 20,000 S Vietnamese committed to campaign are in Laos;
describes 3 major areas of operations; map; Gen Abrams makes trip into Khesanh
for consultation with Brig Gen Hill on progress of drive

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 37 words

Comment on gap between what is visible in forward areas and what US and S
Vietnamese officials rept on incursion into Laos; extent of US support of S
Vietnamese is obscure and little effort is made to clarify situation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 83 words

Laos declares state of emergency, transfers internal security matters from
police to mil officers; links recent developments in mil situation; order seen
as compromise between Souvanna Phouma and militant civilian and mil officers who
oppose his neutralist stance; strengthens Govt unity; Cabinet adopts communique
saying S Vietnamese incursion violates '62 Geneva accord which called for no
foreign troops in Laos, but saying incursion is consequence of continuous
violations by N Vietnamese troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Sketches on means through which N Vietnam sends supplies through Ho Chi Minh
trail (Laos)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CRITICAL REVIEWS & APPRAISALS

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAMS & DRAWINGS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

Comment on S Vietnamese drive into Laos with US support; risks involved in
action discussed; map of Ho Chi Minh Trail and area of S Vietnamese drive

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 54 words

N Vietnamese regulars reptdly launch major attack against guerrilla base at Long
Tien, inflict severe damage and heavy casualties including at least 1 member of
US CIA; refugees continue to flee from city but earlier repts said to be
exaggerated; Amer forward air controller reptd killed by AA fire which downed
his plane

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

New anti-Amer rioting erupts at Quinhon, S Vietnam, in 2d day of demonstrations
against deaths of 2 Vietnamese civilians

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 44 words

S Vietnamese open for inspection by group of Western newsmen a mile-long sec of
the Ho Chi Minh Trail network; trail has painted traffic signs and latticework
roof with camouflaging vegetation; newsmen see 1 of 3 circular supply depots
uncovered by S Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AFP)

LENGTH: 15 words

N Vietnam calls on all its regions to prepare for USMC landing along
demilitarized zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 22 words

Cambodian troops clash with about 300 Vietcong guerrillas at Samdech Yos
airfield, 100 mi NW of Pnompenh; clash near Siem Reap reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 119 words

S Vietnamese reptdly advance 14 mi into Laos; clash with 500 enemy troops 10 mi
inside Laos reptd; earlier in same area S Vietnamese rangers fought heaviest
clash they have yet reptd in Laos; rept they killed 43 N Vietnamese and suffered
1 killed and 10 wounded; US mil spokesman repts 22 Amers killed, 50 wounded
since operation began Jan 30; 13 US helicopters reptd lost, 7 in Laos, 6 in S
Vietnam; spokesman in Khesanh repts a dozen more shot down but later recovered;
S Vietnamese rept killing 310 enemy; rept their casualties as 43 killed, 148
wounded; map; illus of S Vietnamese wounded being helped from US helicopter at
base in Laos and illus of smoke from bombs dropped by US planes on Ho Chi Minh
Trail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

S Vietnamese deserters are placed back into the military in 'forced labor cos';
they carry no weapons, are not allowed to speak to other soldiers and are used
as 'coolies of the battlefield'; many desert for religious reasons; observers
estimate 10,000 to 12,000 S Vietnamese desert each mo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

Anthony Lewis appraises possibilities for pol settlement in Indochina; charges
US strategy buys time in S Vietnam at cost of intensified killing in Laos and
Cambodia; says only hope is for US to realize that it cannot determine ideology
in SE Asia or elsewhere, can only hope for Indochinese states at peace with one
another and their neighbors

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 2

LENGTH: 62 words

Ed notes hundreds of thousands of Laotians have been driven from their homes and
untold numbers of civilians have been killed and maimed as a result of extensive
US use of air power against N Vietnamese in NE Laos in recent yrs; says that
claim by Pres R M Nixon and his aides that they act to save US lives is a
doubtful proposition; urges US Adm to reappraise policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 72 words

US bombers hit suspected N Vietnamese mil outposts across east-west axis of Ho
Chi Minh Trail and on suspected N Vietnamese outposts on Route 9; S Vietnamese
command repts N Vietnamese fired 100 mortar shells into S Vietnamese night
bivouac 7 mi NE of Suong, Cambodia; repts scattered clashes at 3 points in east
sector of Cambodia; repts 20 enemy killed, 1 S Vietnamese killed, 12 wounded;
virtually no action reptd across S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 163 words

Jungle landing zone in Laos, where 40 US-piloted helicopters ferrying S
Vietnamese troops prepare to set down, is hit by mortar shells; winds from
swirling blades of craft set off enemy booby traps on ground; Amers force
reluctant S Vietnamese to leave craft; none of 40 craft is shot down while
ferrying 500 S Vietnamese in largest single troop-lift of Laotian operation, but
many have holes from enemy fire; incident at landing zone exemplifies problem
for US pilots, who complain of taking fire from N Vietnamese with no apparent
effort being made to clear enemy troops from area beforehand; US personnel,
called 'pathfinders', who would ordinarily check out landing zones are not
permitted in Laos; they have appealed for easing of restrictions but so far no
change is permitted; some say they occasionally do ride helicopters into Laos
but insist they always fly out again without getting out of craft in Laos; illus
of missing photographers boarding helicopter at Khesanh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 126 words

Communist Chinese radio repts several hundred thousand people reptdly attend
Peking rally to denounce allied move into Laos and pledge support for Communist
cause in Indochina; ed in Chinese Communist pub rejects US assurances that
incursion poses no threat to China; China has denounced incursion in 3 official
statements over a period of little more than a wk; China believed to be
concerned that war may spread closer to its border; renewal of Chinese pledges
for support of Hanoi made at meeting between Chinese Premier Chou En-lai and
econ delegation from N Vietnam headed by Vice Premier Le Thanh Nghi; Chinese
leader Lin Piao also pledges support in message to Vietcong on 10th anniv of
'unification of S Vietnam's people's liberation armed forces'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Newsmen rigorously barred from war zones, are forced to depend for news on US
and Laotian officials and on information picked up from other sources;
restrictions on news are jointly enforced by US Embassy and Laotian authorities;
reason for strict curbs is that there are many things that US and Laotian
officials do not want newsmen to see, particularly nature and extent of US and
other foreign roles in Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 169 words

US Air Force plane accidentally bombs 'friendly unit' in Laos near US-supported
base at Long Tieng; plane appears to have released its bombs short of its
intended target; map; another US helicopter downed over Laos, 3 crewmen wounded;
S vietnam repts situation in over-all Laotian operation is unchanged; scattered
actions described; US command repts 1 US helicopter shot down over Laos and 3
crewmen wounded, bringing to 8 total of US craft downed in Laos alone since S
Vietnamese operation began; enemy gunners reptdly fire 25 rockets at Dongha,
near nerve center of S Vietnamese sweep into Laos; S Vietnamese spokesman repts
situation in over-all Laotian operation little changed over last few days; repts
deepest point of advance 12 mi E of Tchepone; repts 16 enemy killed, 6 captured
in scattered actions; US command repts that a total of 4,500 helicopter flights
carried S Vietnamese troops into Laos, provided air cover for them and
resupplied them since the border crossing; details on other actions; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 18 words

US command announces US fighter-bomber, operating over Laos, fires Shrike
missile at AA site near Donghoi

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 166 words

Mil officials say S Vietnamese sweep into Laos against Ho Chi Minh Trail is
already successful in cutting off flow of enemy supplies and troops into
northernmost provs of S Vietnam; say advance has denied to enemy all but 2 of
most important southbound secs of trail; Hoang Xuan Lam comments on operation;
mil sources in Saigon say S Vietnamese are about 12 mi E of Tchepone; intensive
bombing operations in Laos by B-52s and other planes continue; US mil command
announces US fighter-bomber fires shrike missile at AA site in N Vietnam;
announces loss of 3 US helicopters, 1 of them in Laos; says 12 Amers were killed
in crashes; S Vietnamese troops find abandoned enemy training center in Laos;
have destroyed about 30 enemy tanks in operation; other details on operation; US
command repts Amer forces kill 8 enemy near Khesanh; S Vietnamese comdrs at
Khesanh say they are concerned about ability to keep their forces supplied in
Laotian operation; wk of bad weather is forecast; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 93 words

Mil officers, Saigon, say S Vietnamese incursion into Laos has already cut flow
of N Vietnam supplies and troops into northern S Vietnam; claim enemy has now
been deprived of all but 2 of the most important secs of Ho Chi Minh Trail; map;
rept discovery of abandoned enemy training center containing 400 small bldgs;
describe other caches; heavy bombing of trail continues; US command repts loss
of fighting-bomber operating over Laos; bad weather complicates delivery of
supplies from Khesanh to S Vietnamese troops in Laos, raises concern; troops
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 8 words

Army recruitment drive is under way in N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

Lt W Calley's trial on charges of murdering Vietnamese civilians to resume;
defense to place before jury testimony of civilian psychiatrists; Dr A LaVerne's
testimony recalled; Col R Kennedy has sent to attys in case findings of Army
sanity bd; Capt A Daniel has filed motion to bar defense psychiatrists from
testifying

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

US command announces number of US troops in S Vietnam dropped by 2,100 last wk
to 332,900, and that 1,555 more are being prepared for withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 230 words

Thai Govt alters its diplomacy after US announces plan to diminish its role in
Asia; de-emphasizes its mil cooperation with US and abandons its hard line on
Communists; maintains an official silence on US-sponsored S Vietnam incursion
into Laos, but officials, privately, back attack on Ho Chi Minh Trail; 1
official queries wisdom of Brit declaration of support for it; suggests it
prejudices Brit credibility with Communists in her capacity as Geneva conf
co-chmn; does not deny Thai participation in gound and air warfare in Laos;
observers link its participation to concern over its own border areas; Govt
encourages overtures from USSR and its allies and says it welcomes open talks
with Communist China on any subject; some officials angered by charges made by
some US Sens and others that Thais are opportunists who change sides when it is
to their advantage; claim it is US that has changed its policies; officials say
they welcome current negotiations in Thailand between delegates of N Vietnamese
and Thai Red Cross societies on possible repatriation of N Vietnamese refugees
in Thailand; continue to oppose seating Chinese Communists in UN but consider
stand no longer matter of principle; see problem solved when solution is found
to issue of who will hold Chinese seat on Security Council; Foreign Min studies
possibility of ending ban on trade with Communist China

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

Air America ad Continental Airline planes fly reinforcements and supplies to
Long Tieng after its penetration by N Vietnamese commandos; Deputy Min Sisouk na
Champassak says Laos is determined to hold base, news conf; details attack; says
probe is underway to determine whether casualties and damage were caused by
enemy fire or by bombs which US jet dropped in error; puts enemy deaths at 21

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 17 words

Biog sketch of Brig Gen J G Hill Jr, who is in charge of US support for S
Vietnamese drive in Laos; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 125 words

Episode in which some Amer casualties near Khesanh were not immediately reptd
said to call into question again accuracy of official Amer casualty repts; press
is forced to rely on official tallies for lack of any ind means of checking on
casualties but learns of incidents from time to time which are not mentioned in
communiques; US command spokesman announced that 12 Amer helicopters were lost
in Laotian operation only after newsmen began repting unofficial tallies from
field accounts; did not mention that 37 other helicopters were shot down and
later recovered; US command policy is not to list helicopters that are downed
and recovered; S Vietnamese casualty repts in recent days said to have been so
1-sided as to invite skepticism; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 4

LENGTH: 15 words

Lr deplores US expansion of Vietnam war into Laos and Cambodia; urges war's end;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 101 words

C L Sulzberger says argument about news embargo at start of Laotian operations
has become 'as ridiculous as it is bitter and distorted'; says what has been
forgotten is fact that Amer and other reporters in Indochina have been permitted
to operate with freedom that would have seemed 'paradisaical' to World War II
correspondents; discusses US censorship policy; holds temporary restraints must
be placed on observers when premature disclosures of pending events could cause
casualties; holds US mil establishment should long ago have established
reasonable, effective mil censorship in Indochina theater

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 40 words

Article on Brig Gen Pham Van Phu, comdr of S Vietnamese 1st Inf Div, which is
among forces pushing into southern Laos; his personal wish to destroy N
Vietnamese forces compared to similar wish of US soldier Sp/4 C Heffley; Pham
Van Phu illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

Lt William Calley's trial resumes; Col R Kennedy reveals Army sanity bd finds
Calley 'normal in every respect'; Calley's attys abandon theory that he was
under influence of marijuana fumes from marijuana smoked in his presence by
others on day of alleged massacre of Vietnamese civilians; jury is absent while
Kennedy hears arguments on admissibility of testimony by defense psychiatrists;
Latimer says he will produce psychiatrists who will testify that Calley lacks
mental capacity to form specific intent to kill; cites Dr LaVerne's testimony;
Sack is released in bail after refusing to bring to ct tape-recorded ints with
Calley; his arraignment set; other details on session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Tran Quoc Buu, S Vietnamese Confederation of Labor pres, says he fears US and
allies put too much emphasis on winning militarily while leaving Vietcong free
to build up their pol apparatus, int and s, Fla; urges US to begin countering
Vietcong on pol front

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 96 words

Pres Nixon stresses need for US to remain militarily strong to support US
policies in maintaining peace, s, Amer Legion conv; says end of US involvement
in Vietnam can be seen but notes US will continue for many yrs its role of
keeping world stability; holds US must maintain adequate armed force until there
is arms control accord with USSR; thanks members of Amer Legion for their
support of his decision to enter Cambodia in '70; cites gains from incursion;
says US must remain strong in peacetime as it has been in wartime in order to
maintain peace; hon members of Cong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

S Vietnamese troops continue their slow advance in Laos; enemy soldiers step up
pressure against US positions near Khesanh; 6 Amers killed in 2 assaults; other
action near Khesanh reptd; enemy and Amer arty exch fire across Laotian border;
S Vietnamese mil spokesman repts 8 enemy killed and very light S Vietnamese
casualties in 2 engagements in Laos; fog delays flights to Khesanh and Laos; US
jets attack N Vietnamese missile sites for 3d successive day in 13th and 14th
'protective reaction' strikes this yr; US command repts 2 USN planes fire 2
Shrike missiles at AA installations near Vinh; other details; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 97 words

Repr P N McCloskey Jr says Pres Nixon should be threatened with impeachment as
means of changing Adm policy, TV int; suggests threat of liberal Repub challenge
to Nixon in '72 NH primary might also cause Nixon to rethink his position;
argues Nixon's utilization of air power in Laos exceeds Nixon's 'const powers';
scores US policy; says he has no intention of introducing impeachment
resolution; seeks support for resolution to cut off funds for war by Dec 31,
'71; ridicules Nixon contention that Amer incursions in Cambodia and Laos are
needed to protect Amer troops in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 17 words

Min Tran Van Lam says S Vietnam will suggest at next Paris talks session that
talks be moved to SE Asia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 62 words

US Air Force announces it will ct-martial 2 officers and 12 noncommissioned
officers, charged in Mar '70 with mishandling mess hall funds in Thailand;
charges include bribery and 'accepting gratuities' from cos doing business with
their messes; Sen E Gurney accuses mil services of evading questions concerning
service clubs asked by investigators sent to Vietnam last Nov

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 191 words

Defense Sec Laird advises Pres Nixon and Cabinet members to expect 'some tough
days ahead' in allied effort to cut Ho Chi Minh trail; says S Vietnamese troops
may meet greater enemy resistance than they encountered thus far; Laird and Sec
Rogers give detailed rept of progress of Laotian operation and progress of
Vietnam war; White House press sec later summarizes their remarks at briefing;
says operation has been 'going very well' in its early stages; allied
intelligence specialists say N Vietnamese forces have maneuvered into positions
from which they can harass S Vietnamese units; Laird's concern about intensified
fighting is based on recent intelligence repts; independent assessments of
operation have been impossible because Amer reporters have been barred from US
helicopters; some newsmen manage to get 1st hand information from S Vietnamese
aircraft crewmen; repting said to be equally difficult in Washington, where Adm
spokesmen have confined themselves to generalities; Adm officials, in private,
say they expect some kind of N Vietnamese counterattack against S Vietnamese
inside Laos; White House official discusses operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

Young S Vietnamese men throw 2 fire bombs outside Amer Embassy in Saigon;
incident causes little damage; mil command spokesman acknowledges there have
been 5 attacks on Amer mil vehicles in Saigon in 3 days; says assailants are
believed to be youths protesting killing and wounding of S Vietnamese civilians

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 13 words

S Vietnamese arty unit shelling suspected enemy position along trail illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 54 words

Sen E Kennedy says Vietnamization is actually 'policy of violence' that has
resulted in invasion of Cambodia and Laos, s, Business Execs Move for Vietnam
Peace meeting; expresses 'disappointment and dismay' that Amer people have not
protested Laotian operation more strongly; scores operation; Gen W W Ford scores
US policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 33 words

Article on situation at S Vietnam border crossing into Laos on Route 9; no
supplies move on road because S Vietnamese troops are being supplied by air;
comments of S Vietnamese US soldiers noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 184 words

Lt Wm Calley trial; Atty Latimer says Calley did not feel he was killing
'humans' when he ordered and participated in execution of 2 groups of Vietnamese
civilians; says Calley considered victims a sort of enemy 'with whom one could
not speak or reason'; gives ct preview of Calley's testimony; preview is
contained in hypothetical question put to defense psychiatrist, Dr D G Crane;
Latimer says Calley prevented 1 of his men from sexually molesting a Vietnamese
woman; says Calley will testify Medina criticized him for not moving his platoon
faster through village; says Calley ordered Meadlo to shoot and took part
himself in shooting some detained Vietnamese on 2 occasions; before evidence of
defense pyschiatrists can be placed before jury, Latimer has to promise Kennedy
that any hypothetical questions answered by experts will be based on Calley's
factual backgroud; Latimer discusses Calley's career and his mental state before
alleged massacre; Crane and Dr W Hamman say Calley tends to place literal
interpretation on things, including orders; Crane implies Mylai killings were
spontaneous

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 335 words

Pres Nixon holds impromptu press conf in his White House office without TV
cameras; conf is 1 of few such sessions Nixon has consented to hold in his
office without TV cameras, and it was called on very short notice in order,
Nixon later explains, to keep number of newsmen in office at manageable level;
about 40 newsmen crowd around his desk; Nixon says he will experiment with
variety of settings in effort to provide more frequent exchange of views with
newsmen, including smaller confs with cameras, TV ints with single reporter and
conventional East Room confs; Nixon says he will put no limit on use of Amer air
power in Indochina except that use of tactical nuclear weapons is banned; nor
will he rule out a S Vietnamese thrust into N Vietnam; is modestly optimistic
about Laotian operation so far, but says he expects increasingly stiff
resistance because enemy forces 'have to fight here or give up the struggle to
conquer S Vietnam'; warns time is running out for significant negotiations with
US; holds out little hope for diplomatic breakthrough in Paris; rules out use of
US mil personnel in operations in Laos, Cambodia or N Vietnam; says air power
will be used against mil activities that threaten US troops; says US troop
withdrawals will continue on schedule this yr and may well be accelerated in '72
if Laotian operation succeeds; says some US troops will remain until N Vietnam
releases POWs; leaves himself wide range of options in answer to questions on S
Vietnamese invasion of N Vietnam and on wide US bombing of N Vietnam; seeks to
offer reassurances that Laotian operation will not invite Chinese Communist
retaliation; gives brief evaluation of Laotian operation; says Gen Abrams has
reptd that S Vietnamese have cut 3 major 'trails' leading from Tchepone into
Cambodia and S Vietnam; notes troops encountered heavy resistance from enemy on
rd leading to Tchepone; says operation will last as long is required to complete
its mission; other details on Nixon statements and news conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 279 words

High mil sources rept 2 additional N Vietnamese regiments have moved into new
positions in southern Laos in what appears to be serious threat to advancing S
Vietnamese troops; regiments are believed to total about 4,000 men; movement of
regiments coincides with increased indications that N Vietnamese are also moving
AA weapons closer to S Vietnamese troops in effort to counter US air support;
mil sources rept N Vietnamese have begun to move some supplies out of staging
area that runs through and S of Tchepone; say enemy appears to be still
uncertain of ultimate range and objectives of S Vietnamese operation; S
Vietnamese troops are reptd to have penetrated deeper than previously estimated
14 to 15 mi inside Laos; N Vietnamese reptdly are still able to move men and
supplies south through Laotian panhandle; informed sources hold S Vietnam troops
must take Muong Phine, town 20 mi SW of Tchepone, to effectively curb enemy
traffic; allied spokesmen say there are signs of increase in enemy pressure on
both sides of border; N Vietnamese troops wound 8 Amers near isolated US arty
base 6 mi S of buffer zone; details on action near base; US command announces 3
ground clashes W of Camlo, about 15 mi NE of Khesanh; repts 3 Amers killed, 5
wounded, 21 enemy killed; repts 13 Amers wounded in enemy shelling NE of
Khesanh; S Vietnamese command repts 3 clashes with enemy troops in Laos near Lao
Boa; 26 S Vietnamese wounded, 8 enemy killed in sharpest clash; S Vietnamese
troops kill 35 enemy in 2 other engagements; bad weather continues in Khesanh
area; weather does not hamper operations in Laos; Abrams, Lt Gen J W Sutherland
and Lt Gen Hoang Xuan Lam illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 182 words

Former Sgt Maj of the Army Wooldridge and 7 others indicted by Fed grand jury
for plotting to defraud service clubs in Vietnam; others indicted are M/Sgt W
Higdon, Sfcs W C Baghy and S Lazar and Sfc N Hatcher (ret), T Bass and C and I
Terhune; Marmed Inc, co which sold goods to clubs and whose stockholders
included Wooldridge, Higdon, Hatcher, Bass and Lazar, also indicted; defendants
are accused of conspiring to defraud clubs from '65-69 by submitting fraudulent
claims and bribing club employes to buy goods at inflated prices; Atty Gen
Mitchell announces indictments; details on charges; Sen subcom opens hearings
into operations of mil post exchs; chmn Ribicoff charges 'certain large Amer
businesses' participated in corrupt practices involving mil personnel; subcom
asst counsel and investigator L J Duffy testifies that W J Crum, US businessman,
provided $2,000-a-mo villa in Saigon for exch officials and pressed them to
stock brands of whiskey and beer that paid him fees; charges Crum also
controlled sale of almost all slot machines, pinball machines and jukeboxes in
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 21 words

Stanford Univ pres R W Lyman lr on deterioration of pol, dem values and rational
discourse on campuses as result of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 76, Column 5

LENGTH: 52 words

David B Malament, defendant in draft evasion case in Fed Ct, NYC, bases defense
partly on insistence Selective Service Act gives Pres war-making powers properly
exercised only by Cong; jury splits 11-1 for conviction; challenges const of
Vietnam war and refuses to be inducted into Army; judge orders 2d trial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 5

LENGTH: 150 words

US Sen subcom holds hearings on role of businessman William J Crum, who is
accused of profiteering from PX business in Korea and Vietnam and corrupting
civilian and mil officials in process, Washington; A J Manfredi, former Army
agent, testifies that Army's '59 probe of bribery, kickbacks and smuggling in PX
system in Korea was 1st obstructed and then killed by sr Army officers stationed
there; says he suspected that officers that thwarted his inquiries were
'pressured from outside'; says he had finally been permitted to int Crum in the
presence of sr officers and on condition that he submit all questions in writing
in advance; repts Crum gave him 'pat answers' which caused him to write a
'whitewash ' rept; M Peterson, vp of J B Beam Distilling Co, admits he condoned
Crum's renting of villa in Saigon to entertain exch officials whom he was
attempting to persuade to handle more Beam whisky

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

Lt William Calley trial; Drs Crane and LaVerne testify Calley lacks mental
ability to premeditate murder of S Vietnamese civilians; say Calley was under
great mental stress that, combined with his ltd intellectual background and
psychological makeup, made it impossible for him to grasp enormity of killings;
are sharply cross-examined by Daniel; details on their testimony and session;
Crane illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

US command repts 51 Amers killed in combat in Indochina in past wk, over twice
that of previous wk; increase linked to losses in Laos; repts sharp rise in S
Vietnamese casualties

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

Max Frankel news analysis of Pres Nixon's news conf sees most of his remarks
designed to convey great confidence, to prepare himself against serious setback
in '72 and to make clear that there is no real time limit on operations in Laos
and Cambodia; says it is difficult to separate statements made for their
immediate effect in Hanoi and those that offer significant clues to Nixon's
long-term strategy; says Nixon suggests that he is certain he will not be
defeated by war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 120 words

S Vietnamese command repts forward units of its forces now operate 22 mi from S
Vietnam border; spokesman says slowness of advance is result more of care
employed in searching for enemy supply dumps than of enemy ground resistance;
another spokesman says 95 enemy have been killed in last 24 hrs, puts S
Vietnamese toll at 8; US repts 4 more helicopters downed in Laos, 3 Amers
killed, 7 missing and 6 recovered wounded; S Vietnamese command says there are
now 15,000 to 16,000 S Vietnamese troops in Laos; details on action in Laos, S
Vietnam and Cambodia; troops reptdly repulse 2 N Vietnamese attacks on their
positions near Suong; 116 enemy soldiers reptd killed; map; illus of trucks
destroyed on Ho Chi Minh Trail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 163 words

US Govt specialists on China voice doubt Peking will commit troops to Indochina
war; view is based on conviction that, with Amer troop withdrawals continuing,
Peking no longer regards US presence in Indochina a threat to its security; Sen
McGovern, '72 Pres aspirant, says he is increasingly alarmed by US actions in
war; says US, by spreading war into Cambodia and Laos, 'flirts' with World War
III and 'courts' Chinese intervention; Sen Fulbright echoes his concern; accuses
Pres Nixon of going out for mil victory; State Dept and White House officials
say they tend to doubt that S Vietnamese strike into N Vietnam would prompt
China to send in troops; their remarks prompted by Nixon's news conf statements
on use of Amer airpower in Indochina and on likely Chinese intervention; details
on thinking of specialists and officials; former State Dept aide A S Whiting
says he does not regard threats inherent in N Vietnamese remarks in Paris as
supported by Peking's rhetoric

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 174 words

Xuan Thuy charges US threatens to extend war to N Vietnamese territory and by so
doing menaces Communist China as well, 103d Paris talks session; says US
threatens N Vietnam and Communist China by concentrating large land forces in
northern part of S Vietnam, reinforcing naval forces in Tonkin Gulf and
extending operations in Laos; makes no direct threat of reprisal, but his
spokesman says China 'will not remain with its arms folded' before such a
menace; Xuan Thuy charges seen as reaction to Nixon statements on use of air
power; he expresses anger at Nixon's refusal to rule out ground thrust into N
Vietnam and at timing of Nixon's warnings on talks; Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh makes
similar statements; Bruce blames N Vietnam for continued fighting, says, after
session, all it produced was 'false and useless propaganda'; Pham Dang Lam,
during session, makes rept on Laotian operation; says S Vietnamese forces have
eliminated 600 N Vietnamese soldiers and have captured large quantities of
supplies; details on his rept; Xuan Thuy illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 20, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 8

LENGTH: 103 words

13 members of HR from NYS charge 5 members of 26th US Army band, stationed at Ft
Wadsworth, SI, are scheduled to be transferred to Korea and S Vietnam because of
their antiwar activities; write lr to Laird asking him to examine matter and
reverse transfer order; aide to Repr Ryan says 5 servicemen signed antiwar
petition in Nov, '69, which appeared in ad in NY Times; lr is signed by Reprs
Ryan, Abzug, Badillo, Bingham, Carey, Chisholm, Down, Koch, Podell, Rangel,
Rosenthal, Scheuer and Halpern; Army spokesman is not available for comment; 5
soldiers are Sp/4 C Annand, T Bankston, P Dix, R Brooks and L Lovallo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 20, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

VFW natl comdr H R Rainwater says Pres Nixon takes under advisement VFW request
that no more US troops be withdrawn until N Vietnam agrees to POW exch; makes
statement after conf with Nixon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 20, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

War protests set for 12 coll campuses; represent attempt to break 'silence' over
Indochina war issue; will consist of teach-ins; are sponsored by group of
students and faculty members at Harvard and Yale; prominent pol and academic
figures are expected to address protests; Prof J C Thompson Jr comments;
teach-in concept emerged 2 wks ago at meeting of several Harvard profs who were
alarmed at US actions near Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 20, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 121 words

Lt William Calley's trial on charges of murdering Vietnamese civilians; Dr
LaVerne, a NY psychiatrist, is dismissed as defense witness after Kennedy
expresses doubt as to truth of his sworn testimony; Kennedy accepts defense
motion to excuse LaVerne and strikes from record all of his testimony; LaVerne
tells ct he labors under stress and fatigue; dismissal of LaVerne resulted from
his consultation of Army bd rept after asking permission and giving impression
he was going to consult his own notes; Latimer says Calley concurs with
LaVerne's dismissal; Hamman relates account of shooting of 40 civilians given to
him by Calley last mo; makes no mention of any shooting by Calley; mentions
actions by Meadlo; LaVerne illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 20, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 52 words

Strong N Vietnamese force keeeps S Vietnam arty base, manned by S Vietnam
Rangers, under heavy attack, 6 mi inside Laos and 9 mi N of Route 9; S
Vietnamese casualties believed to be heavy; helicopters trying to reach base run
into heavy fire, 1 med evacuation craft hit; action in S Vietnam and Cambodia
reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 20, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 17 words

Article on activities at Khesanh, S Vietnam; '68 siege recalled; comments of
some US personnel noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 20, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 95 words

Sen M Mansfield says S Vietnam operation in Laos represents 'mil gamble' that
could lead to an extended, broadened war, s, Sen; Sen Scott replies; says
operation, if successful, could cripple enemy's ability to undertake an
offensive in S Vietnam and strengthen Vietnamization program; ex-Sec Rusk holds
disruption of enemy support lines could stabilize situation in Laos and S
Vietnam, s, Athens, Ga; W A Harriman sees widened conflict, s, Washington; says
Communist China will intervene if N Vietnam is invaded; Mansfield said to be
replying to Pres Nixon news conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 20, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 121 words

S Vietnamese sweep in Laos remains at standstill for 2d successive day;
spokesman says slowdown is result of AA fire and bad flying weather; forward S
Vietnamese units reptd to be operating 22 mi inside Laos; Amer mil spokesman
concedes aircraft are encountering considerable ground fire; S Vietnamese mil
spokesman says some branches of trail have been cut but others remain open; says
it is possible enemy has shifted supply movements westward to evade attackers;
details made pub so far indicate supply caches that have been discovered are
much smaller that those discovered in Cambodian sweep last spring; S Vietnamese
command repts 2 rocket attacks on Kontum and Hue, S Vietnam; details on
operations in Laos; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Peggy Steinle article holds S Vietnam's artists have been fighting difficult
battle for survival during 2 generations of war; says they must overcome
spiritual and material hardships, seeking beauty in environment of destruction
and degradation; discusses works of several leading artists in Saigon; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

Comment on 'mist' hanging over Laotian campaign as a result of ban on
journalists accompanying troops or flying on Amer-piloted helicopters; what is
unkown about campaign said to seem immense; claims made in repts from allied mil
spokesmen discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 19 words

Pres Nixon's statements on Laotian operation discussed; his attempt to unsettle
N Vietnam with his threats stressed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Ed holds Pres Nixon threat to use US air power without restraint and his refusal
to rule out S Vietnamese invasion of N Vietnam indicate he seeks mil victory;
says Nixon's Vietnamization policy is exposed as essentially an illusion; says
Nixon feels compelled to expand war because Vietnamization has not worked; says
threat to unleash unltd air war on N Vietnam is 'ominous hint' that S Vietnamese
drive into Laos may be headed for serious trouble; urges Cong to take steps to
restrict use of US armed forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 28 words

Prof L E Williams contrasts US '41 situation in war against Japan and present
situation in war in Vietnam, lr on A Brackman Feb 6(29:2) article defending
Vietnam action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Cartoons on US role in Laos and S Vietnam Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky call for
invasion of N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 78 words

Tom Wicker holds Pres Nixon, in his remarks, has finally confirmed, what
skeptics have long believed, that his is a policy of escalation by Amer airpower
and S Vietnamese manpower with aim of mil victory; scores it as a policy of
indiscriminate aerial warfare and blind firepower that means wholesale death and
destruction; says for the people of Indochina it is a 'wanton lie' that his Adm
is winding down the war; holds Nixon has 'effectively jettisoned' Paris talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 4

LENGTH: 80 words

James Reston scores Pres Nixon's latest explanation of his Indochina policy as
not only illogical but almost dishonorable; sees it as a logical personal and
pol strategy but a mil and geographical contradiction; says he must make a
choice between his dual aims of getting out of Indochina and maintaining a
non-Communist regime in S Vietnam; notes Nixon emphasizes withdrawal of Amer
troops and fights in Laos to cripple enemy; says Washington is deeply divided
about US policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 59, Column 0

LENGTH: 17 words

R Hilsman lr on comments on Pres Kennedy and Johnson in Roche Jan 24 article on
Vietnam; Roche replies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 7; Page 5, Column 0

LENGTH: 24 words

Prof D K Wyatt revs several books on Indochina war (part 2) revs T Hoopes book;
revs S M Hersh and R Hammer books on alleged Mylai massacre; dwg

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CRITICAL REVIEWS & APPRAISALS

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAMS & DRAWINGS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 0

LENGTH: 18 words

Paul F Langer and J J Zasloff book North Vietnam and the Pathet Lao, Partners in
the Struggle for Laos, revd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (AFP)

LENGTH: 37 words

S Vietnamese pres Tran Thien Khiem cancels press decree he signed Jan 21, after
outcry by Saigon press; under decree, persons or orgns meeting specific legal
conditions could publish maximum of 1 daily and 1 wkly rev apiece

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 31 words

NM Sen gets bill barring use of NM servicemen in undeclared wars, such as
conflict in Indochina; bill is similar to that approved by Mass Legis aimed at
testing legality of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

Despite Cambodia's victory last mo in reopening Hwy 4, few oil convoys have been
able to use rd because of enemy activity; alternate supply system of bringing
stocks from S Vietnam by barges prevents shortages in city; map; only 2 oil
convoys totaling 30 trucks have reached capital while others have been blown up
and burned; Govt has not been able to refill its gasoline reserves and long
lines of waiting cars form at gas stations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Agency in US mission in Saigon has contracted US construction consortium,
RMK-BRJ, to build prison compound consisting of 288 isolation cells on island of
Con Son; new cells apparently are being built to replace 'tiger cages',
disciplinary cells discovered there last summer by US Congressmen; US aide F E
Walton comments; State Dept says new cells are designed 'according to modern
penal standards'; says there are no prisoners at old tiger cage prison

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 47 words

Army announces it drops several charges of murder and assault against Capt E M
Kotouc in alleged Mylai massacre; Kotouc will be ct-martialed for allegedly
maiming and assaulting suspected Vietcong member; Lt Gen A O Connor says charges
are dropped because of insufficient evidence

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 141 words

Cambodia's sole archeologist, C T Seng, almost singlehandedly attempts to save
ancient temples and statues from ravages of Indochina war by either bringing
them to Pnompenh museum basement or burying them if they are too large to move;
500 pieces at Angkor Wat have already been buried with cooperation of North
Vietnamese troops who occupy area; UNESCO, only outside source that has provided
aid, has sent 5 experts to advise on cleaning, packing and storing artifacts;
Seng says he has been relatively successful in getting cooperation of
belligerents; notes that US assured its cooperation in July '70 after appeal
from group of Paris professors to Pres Nixon asking him to spare monuments from
US bombers; says 1 important monument has been damaged thus far but cites
problem of increased smuggling of artifacts to West since start of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 65 words

Communist Chinese publications score US Indochina policy and Pres Nixon's
comments on situation; deride his statement that incursion into Laos poses no
threat to China; reiterates its earlier position; new Chinese declaration found
no stronger in tone than earlier ones; is not seen as foreshadowing Chinese mil
intervention; says Nixon thinks of stepping up bombing raids against N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 19 words

Vietcong gunners shell Danang air base, destroying transport plane used to carry
supplies for Laotian operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 131 words

Yale Univ pres Brewster says basic flaw in US war policy is moral, s, Alumni Day
meeting, New Haven; holds US goal should be peace and the return of POWs rather
than the 'Vietnamization of continuing Amer-sponsored warfare'; says US policy
seems to be shaped as though US had no concern for 'sanctity of human life';
scores indiscriminate bombing of neutrals; Yale Daily News, univ student
newspaper, in ed on previous day, urged Brewster to utilize Alumni Day as forum
to denounce war policy and to cancel a previous speaking engagement to
participate in a teach-in at Yale that will protest incursion into Laos; ex-Atty
Gen Clark, W A Harriman and other natl figures to participate in teach-in; like
meeting to be held at Harvard Univ; Brewster voices regrets that he cannot be
present

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

Common Cause (orgn) will begin next wk major campaign against Pres Nixon
Indochina policy; has hired M Halperin, former White House aide, as adviser to
effort; spokesman says orgn, already on record as favoring Amer withdrawal by
set date, will announce further position and details of its campaign next wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 195 words

Intense ground fighting reptd at S Vietnamese arty base near Phu Loc village
where S Vietnamese advance has been stalled for 3 days; S Vietnamese reptdly
suffer heavy casualties; dense AA fire hinders helicopter supply and rescue
missions; 3 more Amers reptd downed; S Vietnamese mil spokesman repts Ranger co
had been routed from night defensive position in 4-hr battle near village of
Laobao; says, for 1st time, that enemy ground action is partly responsible for
halt to S Vietnamese advance; Amer spokesman puts total helicopter losses in
Laos at 20; says believe explosion that destroyed 600 tons of ammunition in
Quangtri storage dump was caused by saboteur and not by accidental fire; says 23
men were killed in downings, 22 wounded and 9 listed as missing; unconfirmed
repts say 2 Amer helicopter pilots were killed at arty base in Laos while trying
to evacuate crew of downed helicopter; some enemy forces are believed to be
coming south toward Rangers' positions, another heading north to intercept S
Vietnamese inf units; illus of giant helicopter moving in to pick up gunship
downed by enemy along Ho Chi Minh Trail and of wounded S Vietnamese soldier; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

Vietcong says any US mil actions against N Vietnam will be matched by
retaliatory attacks in S Vietnam; scores Pres Nixon for his statements on use of
air power

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 130 words

Saigon Govt disapproval of published articles calling for end to war results in
sentencing of Revs Nguyen Tin and Truong Ba Can, both Roman Cath priests, to
9-mo prison sentences; Nguyen Tin is publisher of magazine Face to Face, Truong
Ba Can is contributor; some S Vietnamese in publishing and politics hold
sentences are severe; hold pressure on press increases in light of forthcoming
pres election; sentences have caused widespread comment, mostly critical, in
Saigon's Cath community; Nguyen Tin to appeal ct ruling, Truong Ba Can will not
appeal; both defend selves as historians; newspaper Tin Lang repts that on day
priests were sentenced 40 issues of paper and pubs recently seized by Govt were
also in ct; Face to Face has 8 of 20 issues confiscated and closed for 6 mos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 3

LENGTH: 177 words

Lt L Font files charges of war crimes against Maj Gen Koster, div comdr of
troops who committed Mylai killings, and against Lt Gen Seaman, First Army comdg
gen, who dismissed charges against Koster; has never been to Vietnam, but any
member of Army has right to make ct-martial charges; Font submits in support of
charges 86 statements from enlisted men, NCOs and one officer who made
statements on alleged atrocities at pub meeting of antiwar group in Washington,
DC, in Dec '70; Font's action seen latest move in his running battle with Army
over its refusal to discharge him as conscientious objector; Font has also filed
charges of assault against First Army C/S Maj Gen Ciccololla for allegedly
seizing him as he left First Army hq from which he was ordered after giving copy
of war crimes charges to Koster, Seaman and Ciccololla; knowledgeable mil
observers hold neither Koster nor Seaman will be ct-martialed; details on case;
army has filed 5 charges of disobedience against Font for failing to obey orders
when attempting to file war crimes charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5; (AFP)

LENGTH: 16 words

Hwy 1 between Pnompenh and Saigon cut after enemy troops damage bridge about 35
mi SE of Pnompenh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 165 words

Sen G McGovern says N Vietnamese troops in S Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos more
nearly represent nationalistic aspirations of Indochinese people than do US
forces in SE Asia, TV int; calls for total withdrawal of US troops; says he has
'no idea' what would happen in wake of total withdrawal, but says he is willing
to accept possibility that N Vietnam might take over S Vietnam; attributes
relative lack of alarm by Amers over Laotian campaign to Nixon's 'deceptive
tactics'; says he believes Nixon hopes for mil decision by which to end war;
says majority of Indochinese want to settle their own affairs without Amer
intervention; says he believes N Vietnamese have been more popular in Indochina
than Amers because N Vietnamese are 'on the side of expelling foreigners'; says
he regards war as most 'barbaric and inhumane act' that US has committed; holds
his candidacy for 1972 Dem Pres nomination has 'seriously challenged' Muskie's
'almost undisputed lead' of 2 mos ago; McGovern illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 39 words

S Vietnamese soldiers find body of French freelance journalist Francis Bailly
near prov capital of Kompong Cham; no details on cause of death or time given;
Bailly is 9th journalist known to have been killed in Cambodia since Mar '70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 118 words

Bn of S Vietnamese Rangers is driven from Laotian mountaintop 6 mi NW of Phu Loc
command post after N Vietnamese soldiers overrun their position; loss follows
1st major enemy attack reptd against S Vietnamese thrust; US mil advisers say AA
fire prevented helicopters from bringing supplies and reinforcements to Rangers;
some helicopters manage to reach site after air strikes are called in; some of
strikes are directed from ground by Sp/4 D J Fujii, crew chief of downed med
evacuation helicopter; helicopters take 200 men from overrun group to more
secure position about 1 mi to west; S Vietnamese mil spokesman says 23 Rangers
and 639 enemy killed in attack; 40 Rangers wounded; details on fighting; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 51 words

Well-kept rds of Ho Chi Minh Trail described, indicate magnitude of engineering
feat accomplished by N Vietnamese; US pilots say traffic along trail continues
heavy despite continued bombing; article, noting S Vietnamese troops have
established command post on trial, discusses ground and air war on trail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 5

LENGTH: 10 words

Lr urges support for Pres Nixon's effort to end Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 4

LENGTH: 115 words

Brit ex-Min Healey holds concensus in favor of neutralizing all SE Asia is now
developing, includes men as diverse as Malaysian Prime Min Razak and W H Bundy;
suggests GB, together with France, take initiative in organizing conf whose
objective would be a pol settlement in Indochina within context of
neutralization of SE Asia as a whole; holds Laotian operation points up dangers
world may face if Amer withdrawal from Vietnam proceeds in a diplomatic vacuum
and mil balance changes fundamentally in Indochina without any accord among any
of involved parties on pol implications of change; says speed and scale of US
withdrawal has been impressive; says Vietnamization has been success

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 145 words

J Bybee, who worked for 2 of William J Crum's sales promotion cos in Vietnam in
'67, testifies he was not surprised when Crum told him that Col Cole, then a
Brig Gen and deputy C/S for personnel and adm at Longbinh, 'cost him over $1,000
a mo'; says Cole favored Crum with protected storage space, discouraged
interference with his smuggling operations and promoted raids against Crum's
competitors; says Cole also arranged for NCO club to buy Army gift shop
concession that proved unprofitable; says Crum collected marked-up retail price
of inventory rather than wholesale value; Bybee also testifies that Crum was
allowed to store equipment on Army base at Quinhon as result of his friendship
with now retired Brig Gen Meyer, who was comdr of US Support Command at Quinhon;
Meyer denies he got gifts from Crum of provided him with favors; says he and
Crum were friends

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

W A Harriman and former Atty Gen R Clark join members of Cong, clergymen and
others at Yale antiwar teach-in; many of speakers call for immediate withdrawal
of troops; urges Pres Nixon to set firm deadline for ending US involvement in
area; Harriman says best way to influence US policy is to elect new pres;
teach-in is sponsored by Vietnam Witness Com; speakers deplore increase in air
operations; Rev W S Coffin, former Asst Sec P Warnke, Reprs P McCloskey and B
Abzug, Rev J D Duffey and C R Vance s; Vietnam Veterans Against the War member
announces veterans plan antiwar demonstration in Washington April 19

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 23 words

N Vietnamese delegation at Paris peace talks says troops who attacked S
Vietnamese Rangers were Pathet Lao guerrillas and not N Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 11 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, Gen Abrams and Amb Bunker coonf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

Ammunition barge being towed up Mekong River to Pnompenh, Cambodia, blown up,
another badly damaged; 3 Amer civilians aboard towing boat wounded by enemy
shells

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

US command says number of US fighting men in Vietnam has declined to lowest
point since fall of '66; announces impending departure of Marine Fighter Attack
Squadron 115; US troops now total 330,600

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 196 words

Amer officials expect further heavy assaults by N Vietnamese troops against S
Vietnamese forces in Laos; some officials say Washington believes N Vietnamese
units will wait until S Vietnamese forces are stretched farther out along Route
9 befor launching sizable counterattack; officials rept 5 and possible 6 N
Vietnamese regiments, each normally 2,000 men at full strength, are moving
towards S Vietnamese column; White House seeks to cast S Vietnamese offensive in
favorable light despite serious casualties inflicted on S Vietnamese Ranger unit
over weekend; White House press sec says S Vietnamese forces are generally
'performing well'; disputes repts that flow of Communist supplies down trail has
increased since campaign began; Pentagon spokesman acknowledges that weekend
retreat by Rangers is setback; insists operation has not fallen behind schedule;
White House press sec says Nixon feels operation is 'going well'; officials
refuse to say that town of Tchepone is major target of incursion, some privately
concede it will be difficult west cut flow of enemy supplies unless S Vietnamese
forces push west of city opinions of other officials and observers discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 64 words

Wounded Amer helicopter crew chief D Fujii airlifted to safety from besieged S
Vietnamese outpost in Laos where he had stayed on to give up his seat to wounded
S Vietnamese soldier; Fujii had taken virtual command of outpost where he recd
injury; US command says Fujii went into Laos as crew chief of Amer
med-evacuation mission; says he directed air arty strikes against enemy troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 52 words

USSR, continuing its press campaign against Zionism, scores Jewish conf underway
in Brussels by declaring that conf is joint US-Israeli action designed to
deteriorate internatl atmosphere and distract attention of world pub from
Israeli aggression; USSR continues attack on 'US aggressive policy' in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 123 words

S Vietnamese drive in Laos reptd stalled for 5th consecutive day; heavy enemy
firing continues; S Vietnamese lead elements said to be 17 1/2 mi from border;
strong enemy resistance at several points along trail reptd; US command
announces loss of 2 or more helicopters; US helicopter reptdly lifts out from
ranger base helicopter crew chief Fujii; 298 S Vietnamese reptd killed during
battle at hilltop base; nearby based reptd holding out under heavy fire; details
on action; S Vietnamese Govt communique says 12,603 tons of enemy munitions have
been captured in campaign; says 1,960 N Vietnamese troops have been killed; S
Vietnam puts its losses at 168 killed, 661 wounded; these figures do not include
casualties at hilltop base; maps

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 177 words

Repts from battlefield indicate S Vietnamese push into Laos is stalled for 5th
day; Nguyen Van Thieu says incursion has already succeeded in deterring N
Vietnamese plan to seize 5 northernmost provs, s, Vungtau; says N Vietnamese
planned seizure with goal of improving Communist position in peace talks; Saigon
officials now cite attempt to prevent enemy offensive as additional reason for
incursion; Saigon mil command spokesman, at briefing on objectives of incursion,
cites destruction of enemy depots as 1st objective, and adds stopping of enemy
infiltration on trail; declines to discuss results of operation or say if there
will be any further advance; informed sources say that to destroy significant
quantities of enemy supplies, S Vietnamese will have to penetrate much deeper
into Laos; caution is being observed on issue of projected depth of advance;
USAF sources and pilots say more rather than fewer enemy trucks have been moving
along trail since campaign began; Saigon is beginning to acknowledge some of
reverses suffered by its forces in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              260 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 32 words

Lt Gen Do Cao Tri, comdr of mil region around Saigon, is killed in helicopter
crash in Tayninh Prov; correspondent F Sully (Newsweek) also dies in crash; biog
data on both men; Do Cao Tri illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              261 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 9 words

Lt Gen Tri killed in crash, Tayninh Prov, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              262 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 245 words

Sen Dem Policy Com adopts 5-point program for 92d Cong which represents, as
Mansfield says, Dem alternative to Pres Nixon's program; program calls
withdrawal of all US forces from Vietnam by end of '72, better distribution of
resources among Fed, state and local govts, streamlining of Fed Govt, measures
to end inflation and recession and improvement of police training and ct
procedures in field of probation, parole and correctional insts; Sen majority
said to possibly take deliberate pol initiative on withdrawal issue; Mansfield
says purpose of resolution is to 'strengthen hands of the Pres' in his announced
intention of withdrawing US forces; resolution will be presented to Sen Dems
caucus; Sen Dems in private explain they still have considerable doubts that
Nixon contemplates withdrawal of all Amer forces; com seeks to emphasize to
Nixon he will not face pol backlash if he decides on complete withdrawal in
coming yr; Sen Dems privately acknowledge there is pol advantage, because of '72
elections, in coming out now for complete withdrawal by end of '72; Vietnam
'plank' proves to be 1 controversial issue in Dem program; controversy develops
over whether to insert phrase 'time certain' in resolution; Sen sources say
Muskie was influential in helping Mansfield incorporate phrase over reservations
of hawkish elements; Mansfield describes 'time certain' recommendation as 'more
flexible' approach than McGovern-Hatfield amendment; makes other comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              263 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 6

LENGTH: 31 words

LT William L Calley Jr says 'It was essential that troops in Vietnam put out of
their mind the World War II and Korean concept of giving candy and chewing gums
and things to the children'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              264 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

Gen M W Clark (ret), who has just returned from trip to Far East, says
Vietnamization is working well; notes his assessment of Vietnam situation in
Feb, '70 in article he wrote then; lauds Abrams's leadership; says recent
operations in Laos and Cambodia show improvements in S Vietnamese forces; urges
US to show strength and courage and to rebuild its declining mil establishment;
holds time is playing to US advantage for 1st time

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              265 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 3

LENGTH: 18 words

Excerpts from Lt William Calley testimony in his defense on charges of murdering
Vietnamese civilians; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              266 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 199 words

Dem party, over resistance of its hawkish flank, goes on record in favor of
withdrawal of all Amer forces from Indochina by end of '72 and definite time of
release for all POWs; Sen Dems, at heated party caucus, adopt, 31 to 8, policy
statement commiting them to work for total withdrawal committing present Cong;
Vietnam plank was adopted by Sen Dem Policy Com; unexpected opposition develops
when resolution is brought before caucus; Sens Stennis and Jackson lead
opposition; Mansfield says they provoke 'spirited' discussion; Sen Pastore says
time has come to put 'Cong reins' on Pres; Jackson protests resolution is
another attempt to impose Cong deadline for troop withdrawal; Mansfield says
purpose of resolution is 'constructive'; Scott sees pol motive; says com does
not say anything about enemy; privately some Sen Dems say there is potential pol
advantage in resolution should Pres Nixon not have ordered complete withdrawal
by time '72 election approaches; adopt policy statement including improvement in
police training and improvement in ct procedures; adopts policy objectives
calling for econ measures to stop inflation and reverse recession; approves
revenue-sharing program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              267 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 55 words

US command searches in vain for cause of helicopter crash that killed 10
persons, including Saigon Gen Do Cao Tri and US newsman Sully; Nguyen Van Thieu
names Lt Gen Nguyen Van Minh as acting comdr of Mil Region III, which Do Cao Tri
had commanded; some biog material on Sully and Do Cao Tri; illus; Do Cao Tri and
Sully illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              268 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 43 words

US mil spokesmen rept 1 of sharpest attacks against US forces in several mos;
rept 4 cos of enemy troops attack US arty base near Tayninh; 2 Amers killed, 9
wounded; 9 enemy killed; S Vietnamese command repts 58 enemy killed in 2 clashes
150 mi SW of Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              269 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 83 words

Hoang Xuan Lam, S Vietnamese comdr of forces in Laos says his most serious
problem is to supply his units, int, Khesanh; repts enemy troops have cut Route
9 behind some of his forward armored units; says greatest accomplishment to date
has been severing of N Vietnamese fuel pipeline along trail; Lt Col Bui The
Dung, leader of spearhead of drive into Laos, says his force should try to get
out 'if we cannot move,' TV int; says he cannot understand why tanks were chosen
to spearhead drive; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              270 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 26 words

N Vietnamese news agency distributes rept from Vietcong newsman who accompanied
units that recently overran S Vietnamese Ranger post; excerpts from rept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              271 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 42 words

Analysis of S Vietnamese strategy and mil operations; comment on 3 possible
ostacles to S Vietnamese drive in Laos seen by Amer mil advisers: roads, weather
and AA fire; enemy attack on S Vietnamese troops at mountaintop site noted;
operation discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              272 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 75 words

N Vietnamese army newspaper says Route 9 has become 'cemetery of helicopters and
armored vehicles'; says 170 allied aircraft and 210 vehicles have been destroyed
in Laotian operation; says 4,000 allied troops have been put out of action; Nhan
Dan stresses S Vietnamese troops have been able to advance only a few mi since
beginning of operation; ridicules US statements on slowness of advance; sees
'failure' of operation an important setback for US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              273 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

Cambodian command repts its troops have repulsed repeated attacks by N
Vietnamese and Vietcong soldiers on frontier village of Bavet Kandal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              274 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

Sen E Muskie, contending Adm's Vietnamization program provides no answer for
ending war, calls for withdrawal of all Amer troops from Indochina by end of yr,
s, Penna Univ teach-in on war; says Vietnamization can only lead to continuation
of war; says it may be possible to create conditions for negotiated settlement
among Vietnamese people through withdrawal of US forces; regards s as his most
complete statement on war that he has made in recent mos; makes clear he
continues to support McGovern-Hatfield amendment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              275 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 3

LENGTH: 139 words

Hearing; custodians of post exchs in Vietnam, reptdly with aid of Brig Gen E F
Cole, sent lrs to exch hq in US stating they were running out of Carlings beer
when there were 99,000 cases on hand and 125,000 cases arriving each mo; Cole
said to have helped Crum enterprises by providing him with Army warehouses for
his slot machines; Crum quoted as saying Cole 'was costing him at least $1,000 a
mo'; Carlings export dir G P Thompson says he was distressed to learn that
'promotional funds' paid to Crum were used for bribes and kickbacks; records
show Carlings paid Crum $137,500 from '65 to '70; other details on testimony;
Sgt A Crews, who was mentioned in Bybee testimony and was former service club
custodian, refuses to answer questions on const ground that his answers might
tend to incriminate him; Crews and Thompson illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              276 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 159 words

Lt William Calley trial; Calley admits from witness stand that he shot some
Vietnamese civilian prisoners who were herded into ditch in Mylai, but says he
was acting under orders; says he has no regrets; says he told 1 soldier to kill
group of civilians because that was his order; contends civilians 'were all
enemy...all to be destroyed'; says he acted under Medina's orders; denies he
joined in another group slaying along trail; concedes he shot young boy; denies
killing old man; says he butt-stroked man; says he could not have killed as many
as 102 persons; is questioned by Latimer and cross-examined by Daniel; Kennedy
calls mid-morning recess 5 mins earlier than usual to let Calley regain his
composure; Calley said to remain very tense witness; testifies on Meadlo's
actions; testifies Medina told him on 5 separate occasions that orders were to
kill all inhabitants of Mylai; other details on Calley testimony and trial
session; Calley illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              277 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 228 words

Nixon Adm steps up efforts to portray Laotian drive as success; some officials
privately acknowledge S Vietnamese forces will have to move much farther across
Laos to curtail flow of enemy supplies significantly; Defense Sec Laird says
operation proceeds on schedule and its objective is being achieved; forecasts
'tougher, difficult fighting' for S Vietnamese troops in both Laos and Cambodia;
Repub Sens quote Pres adviser Kissinger as saying several key enemy supply
routes have been cut; Kissinger briefs Sens at White House; Sen Scott says 3 of
the 4 main hwys have been cut, that 2 fuel pipelines have been cut and burned;
Repr Ford lauds Laotian operation; calls Cambodian offensive 'fantastically
successful'; Scott takes sharp issue with repts that Laotian operation has
bogged down; declines to say that southward flow of Communist supplies has been
reduced; White House officials acknowledge that just before operation and during
its 1st wk, enemy forces sharply stepped up flow of supplies through southern
Laos; say heavy flow by now has 'almost certainly been reduced'; details on
remarks by Ford; operation discussed; Common Cause, citizen's lobby headed by
ex-Sec Gardner, calls on Cong to legislate fixed timetable for Amer withdrawal
to stop Nixon Adm from 'playing Russian roulette'; Gardner scores US role in
Laotian offensive; scores US policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              278 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 194 words

S Vietnamese mil command says its forces have no intention 'right now' of
penetrating more deeply into Laos; spokesman says S Vietnamese sweep has cut
across trail system to depth of about 16 mi; S Vietnamese troops were first
reptd to have reached 16-mi point in initial wk of advance; US helicopters fly
1,200 missions in support of drive; US command announces loss of 3 craft, 1 by
AA fire, 2 by collision in mid-air and crash; 3 Amers killed in crash; US
command discloses 50 US fighter-bombers flew 'protective reaction' strikes
against missile and AA arty positions in N Vietnam last weekend; announces 2
additional but more limited strikes; says no planes have been lost and news of
raids last weekend was withheld because of security reasons; says raids were
ordered because of hostile acts against US planes involved in operations over Ho
Chi Minh Trail; details on raids, in which Shrike missiles were used; enemy
continues to exert pressure on northern flank of S Vietnamese sweep; USAF
sources hold sweep has choked off enemy troops and supply movements only on
eastern fringe of trail network; illus; map; 8 Amers killed in mid-air
collision, Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              279 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

Excerpts from Lt William Calley testimony in his defense on charges of murdering
Vietnamese civilians; Calley illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              280 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 5

LENGTH: 16 words

Lr takes issue with view of Pres Nixon and Defense Sec Laird that Vietnam war is
winding down

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              281 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 4

LENGTH: 57 words

David Halberstam holds US Adm is using old familiar rationales for incursion
into Laos, laboring under old misconceptions and illusions and making same
foolish mistakes by taking same foolish risks; discusses neglected lessons of
war in Vietnam; deplores futility; notes comments on war Kissinger has made in
past; cartoon on Pres Nixon's role

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              282 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

Article on ease with which US soldiers can buy heroin in Vietnam; some details
on use of drug by soldiers; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              283 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 7

LENGTH: 74 words

Article on drug users spreading malaria throughout US; Dr M G Schultz (Center
for Disease Control) repts disease, spread by contaminated hypodermic needles of
drug users, is on rise; says more cases in US were spread last yr by needles
than by mosquitos; notes that number of documented cases is small but says that
pub health officials suspect that true incidence could be larger; drug-using
servicemen who have returned from Vietnam linked

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              284 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 47 words

S Vietnamese command spokesman amends recent statement on intention of S
Vietnamese forces to advance farther in Laos; says purpose of operation is not
to occupy Laotian territory, but to disrupt enemy supply lines; says he has
nothing to say on further S Vietnamese advances; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              285 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

Brig Gen Pham Van Phu, comdr of S Vietnamese 1st Inf Div, says Route 9 remains
closed to supply missions because of enemy ambushes; says route must be cleared

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              286 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 44 words

N Vietnamese Min Vo Nguyen Giap says Communist 'victories' in Laos constitute
warning to 'Amer imperialists' against further escalation, s, Hanoi; says
concentration of allied troops below 17th parallel indicates 'aggressive
intentions' of US concerning N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              287 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 182 words

Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh, chief Vietcong delegate to Paris talks, charges US prepares
'new mil adventure' against N Vietnam, news conf, Rome; says Communist China
'would not remain idle' if war were expanded to involve directly N Vietnam; says
US troops are being massed along 17th parallel; says US air raids and
reconnaissance missions over N Vietnam have sharply increased during last few
days; says Nixon has expanded war to all of Indochina and has suffered grave
defeats; says Communist China has adopted 'very firm stand' after Laotian
incursion; says Ho Chi Minh Trail is Amer name; notes closeness between peoples
of Laos and Vietnam; declares her side will continue to participate in Paris
talks until there is 'no more use in remaining there'; restates request for
'total and rapid' withdrawal of all US troops; recalls her side earlier offered
to negotiate on liberation of all POWs if all Amer forces were withdrawn by June
30; Vietcong group visits Rome as guests of new Ital Com for Vietnam headed by
Socialist party member; Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh's meetings with pol leaders noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              288 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 73 words

US Defense Sec M Laird says newsmen in S Vietnam will be permitted aboard
special helicopter to cover S Vietnam-US mil operations in Laos, reversing ban
since mil operations began Feb 8; says original policy was requested by Gen
Abrams and that apparently he has changed his mind; some restrictions on
eyewitness coverage seen in that only 1 helicopter will be available for 60
newsmen at front; complaints of censorship by newsmen noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              289 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 186 words

Defense Sec M Laird and Lt Gen J Vogt, of Joint Cs/s, insist that S Vietnamese
forces have deliberately paused in their offensive rather than being bogged down
as a result of enemy attacks, Pentagon briefing; Laird insists operation is
going according to plan; Vogt says there are no major engagements in area
'stopping our forces'; both warn there will be 'tough battles ahead' but are
generally optimistic about accomplishments to date; attempt to downgrade
importance of town of Tchepone; Laird leaves door open for quick withdrawal from
Laos ahead of rainy season in May should N Vietnam mount an overwhelming
response to incursion; Vogt denies repts that N Vietnamese flow of supplies has
increased; says 10,200 troops in Laos have already accomplished 1st portion of
their objectives; concedes S Vietnamese Rangers suffered heavy losses, with more
than 100 killed, when they were driven from mountaintop; Laird says supplies of
weapons and ammunition moving from N Vietnam has been substantially disrupted by
attacks; holds 'the initiative no longer belongs to the enemy in Indochina';
Laird and Vogt illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              290 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 135 words

Lt William Calley trial; defense rests after Calley maintains under
cross-examination the he was obeying orders; Calley shows no remorse over
killing of Vietnamese civilians; says he never questioned 'legality' of Medina's
orders; says he is and will always be very proud to have served under Medina;
testifies he was told everybody in Mylai was at least a Vietcong sympathizer and
that even children threw grenades; says he intended to kill all civilians except
those Medina told him to 'hang on to' in case minefield was encountered; says
civilians would have been forced to go ahead of US troops across minefield; says
Medina later rescinded order concerning minefield; recounts exch with Chief
Warrant Officer H Thompson, who landed from helicopter to inquire about
operation; other details on his testimony

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              291 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 212 words

Main allied rear base for Laotian drive is shelled by enemy gunners for 1st
times since operation began; no casualties reptd for attack at Quangtri in which
17 rockets reptdly landed on installation; incident is 1 of few officially reptd
by mil spokesmen, indicating action in drive is tapering off; S Vietnamese
spokesmen rept forward elements of Laotian drive remain about 16 mi from border;
spokesmen for Amer and S Vietnamese commands draw attention to amts of enemy
materiel captured or destroyed since operation began; US spokesman says 500
enemy soldiers have been killed by Amer planes; says US air action has destroyed
120 supply and weapons caches, 330 vehicles, 115 bunkers, 420 structures and 35
gun positions; Vietnamese command repts destruction of some 1,400 yds of fuel
pipeline; says its ground forces, arty and air strikes have destroyed 12 tanks,
87 trucks, 400 bicycles, 550 houses, 132,000 gals of fuel, 12,703 tons of
ammunition and large quantities of food; US command, for 1st time, makes pub a
summary of damage that Amer planes and helicopters are estimated to have
inflicted in their missions in support of S Vietnamese offensive; announces 25
helicopters have been lost as result of enemy action and 4 more crashed through
other causes; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              292 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 2

LENGTH: 71 words

US command repts 59 Amers killed in action last wk, 217 wounded; 44,518 Amers
have been killed in war, 295,163 wounded; S Vietnam repts 432 S Vietnamese
killed in action last wk, 1,446 wounded; US command repts 2,260 enemy killed
last wk; repts 42 Amers died from nonhostile causes last wk; 1,500 more S
Vietnamese soldiers sent into Cambodia in new operations designed to destroy
enemy sanctuaries, SE of Kompong Trabek; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              293 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

Laotian command repts 5 skirmishes between Govt and N Vietnamese troops around
Dong Hene on Route 9

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              294 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says invasion of N Vietnam by S Vietnamese
troops is only matter of time; Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky has also referred to
possible invasion; observers discount both statements; regard them as part of
campaign to force N Vietnam to keep its troops within its borders

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              295 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

Mil officials, Quangtri, S Vietnam, say no US mil men will escort correspondents
and photographers who will be allowed to fly into Laos on Amer helicopters to
cover incursion; news coverage of incursion discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              296 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 4

LENGTH: 75 words

White House policy makers admit privately that they regard it as mistake to have
mailed out copies of J Alsop column lauding Pres Nixon for approving invasion of
Laos under Amer air cover because Alsop also wrote in column that Fulbright and
his dovish colleagues are 'downright eager to be proved right by an Amer defeat
in war'; reprints were distributed along with lr from communications dir H G
Klein describing column as 'timely and interesting'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              297 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 376 words

Pres Nixon warns he will not be hurried along road of disengagement from
Indochina, State of the World Message; explains US role in Indochina; is
optimistic about allied progress; is confident his strategy will in time lead to
withdrawal of all Amer troops; leaves little doubt of his belief in importance
of non-Communist S Vietnam and his resolve to remain there until Saigon Govt can
stand alone; makes no effort to evade what he concedes are 'sobering problems'
ahead: demonstrated resilience of enemy, uncertainties surrounding the econ,
politics and leadership in S Vietnam, and futility of negotiations in Paris;
says Cambodian incursion bought valuable time for S Vietnamese to prepare
themselves to take over increasingly large share of fighting; makes only scant
allusion to Laotian operation; suggests he will do whatever he thinks necessary
to strengthen S Vietnamese security and insure success of Vietnamization;
suggests faster withdrawal will invite humiliation in S Vietnam and shake
worldwide confidence in purposes of Amer foreign policy; says way in which US
ends war is crucial to its efforts to build lasting peace in coming decades;
assesses US-USSR relations at this point as 'mixed'; says he has been encouraged
by Soviet attitude in SALT talks but disheartened by actions in Mideast, Berlin
and Cuba; holds 'intransigence remains cardinal feature of Soviet system; sees
some evidence that US can lower its 'overseas presence' but warns US cannot let
pendulum swing in other direction, 'sweeping us toward an isolationism which
could be as disastrous as excessive zeal; discusses US policy region by region,
warning in each case against over-hasty disengagement; message as primarily
handiwork of Dr Kissinger noted; says there is still risk of Mideast war but
parties are actively calculating risks of peace for 1st time in yrs; warns
Chilean Govt not to follow Cuba; voices praise for Latin Amer's new sense of
self-reliance; refers to Communist China as People's Repub of China, expresses
continued wariness but a desire to see China become part of family of nations;
suggests he is less rigidly opposed to admission of Communist Chinese to UN;
delivers radio address summarizing his State of World Message to Cong; Nixon
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              298 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

Lt William Calley trial; Army psychiatrists Maj H E Edwards and Lt Col F D Jones
testify Calley was sane at Mylai and was suffering no more from battle strain
than were any of his soldiers; are skeptical of new defense theory, suggested by
Latimer, that Calley was trained and conditioned, somewhat like Pavlovian dog,
to kill Vietnamese civilians on receiving certain cues and stimuli; were members
of sanity bd; 3d member, Col A W Johnson, will testify tomorrow; Edwards and
Jones swear to opinion that Calley, on day of alleged massacre, was able to
distinguish right from wrong; say he was fully capable of premeditating murder
of victims; other details on their testimony

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              299 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 147 words

Heavy fighting reptd at Landing Zone 31, S Vietnamese base in Laos; enemy
resistance continues to stiffen against allied effort; base is 6 mi W of Laotian
border; some observers estimate heavy casualties on both sides; Amer air strikes
called in to support S Vietnamese; enemy forces pound Hill 30, S Vietnamese
position 4 mi from base; mil sources, amid repts that base has been overrun, say
reinforcements are being rushed to area and base is 'still effective'; US
spokesman repts 1 US jet downed; another US plane is hit by ground fire over
Laos, but manages to reach S China Sea; S Vietnamese command repts enemy attacks
on 3 fire support bases and 3 troop positions; announces 1,500 men have been
sent into Cambodia in new operation aimed at destroying enemy sanctuaries,
bringing to 24,500 number of S Vietnamese troops now operating in Cambodia;
details on action in Laos; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              300 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 216 words

Long-smoldering Cong criticism of Adm policy shows signs of flaring up again;
Javits warns Nixon's pol future is in 'grave danger' if he does not abandon his
Vietnamization program for policy of complete withdrawal; Sen Mondale, with
support of 17 Dem Sens, introduces legis that would prohibit Amer forces from
supporting invasion of N Vietnam without 'prior and explicit' Cong
authorization; Sen Saxbe is principal cosponsor; Repub pol leaders now
acknowledge Adm's argument that war is 'winding down' is losing its pol
effectiveness; Sen Dole notes Dems are 'putting the screws to us' on troop
withdrawal; Saxbe explains his position on legis; Mondale says Cong faces
'crisis of responsibility'; says it is now clear Nixon widens war; Fulbright
said to be in mood of despairing resignation; says he is not optimistic that any
legis can make Nixon stop war; Sen Mathias says it is time for Cong to enact
legis to accelerate US withdrawal, s supporting legis requiring withdrawal of
all troops by end of yr; Javits says time is closing in on Adm with respect to
ending war, s, Chicago; predicts that if Adm does not adopt natl policy of
withdrawing all troops by mid-'72, there is good chance Cong will act to
establish it by law; says Nixon Adm faces same dilemma that faced Johnson Adm in
'67

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              301 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 166 words

USSR denounces Pres Nixon's Vietnamization policy and says increased fighting in
Indochina 'cannot fail to affect Soviet-Amer relations', statement; statement
said to indicate USSR exasperation with Indochina situation and is construed as
warning to Washington that it can expect no help from Moscow in ending war; USSR
appears to be urging US to show restraint and not resume bombing of N Vietnam;
affirms its opposition to any internatl forum to settle war; says it is prepared
to continue giving 'all necessary aid' to Hanoi and 'patriots of Indochina';
statement is 1st official USSR reaction to Laotian incursion; USSR emphasizes
way to end war is through accepting terms proposed by Communists; says US
carries out 'a cynical policy of Vietnamization' to fool pub opinion; says
Vietnamization policy uses S Vietnamese forces as 'direct executor of Amer plans
in Laos'; other details on statement, which Western diplomats hold is probably
meant to reassure N Vietnam of continued USSR backing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              302 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 148 words

Pres Nixon, in foreign affairs message, says Vietnamization cannot, 'except over
a long period', end the war; says policy will fulfill objective of reducing Amer
involvement in fighting; says if Vietnamization leads to perpetuating war, it is
not 'by our design' but because other side 'refuses to settle for anything less
than a guaranteed take-over'; Nixon said to raise possibility of open-ended
fighting of Indochinese people in wake of US withdrawal; Nixon's raising of
possibility said to be in direct contrast to '70 message and ss he has made;
Nixon says 'if winding down the war is my greatest satisfaction in foreign
policy...the failure to end it is my greatest disappointment'; restates 5-point
peace proposal made last Oct 7; presents Adm's rationale for operations in
Cambodia and Laos; attempts to answer charges that allied operations in Laos and
Cambodia have widened war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              303 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 6

LENGTH: 61 words

Pres Nixon, in Quotation of Day about US withdrawal from Vietnam, says 'We must
strike a balance against doing too much and preventing self-reliance, and
suddenly doing too little and undermining self-confidence. We intend to give our
friends the time and the means to adjust, materially and psychologically, to a
new form of American participation in the world'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              304 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

Lr noting US State Dept reassurances that Communist China will not respond to
incursion into Laos, queries why US is in Indochina at all if not to forestall a
dangerous shift in balance of power; scores Adm policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              305 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 37 words

104th Paris talks session; N Vietnam declares Pres Nixon lies in his message on
Indochina, statement issued after session; session said to be fruitless;
Communist delegates read victory communiques regarding recent fighting

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              306 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 3

LENGTH: 229 words

Tornado alert forces suspension in Lt William Calley's trial, interrupting sharp
debate over whether Govt should be allowed to introduce testimony regarding
other acts of alleged misconduct by Calley; tornado fails to materialize, but
proceedings are put off until tomorrow; Daniel, declaring defense has opened
door by offering evidence regarding Calley's life before and after alleged
massacre of Vietnamese civilians, asks ct for permission to call rebuttal
witnesses to testify on alleged misconduct by Calley at other times; Latimer
demands news media be excluded from courtroom before issue is discussed further;
contends matter to be raised by Daniel would be detrimental to Calley's
character; Kennedy calls brief recess; proceedings are suspended a few minutes
later because of tornado warning; Kennedy indicates news media will be admitted
to courtroom when trial resumes tomorrow in rare Saturday session; Col A W
Johnson testifies Calley was not suffering any mental disease, derangement or
impairment at time of alleged massacre and was able to premeditate murder and
distinguish between right and wrong; says there has been increase in psychiatric
casualties among US soldiers during last few yrs of war; details on his
testimony; at end of his testimony, there is unusually strong flow of written
questions from jury members; Kennedy comments on questions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              307 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 54 words

USSR, reacting with skepticism to Pres Nixon message on foreign affairs, attacks
Vietnamization policy as pretext for 'organizing armed incursions' into such
neutral nations as Laos and Cambodia to secure safety of Amer troops in S
Vietnam; quotes Amer press on lack of anything new in Nixon message; finds
nothing to praise

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              308 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 51 words

N Vietnamese press agency scores Pres Nixon message on foreign affairs as
'inflated rhetoric'; says Vietnamization policy is attempt to make S Vietnamese
troops die in place of Amers and prolong war; says Nixon does not show any sign
of willingness to abandon his 'reactionary, warlike colonialist policy'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              309 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 31 words

Cambodian Min Koun Wick calls for invasion of N Vietnam by US and its allies,
news conf, Australia; says invasion is only way to persuade N Vietnam to
participate in fruitful peace talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              310 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 38 words

Nguyen Van Thieu spokesman says Nguyen Van Thieu was misquoted as having said
invasion of N Vietnam is only matter of time; says Nguyen Van Thieu meant S
Vietnamese forces are capable of fighting N Vietnamese on any battlefield

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              311 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 264 words

Authoritative Adm officials say US has no intention of sending ground troops
into N Vietnam; strongly discount likelihood of S Vietnamese ground attack on N
Vietnam; Adm spokesmen, in pub, maintain silence on both questions; other
officials acknowledge privately that this is part of psychological-warfare
effort to keep enemy forces off balance; say invasion threats attributed to
Nguyen Van Thieu are aimed, in part, at diverting N Vietnamese forces from
buildup around S Vietnamese column operating in Laos; Pentagon officials
maintain S Vietnamese tactics, coupled with US mil moves just S of buffer zone,
are having desired effect of keeping some enemy forces pinned down; say
1,500-man USMC combat team has been shifted several times in S Vietnam just
below buffer zone in deliberate effort to worry N Vietnamese comdrs about
possibility of some foray across zone, or possibly even an amphibious landing on
N Vietnam's coast just above zone; Adm officials say small numbers of Amer
combat troops will be sent into Laos, if necessary, to help recover Amer airmen
shot down during fighting; hold it will not violate any Cong curbs on use of
Amer combat troops in Laos is small teams go in to Amer search-and-rescue
operations; Pentagon spokesman J W Friedheim comments; Adm spokesmen at White
House and State Dept refuse to answer questions about whether Amer ground forces
will be used in action against N Vietnam; Kissinger indicates US has no
intention of sending ground forces into N Vietnam, TV int; says S Vietnamese
ground attack on N Vietnam is not 'dominant probability'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              312 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 165 words

Heavy enemy tank and inf attacks reptdly rout S Vietnamese troops from many
defensive positions on Hill 31 in Laos; official spokesmen continue to insist
that hill has not been completely lost; Hoang Xuan Lam says S Vietnamese troops
are attacking again to regain control of hill; says reinforcements are on way;
says perhaps 1,000 Communists were killed in fighting on hill; details on clash;
Hill 30 said to be under siege by N Vietnamese; enemy troops attack arty base
and inf bn position S of Route 9; casualties noted; US aircraft pound enemy
troops around Hill 31; Amer helicopter force comdr repts AA fire around both
hills is heaviest ever; 1 US fighter-bomber downed in Laos; other details on
action in Laos; 2 Vietcong sapper squads attack S Vietnamese city of Phanthiet;
are repulsed after allied tanks are ordered into city; map; illus; S Vietnamese
forces strike at N Vietnamese troop concentrations near Snoul; rept 371 enemy
soldiers killed with help of Amer air strikes; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              313 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 226 words

Dem Natl Com's Policy Council, charging Pres Nixon's State of the World message
offers 'prospect of an endless war' in Indochina, urges US adopt firm,
unequivocal policy that all Amer forces be withdrawn from Vietnam by end of this
yr; calls Nixoon's message '180 pages of uninformative rhetoric filled with
unstinting self-praise, an absence of candor and a distortion of results'; Dem
rebuttal to Nixon's message is offered in critical analysis by W A Harriman,
council's internatl affairs chmn, and P C Warnke, former Asst Sec and council's
arms control and defense policy chmn; Scott accuses Sen Dems of trying to
'hitchhike' on Nixon's program by advocating withdrawal of all Amer troops by
end of '72; Sen Byrd says that while Dems are ready to support troop withdrawals
by Adm, they are fearful Nixon's program means forces will not be withdrawn for
some time; details on Dem Natl Com charges, which are contained in 1,500-word
statement; Advisor Kissinger reaffirms Adm's opposition to specific deadline for
withdrawal of all Amer forces; says Adm has every intention of continuing to
wind down war, TV int; says Adm intends to continue troop withdrawals as S
Vietnam takes over more of war effort, but to announce deadline for withdrawal
would remove incentive for N Vietnam to negotiate peace settlement; details on
statements by Scott and Byrd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              314 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 3

LENGTH: 144 words

Defense in Chicago 7 case files appeals brief contending that convictions for
crossing state lines with intention of inciting disorders at '68 Dem Natl Conv
should be reversed; brief cites wide variety of arguments, including contention
that antiriot law is unconst, objections to conduct of trial, particularly
demeanor of Judge Hoffman, and that jury was unfairly constituted; charges that
law lends itself to selective enforcement against unpopular causes and that it
violates activists' rights to interstate travel; also argues: that Hoffman's
refusal to admit ex-Atty Gen Clark as defense witness is reversible error; that
Hoffman refused to admit testimony of 'expert' witnesses offered by defense;
that Govt conducted illegal electronic eavesdropping on defendants; convicted
defendants are D T Dellinger, R C Davis, T E Hayden, A H Hoffman and J C Rubin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              315 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 52 words

Laotian operation appraised; S Vietnam seen fully dependent at present on
firepower and trooplift capacity of Amer planes and helicopters and protection
of Amer ground forces in rear; implications for future of Vietnamization program
discussed; map shows strength of US, S Vietnamese and other forces in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              316 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 68 words

Comment on change in Amer policy to permit Amer newsmen to fly in US helicopters
from S Vietnam to combat areas in Laos; chafing of newsmen under news embargo
and suspicion that official briefings did not give accurate or complete picture
of situation led to flurry of protests to Defense Dept and White House by news
orgns; recent deaths of some newsmen in Laos and Sully's death in S Vietnam
noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              317 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

Comment on investigation into Crum's illegal business activities in Vietnam;
Crum has not been subpoenaed because he cannot be found; career revd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              318 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 2

LENGTH: 102 words

Ed says it is difficult to deny right of mil comdrs to send Amer rescue troops
into Laos, but it is 'absurd' to assert that such action would not represent
violation of Cong restrictions on Amer combat operations in Laos; charges use of
term 'protective encirclement' is more semantic subterfuge; says introduction of
Amer ground combat troops into Laos under any circumstances would represent
policy change that could 'perilously increase US involvement in the widening war
in Indochina'; says whole history of conflict is one of major escalations
growing out of relatively minor increments in US commitment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              319 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 5

LENGTH: 12 words

Lr urges support for Pres Nixon decision on use of air power in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              320 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 4

LENGTH: 54 words

James Reston holds US pursues its illusions and myths of victory in Indochina;
says Pres Nixon believes in these illusions and wages huge campaign to convince
nation that his program is correct and, unfortunately, also believes in a 'happy
ending'; notes Adm, in many ways, now follows in war techniques of Amer commerce

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              321 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 6

LENGTH: 35 words

Tom Wicker, commenting on testimony of Lt W L Calley Jr, who is charged with
murder in connection with alleged Mylai massacre, says Pres Nixon should weigh
war's brutality in assaying question of terminating war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              322 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 116 words

Sen E F Kennedy, making rare speaking appearance in South, s at SC Jaycees
meeting, Charleston; word of his coming sparks controversy in lrs-to-ed column
of Charleston News and Courier; some epistolarians defend him but most denounce
him and criticize Jaycees for inviting him; newspaper pub ed urging readers to
display good manners; about 500 persons attend reception for Kennedy; welcomers
include Lt Gov Morris, Mayor Gaillard and other pol figures; Sen Hollings
introduces Kennedy at meeting; Kennedy opposes increased defense spending;
opposes SST; reaffirms opposition to racism, calls for 'equal opportunity for
all citizens; reaffirms his opposition to Vietnam war; Kennedy s detailed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              323 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6; (AFP)

LENGTH: 46 words

N Vietnamese account of battle in Laos in which S Vietnamese position was
overrun reptd; S Vietnamese prisoner repts enemy troops have overrun S
Vietnamese bn in La Thuong region, taken 10 S Vietnamese officers as prisoners;
claims 100 soldiers surrendered; details battle

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              324 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Rumor that S Vietnam plans invasion of N Vietnam spreads in Saigon; Vietnamese
and Amer officials in Saigon agree with Kissinger assessment that invasion is
not probability at moment; statements by Nguyen Cao Ky and Nguyen Van Thieu
noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              325 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 33 words

Vietcong denounces Washington's expressed readiness to send US troops into Laos,
statement released by peace talks delegation; scores Nixon Adm; says US troops
have taken part in Laotian operations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              326 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 121 words

Lt William Calley trial on charges of murdering Vietnamese civilians; Kennedy
rules testimony that Calley shot woman who ran towards him with her hands above
her head, pleading for mercy, is now admissible; testimony was stricken from
trial record last Dec because it was not included in Govt's 4 counts against
Calley; Kennedy says testimony only will be admitted to show Calley's state of
mind; Daniel says ct is entitled to know what the 'whole man' is; ruling will
enable Daniel to recall T Turner; Govt intends to recall at least 18 rebuttal
witnesses; Kennedy says he will rule on whether to admit testimony on 'other
acts of misconduct' by Calley; denies Latimer's request to bar newsmen and
spectators from session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              327 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 20 words

About 1,200 Marine officers will revert to enlisted ranks as temporary comms
awarded during Vietnam buildup are revoked

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              328 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 160 words

75 Bostonians, in protest against Indochina war, turn over their Fed telephone
excise taxes to farm workers union; group, representing more than 300 people in
city who withhold excise or income taxes, is part of growing natl movement
planning tax demonstrations prior to Apr 15 deadline for filing '70 income tax
returns; War Tax Resistance is orgn that coordinates resistance orgns in 174
cities; plan is to turn over '70 income taxes to community projects; IRS
officials in Boston regional office belittle move; note increase in number of
tax resisters; Roxbury War Scholarship Award Fund, another group, has $25,000 in
withheld taxes on deposit in black-owned bank for educ purposes; taxes reptd
eventually paid, but 1 member says only after Govt makes extra effort to
collect; no prosecutions reptd so far; natl orgns, such as SCLC, back
withholding efforts; T Wicker, in recent s at Harvard Univ teach-in, suggested
refusal to pay taxes as war protest

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              329 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 159 words

Heavy fighting continues at major S Vietnamese outposts in Laos; S Vietnamese
announce they regain control of Hill 31; precise status of Hill 31 remains
obscured in conflicting statements; Saigon spokesmen say enemy has withdrawn
after intense Amer air strikes and the arrival of an armored column to reinforce
defenders; field repts indicate fighting continues around position; Saigon
spokesman repts 15 of 20 enemy tanks involved in fighting destroyed, 5 of them
by Amer planes; new threat to S Vietnamese troops appears to be developing at
Hill 30; S Vietnamese forces rept they have killed 2,500 enemy in Laos while
losing 300 of their own men; details on fighting in Laos; S Vietnamese troops
and support air strikes and arty have killed 250 of enemy in Cambodia; rept
great successes in their attacks against N Vietnam supply areas; Maj Gen Duong
Van Minh says Laotian operation could have 'disintegrating effect' on S
Vietnamese army; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              330 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 0

LENGTH: 11 words

Tauber, Burton R: The War In Vietnam Preliminary Prospectus revd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
