
                               1 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 1, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 167 words

US Army spokesman announces that for 4th wk in row, number of Amer soldiers who
died in Vietnam as result of noncombat causes exceeds number of battle deaths;
repts 42 Amers died from noncombat causes last wk, 9,035 have died from
noncombat causes since beginnning of war in Jan, '61; announces sharp rise in
Amer combat deaths last wk despite Xmas cease-fire; repts 41 Amers killed in
action, 147 wounded; S Vietnamese command repts 301 Govt soldiers killed last
wk, 899 wounded; 1,250 enemy said to have been killed during same period; US
command list 44,208 Amers as having been killed since beginning of war; enemy's
3-day New Yr truce has begun; allied 24-hr truce will begin this evening; 19
members of S Vietnamese civilian defense force killed 24 mi NW of Saigon; US mil
command discloses series of devastating bombing raids of Ho Chi Minh Trail in
Laos that are believed to have disrupted N Vietnamese plans for early spring
offensive; raids spanned 10-day period in late Dec; damage noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 1, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Article on war's effect on S Vietnamese family, which had to move from its home
in village of Longtri and now lives on boat; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 1, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

US mil command in S Vietnam discloses series of devastating bombing raids on Ho
Chi Minh Trail in Laos that are believed to have disrupted N Vietnamese plans
for an early spring offensive in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 1, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 70 words

Central African Repub Govt spokesman repts 17-yr-old Vietnamese girl Martine,
who was brought to Central African Repub in Nov '70 after being identified as
Pres Bokassa's long-lost daughter born to Nguyen Thi Hue while Bokassa was
serving in French garrison in Saigon, is not Bokassa's daughter; says another
girl with same name and of same age has been identified as daughter and will be
brought to Central African Repub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 1, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 73 words

Sgt C E Hutto enters plea of not guilty to charges stemming from alleged mass
killing of S Vietnamese civilians at hamlet of Mylai 4 (village of Sonmy) in
'68, clearing way for his ct-martial at Ft McPherson, Ga, next wk; will be 3d
soldier to be brought to trial in connection with alleged massacre; Lt W L
Calley Jr is currently standing ct-martial at Ft Benning, Ga; Sgt D Mitchell was
cleared by ct-martial at Ft Hood, Tex, in late '70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 1, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

CBS evening news shows film made by Algerian TV station in which Amer POWs Lt
Paul G Brown and Maj Roger D Ingvalson are int at N Vietnamese camp; film is
similar to another one released recently by CBS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 2, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

About 150 S Vietnamese peasants demonstrate on steps of Natl Assembly bldg after
Govt officials bar them from visiting relatives at Tanhiep Prison, central
detention center which is 20 mi NE of Saigon; complain that many of prisoners
have been without trial for up to 3 yrs; prisoners include suspected Vietcong
and S Vietnamese who are suspected of subversion or active participation in NLF;
details on complaints of peasants regarding visits; Saigon-based com to improve
prison conditions has also been turned away from Tanhiep Prison; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 2, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 31 words

S Vietnamese pres Nguyen Van Thieu says he believes any peace agreement with
Vietcong will be worthless unless Communist movement in S Vietnam is 1st rooted
out and destroyed, s, Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 2, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 51 words

US command announces 1st troop redeployment of new yr; says authorized Amer
strength in Vietnam is reduced by 170 men with withdrawal of Army air supply co;
under 6th phase of US withdrawal, US troop strength is scheduled to drop to
284,000 by May 1, decrease of 53,800 from present total of 337,000 men

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 2, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

Amer Friends Service Com aide Stewart Meacham lr, noting recent release by N
Vietnam of list of 339 Amer POWs, questions view of Sec Rogers that list is
incorrect; says he (Meacham) is convinced N Vietnam complies with Geneva Conv on
POWs; says Rogers seeks to make it appear that N Vietnamese are inhumane

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 2, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 100 words

Mil spokesman rept surge of fighting that mars allied New Year's truce; rept at
least 26 clashes; US command repts 1 Amer killed, 8 wounded; 6 S Vietnamese and
9 guerrillas reptd killed; heaviest fighting occurs between S Vietnamese and
Vietcong troops; Vietcong attacks S Vietnamese outpost on edge of U Minh Forest
in Mekong Delta; 10 Amers killed on New Year's Eve by booby traps and in ambush;
details on action; US command repts more than 44,200 Amers have been killed
since war began in Jan, '61; puts wounded at 293,225; US begins 2d decade of its
involvement in war; Nguyen Van Thieu illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 2, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 65 words

Ed on recent rept on US crop-spraying program made for AAAS by study team headed
by Dr Matthew S Meselson in S Vietnam; team reptd at least 1/5 of 1.2-million
acre mangrove forest in S Vietnam has been 'utterly destroyed'; reptd enough
food to feed 600,00 people for a yr has been destroyed; ed says evidence calls
for immediate halt to practice, not 'phase out' as promised by White House

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 3, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 227 words

Soviet Premier Aleksei Kosygin says proposals made at Paris talks by Vietnamese
Communists are 'good, realistic basis for a pol settlement'; says talks could be
brought out of impasse if US 'displayed a fully responsible attitude to these
proposals'; proposals include withdrawal of all Amer forces and coalition govt
barring present Saigon leaders; Kosygin says USSR is ready to facilitate pol
settlement in Indochina that meets 'lawful aspirations' of people in area; says
USSR seeks reasonable agreement with US on strategic arms limitation that would
not give either side an advantage, int, Moscow, with Tokyo newspaper Asahi
Shimbun; Washington analysts of Soviet affairs say his comment reflects USSR
cautious approach; Kosygin expresses displeasure with decision by NATO to make
solution of Berlin problem precondition for a Eur security conf, urged by Warsaw
Pact countries; expresses importance Soviet diplomacy attaches to progress in
Eur and says there is no reason 'whatsoever' to delay a Eur conf; says that USSR
sincerely wants peace in Middle East but that no progress is being made because
of obstructionist position of Israel and US; notes that in past some steps in
direction of normalization of Soviet-Chinese relations have been taken but
indicates relations are still unsatisfactory; says anti-Soviet activity has been
intensified in Japan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 3, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 104 words

Enemy's New Yr's truce ends with sharp fighting in northern and southern parts
of S Vietnam; S Vietnamese troops sweep into demilitarized zone and fight enemy
troops for 10 hrs before pulling back; Vietcong guerrillas shell 3 S Vietnamese
mil positions in Kiengiang Prov, about 100 mi SW of Saigon; 3 S Vietnamese
soldiers killed, 26 wounded; 17 Vietcong killed, 2 captured by S Vietnamese
troops about 45 mi SW of Saigon; 1 person killed, 15 wounded when hand grenade
explodes in crowd in Quangngai Prov; 12 Amers, 32 S Vietnamese and 53 enemy
reptd killed during enemy truce; details on action in demilitarized zone; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 3, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 10 words

Illus of photos, released by N Vietnam, of captured US airmen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 3, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Business Execs Move for Vietnam Peace, which has decided to reactivate its
antiwar efforts, will concentrate efforts on Cong; has opened office in
Washington and informed newly elected members of Cong that they will be visited
by group member; group will try to expand its membership; chmn Henry E Niles
comments; activities of group discussed; Niles and other members illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 3, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 120 words

Ed on delay and confusion in 91st Cong attributes great deal of it to titanic
clash in field of foreign policy between Sen Dems and Pres Nixon; calls revolt,
led by Sen Fulbright, against Pres leadership greatest since that against Pres
Wilson in '19-20 over League of Nations; notes Sen Mansfield recent plea for
reduction in US commitment and involvement in Vietnam; holds upsurge of pub
conviction about environmental values will find expression in future vote on US
supersonic transport; assesses 91st Cong's record; ed on issues facing incoming
92d US Cong notes both Dem and Repub leaders in HR and Sen agree 1st order of
business will be passage of bill increasing social Security benefits,
retroactive to Jan 1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 3, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 73 words

Egbal Ahmad and Prof Richard A Falk lr, noting Pres Nixon stand on bombing and
other aspects of Vietnam policy, says Nixon twists truth to confuse Amer pub,
and wages war and seeks mil solution while talking of peace; says Amers should
insist their Govt stop 'double-dealing' with issues of war and peace; cites US
bombing of Cambodian territory after his assurances that US armed intervention
in Cambodia would cease after June 30, '70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 3, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

Cartoon on POWs as issue at Paris peace talks on Vietnam; cartoon on lrs to Amer
POWs from those who do not know them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 3, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 4

LENGTH: 170 words

J Reston, noting Nixon Adm is working on its 2d State of the World message, says
Sec Rogers holds Vietnam war is winding down and US should be able to get out of
ground fighting; says Rogers holds S Vietnam and other SE Asian nations are
working together on common problems; says Rogers holds that there is no sign for
pol settlement with N Vietnam, but S Vietnamese Govt knows that US is determined
to keep its withdrawal timetable and that Saigon must take increasing
responsibility in coming yrs; discusses various issues in current world
situation and relatively optimistic outlook now of Rogers; contends Rogers backs
W Ger efforts to improve ties with USSR and disputes argument that move will
weaken W Ger ties with West; discusses view that over-all situation in SE Asia
has improved since '70; notes Rogers lists as definite gain in '70 W Ger
Chancellor Brandt moves for rapprochement with E Eur states; notes he remains
confident some kind of arms limitation accord between US and USSR will
eventually be signed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 254 words

Defense Dept task force rept finds increasing drug abuse among Amer mil
personnel in Vietnam and elsewhere in SE Asia has become 'mil problem' for which
authorities have found no effective solution; says policy of permissiveness with
respect to narcotics has led to breakdown in leadership and discipline,
particularly at or below co command levels; finds judicial sanctions against
drug abuse have become meaningless because 'gen cts-martial are never convened
for purely drug or narcotic offenses' and because 'there are too many young
officers sitting on the various administrative bds who will not approve an
administrative discharge to a marijuana offender'; says 'fines and restrictions
have almost no deterrent effect'; says many enlisted men want so much to get out
of service they are prepared to risk less than hon discharge to do so; study was
undertaken at direction of Vice Adm W P Mack; 6-man study team was led by Lt Col
J Vacek; rept was completed about mid-Sept 'for official use only' and was
submitted to Congressional panels investigating drug abuse in armed services;
rept says marijuana accounts for about 90% of drug abuse in Vietnam; says 'hard
narcotics are on the upswing'; says US news media have 'grossly inflated' extent
of drug abuse; 1 sec of rept deals with observations made by 900 officers and
enlisted men int in areas visited; gen view is that key to solving problem is
the squad leader and better communication between noncommissioned officers and
enlisted men; other details on rept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 175 words

US planes bomb wide areas of Indochina, concentrating on suspected enemy supply
trails in Laos and Cambodia; informed sources say campaign has been designed to
interrupt flow of enemy war material through Laos and Cambodia to S Vietnam;
B-52s raid in Laos, Cambodia and S Vietnam; US fighter-bomber downed over Laos;
plane is 85th aircraft repted downed over Laos since Mar 10, '70; informants say
about 400 more have been lost in air operations since '64; US mil command repts
destruction of large N Vietnamese supply depot along Ho Chi Minh Trail; details
on raids and earlier bombings; 2 Amers killed in skirmish 59 mi E of Saigon; 7
marines wounded by booby trap S of Danang; S Vietnamese command says it has
withdrawn 1,500 men from Cambodia after ending operation near border 80 mi N of
Saigon; 8,500 S Vietnamese soldiers remain in Cambodia; Cambodian Govt repts its
offensive to clear enemy troops from hwy leading to sea is inching forward;
clash close to Chambak described; US command repts 4 gasoline bombs thrown at
Army truck in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 61 words

Vietcong, in New Yr's message broadcast to Vietcong troops and their supporters,
says it would agree to cease-fire with US if Washington 'declares it will
withdraw all its troops and the troops of other foreign countries' from S
Vietnam; NLF aide Nguyen Huu Tho says Vietcong will continue to fight S
Vietnamese forces until present Saigon leadership is ousted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 133 words

Mil judge Col Ralph Hammack says US command impaired Pvt Gerald D McLemore's
rights by refusing his civilian atty, Henry M Aronson, permission to use mil
transportation and telephones to develop his case; denies motion to postpone
McLemore's ct-martial because Army did not violate regulations; McLemore, a
Negro, is charged with unpremeditated murder of white soldier during racial
incident at Chulai, 345 mi N of Saigon; Aronson, dir of Lawyers Mil Defense Com,
argued in pretrial hearing that McLemore was being denied fair trial by
command's action; Capt John Fairley, Govt prosecutor, argued that Aronson was
considered an 'unofficial person' under mil regulations and, as such, not
entitled to use official facilities; Aronson says he may leave case so mil
defense counsel can be appointed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 53 words

Repr Lowenstein, in Saigon on fact-finding tour of Indochina made at his own
expense, says that if Amer dilemma in Vietnam is to end, Nixon Adm will have to
impose strict conditions for aid on S Vietnamese leaders; says by announcing
these conditions now, S Vietnamese Govt will have time to make necessary reforms

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

Anthony Lewis says Vietnam war does not dominate our consciousness as it did
because of lower casualties and gradual US withdrawal; notes some recent events
that force us to consider again significance of what has happened and is
happening in Vietnam; says US has used 'overpowering means of death'...'almost
casually'; says war shows us profundity of J-P Sartre insight that 'evil is a
product of man's ability to make abstract that which is concrete'; comments on
Calley trial; comments on Amer Assn for the Advancement of Science rept;
contends gaining mil advantage is no excuse for destruction of forests

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 191 words

NYS Gov Rockefeller says he rejected bid to run for Vice Pres in '68 on Dem
ticket headed by Hubert H Humphrey; rumors of such a bid recalled; sources close
to Humphrey confirm for 1st time that Rockefeller was seriously considered as
running mate, and that Humphrey 'encouraged' 2 direct overtures to Rockefeller,
1 of which was reptdly made by ex-Gov Peabody; by Rockefeller's account, offered
in response to newsman's query after TV int, Humphrey called him during Dem Natl
Conv; Rockefeller says he never seriously considered offer; recollection of '68
is prompted by Rockefeller's remark during TV int that he has no interest in
Vice-Pres nomination and that he has 'had that opportunity on various
occasions'; thinks Pres Nixon will run again in '72 and says he will back him;
says he was offored Vice-Pres nomination on Repub ticket by Nixon in '60, int
after TV int; says Nixon inherited a runaway inflation situation from previous
Adm and has taken very strong steps to try to control it; says he thinks war
will be over by '72, or at least active US phase of participation; says Nixon
has achieved major accomplishment in Vietnam; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 303 words

Pres Nixon, in nationwide TV int with 4 network correspondents, forecasts
significant improvements in US econ in '71, followed by 'very good yr' in '72;
pledges to reduce unemployment by pursuing 'expansionary' monetary and fiscal
policies; suggests he is prepared to accept budget deficit to reduce
unemployment; says he cannot promise to achieve full employment in '71 but adds
he hopes to attain goal by end of '72; repeats his opposition to wage and price
controls or to wage-price guidelines or wage-price bd; says he has decided
against any new US Fed taxes for time being; says best hope for manageable econ
growth without new round of inflation lies in expansionary budgetary policy in
which spending would not exceed revenues that could be generated by econ
operating at full employment; discusses achievements and disappointments;
appears at ease during talk; adopts generally conciliatory attitude toward his
critics; seen determined to put rancor of '70 campaign behind him; says greatest
achievement was reduction of US role in Vietnam; says 2 greatest disappointments
were Cong's failure to enact his welfare-reform proposals and Fed revenue
sharing; notes other disappointments; concedes that rebroadcasting on TV on
election eve of his attack on demonstrators at San Jose, Calif, was mistake that
he will not repeat; says he is disappointed with 'tragedies of Kent State,
Jackson State and Wisconsin Univ'; voices hope that success in foreign policy
will cause such violence to recede; acknowledges that, despite his intensive
campaigning, he still faces Dem majority in Sen and HR that cannot easily be
bent to his will; says his main motive in apptg ex-Gov Connally, Dem, as Treas
Sec is to get his help in getting through Cong domestic legis that Adm has not
been able to get through in past 2 yrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 45 words

Acknowledgement by UAR Pres Sadat of death of 6 Soviet soldiers apparently is
1st official confirmation of loss of Soviet mil personnel in operation of
missile sites supplied to Soviet allies; assumptions regarding role of Soviet
missiles in N Vietnam in '65 recalled

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 19 words

2 US Green Beret camps are transferred to S Vietnamese; at their peak, Green
Berets operated 80 camps in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 2

LENGTH: 77 words

CBS televises enemy film in which about a dozen Amer soldiers are depicted as
surrendering to Vietcong during battle in S Vietnam in '68; Pentagon spokesman
says film 'obviously shows Amers under Vietcong control'; says film is 1st to
become available showing Amers believed held captive inside S Vietnam; says
Defense Dept encouraged CBS to show film in hope relatives of captured Amers
might be able to identify them; makes other comments; frame from film illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 55 words

Lt Robt Frishman, former prisoner in N Vietnam, insists many more Amers are held
by N Vietnam than those reptd in recently released lists of captives, remarks
made at UN during Frishman's discussion of delivery of 26-million signatures on
lrs and petitions dealing with POWs that he hopes to present to N Vietnamese
reprs in Paris

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 116 words

Ex-Army undercover agent Oliver A Pierce says he spied for nearly 6 mos on Colo
youth group, Young Adult Project, and its leader, Jerry Kvasnicka, in Colo
Springs because Ft Carson intelligence officer feared they would turn soldiers
against Vietnam war, int; statement is latest in series of disclosures by
ex-agents concerning army's domestic surveillance; large defense indus in Colo
Springs noted; town's dissenters are few in number but were apparently closely
watched; Pierce says Army had 2 competing intelligence units at Colo Springs;
says Army's method of determining who needs watching is decentralized; says it
depends on attitude of commanding officer; other ex-agents confirm view

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 346 words

Transcript of Pres Nixon's TV talk with network correspondents; illus; Nixon
discusses US position in Middle East, TV int; declines to speculate on whether
US would intervene if Israel were in danger of defeat but cites positive factors
for peace that exist at present; says prospects for peace will not be aided by
formal US-Israeli alliance and that Israel, Jordan, UAR and Big 4 powers hold
key to peace; holds it is important that Big 4 not put additional arms or carry
out additional activities in area because of possibility of confrontation; says
Jarring talks must be done quietly to give them chance for success; says US is
on way out of Vietnam in way he hopes will build foundation for generation of
peace; predicts unemployment rate will avg approximately 4.9% in '71; contends
he is aware of human cost of unemployment; defends ex-aide Daniel Moynihan on
his memo proposing benign neglect on racial problem; lauds Moynihan's service on
his staff and role as author of family assistance plan; holds his legacy will be
welfare reform enactment and q guaranteed minimum income for every Amer family
with children; Nixon says it is not realistic to propose either new taxes or tax
reform; pledges to use law to open housing in suburbs but says that he will not
go beyond law to force integregation; opposes summit conf with USSR leaders
unless there is chance for progress; notes USSR has cut down on development and
deployment of SS-9 ICBMs; says Nixon has commitment from Cong to act on welfare
reform plan early next session; bars comment on his '72 Pres election plans;
says '71 is noncampaign yr and he will wear his hat as Pres; holding US is
making 'delicate' transition from wartime to peacetime econ, says 1.7-million
Amers who have been released from defense plants and armed forces contribute to
unemployment; discusses what he thinks must be done to give US 'lift of driving
dream'; notes Life (pub) poll finding that Dems will benefit in US natl
elections from lowering of voting age to 18; comments on what Repubs must do to
gain confidence of young

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 5

LENGTH: 29 words

Chas J Coe lr suggests Amer youth should not be berated for not expressing
gratitude to parents when US Govt does not do so when given list of prisoners
held by N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 3

LENGTH: 86 words

Sen Goodell says war continues without foreseeable end despite efforts of those
opposed to it, excerpts from his last major Sen s, which was made recently; says
Pres Nixon's words and actions suggest he is prepared to sacrifice all prospects
for peace in order to preserve existing order in S Vietnam; holds Nixon even
contemplates new course of escalation; says scenario has now been set by Adm for
resumption of extended air war over N Vietnam; scores Adm policy; urges Sen to
enact his antiwar amendment; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 329 words

Pres Nixon says he would regard servicing of USSR nuclear submarines 'either in
Cuba or from Cuba' as violation of understanding reached in Oct, in 1st
statement on issue of possible base-bldg US raised in Sept; expresses confidence
USSR does not want 2d crisis in light of reassurance about '62 understanding;
says understanding has been 'expanded' from provision barring offensive missiles
to include pledge not to build mil naval base in Cuba; issue revd; Nixon says
end of US combat role in Vietnam is in sight, telvised discussion with 4 TV
network correspondents; implies end of ground combat will come before '72; does
not say anything further about troop withdrawals beyond scheduled reduction;
says he does not wish to resume bombing of N Vietnam; reiterates his new
understanding that he would order bombing of key areas if N Vietnam expands
infiltration as US troops are withdrawing; says move would be necessary to
protect Amer lives; says that any US promise or formal commitment to intervene
to prevent destruction of Israel will only tend to inflame Middle East
situation; he says that Israel and Arab neighbors know how much help US is
providing and they know that Israel will continue to receive arms needed for
self-defense; says present is time for private talks and that peace depends on
readiness of USSR to play 'conciliatory, peace-making role'; says basic
disagreement about definition of strategic weapons will prevent comprehensive
agreement to limit those weapons, but that a ltd agreement should be possible
'eventually'; lauds Soviet decision to limit deployment of SS-9 and other big
missiles and says he senses overwhelming common interest by US and USSR to avoid
nuclear competition and 'escalating burden of arms'; says US relations with
Chile under Marxist Pres Allende will remain cordial so long as Chile's foreign
policy is not 'antagonistic' 3 US interests; holds US intervention in free
election would have had 'far worse' consequences

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 47 words

B-52s pound Ho Chi Minh Trail in continued attempt to counter enemy buildup; US
discloses loss of fighter-bomber over Laos, 86th aircraft loss over Laos since
March 10, '70; Communist troops ambush US mil convoy in central highlands 100 mi
NE of Saigon; 1 Amer killed, 1 wounded; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 85 words

Land dispute involving Montagnard tribesmen and Mrs Nguyen Cao Ky has gone to
highest S Vietnamese officials for decision; Mrs Nguyen Cao Ky has moved to
claim more than 5 sq mi of choice land in central highlands; Montagnards say
land belongs to them; case is unresolved after a yr; Min P Nur has upheld
tribesmen's rights, but says he has referred case to Premier Tran Thien Khiem
and Pres Nguyen Van Thieu; Mrs Nguyen Cao Ky seeks land for planting fruit trees
and animal breeding; other details on dispute

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 171 words

US ex-Under Sec Nicholas Katzenbach and ex-Deputy Asst Sec Townsend Hoopes doubt
Nixon doctrine of substituting US aid for Amer manpower in Asia will achieve
either an Amer disengagement or pol stability, Joint Cong Subcom on Econ in Govt
hearing; Katzenbach fears repetition of Vietnam pattern; says the more US puts
in the more it becomes involved; Hoopes says US cannot determine mil balance of
Asia through aid, that aid cannot substitute for an Amer presence; suggests US
encourage small nations bordering on Communist China to reach an accommodation
with China; Sen Proxmire holds mil aid to poor nations destabilizes them because
of training and maintenance required for sophisticated US weapons, increases
prospects for subversion; Katzenbach says US Defense Dept, without State Dept's
knowledge, continued to ship arms to Greece after State Dept ordered shipments
stopped as expression of pol disapproval of regime; says it was probably his own
fault for assuming that cutoff actually took place after it was ordered

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 29 words

15 servicemen, who were brought home by Cortland, NY, residents for Xmas visit,
start their return flight to Vietnam; comments of some servicemen and residents
noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 4

LENGTH: 206 words

W Averell Harriman holds news conf, NYC, on forthcoming book America and Russia
in a Changing World: A Half Century of Personal Observation; says he will go to
Moscow with Sen Muskie and join him in talks with USSR leaders; contrasts Pres
Kennedy handling of critical issues with Russia with that of Nixon, favorably
for Kennedy; cites '62 crisis; recalls Kennedy disregarded tough lr from USSR
and concentrated on earlier lr which indicated interest in coming to an
understanding; recalls that Pres Kennedy, when he wanted to come to an agreement
about nuclear test ban with USSR, announced that US would stop testing in air as
long as USSR did; says Nixon should have announced in winter of '69 that US was
stopping all testing and deployment of new sophisticated weapons such as MIRV
and AMB and demanded that Soviets take parallel action; says Pres Nixon has
escalated, rather than tried to halt, testing and deployment of new weapons;
says US would be well out of Vietnam war by now if Sen Humphrey had been elected
Pres in '68; scores Vietnamization policy; says it is program for perpetuation
of war; charges Nixon Adm has created recession artificially and unwisely and
yet has failed to curb inflation; por at present and in '25

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 167 words

James Reston comments on '68 understanding that led to bombing halt and
agreement by N Vietnamese and NLF officials to negotiate in Paris with reprs of
S Vietnamese Govt; says misunderstanding about understanding is one of small but
important ironies in tangled relations between US and enemy officials; says
enemy officials refused to enter into formal understanding, holding that bombing
of N Vietnam was illegal breach of internatl law and that any effort by US to
insist on conditions would be form of blackmail; says enemy has always insisted
it never agreed to US right to fly unarmed reconnaissance planes over N Vietnam;
says each side has acted on its own interpretation of understanding; notes
recent statements by Pres Nixon relating to understanding; says Nixon insists on
his own freedom to bomb when he believes it necessary to preservation of his
command; holds he lays down his own new conditions; says mil logic of Nixon
policy is obvious, but it is not part of original understanding

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 280 words

Pres Nixon now deems it reasonably safe, and politically desirable, to turn away
from personal preoccupation with foreign problems and devote more attention to
domestic front (M Frankel rept); he and sr advisers see things going well enough
overseas to permit them to look at domestic affairs for a while; signs discussed
for key areas, Vietnam, Mideast and Cuba, and for other situations; officials
close to Nixon say he still prefers to deal with world affairs; but he is said
to sense that country wants him to make more visible effort to tackle domestic
problems; change of priorities seen dictated by fact that Pres campaign is only
1 yr away; Adm continues to view Middle East as most precarious region but sees
new sense of hope that diplomacy can sustain cease-fire and possibly bring
period of promising talks; help of USSR is deemed essential but officials
believe Soviet reappraisal of situation may not become evident until after
Communist party cong in Mar; Adm hopes that USSR will help avoid more fighting
and possibly find way to back down from confrontation; Adm is pressing UN
mediator Jarring in short run to let him prescribe procedures for talks to
isolate some points of agreement resulting in progress rept that would justify
cease-fire extension; Frankel says Nixon and his aides are encouraged about
chance of further reducing Amer involvement in Vietnam war without injurious
side-effects on other parts of world; discusses war situation; some senior US
officials say concern about Cuban base-bldg should not have been made crisis
point by Adm although Nixon now believes USSR will not risk dispute in Caribbean
for only marginal advantages for submarines

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 200 words

Defense Sec Laird, stopping off in Paris on his way to SE Asia, says US will end
its 'combat responsibility' in S Vietnam by mid-summer, news conf; says after
that, US will have 'logistic role', and 'air support role' and combat forces
which will be assigned to logistic support and arty roles will be a 'security
mission'; says those forces will be in Vietnam to 'protect' and 'secure' other
troops; cites Nixon Adm record of lowering US troop ceiling from 549,500 men to
284,000 as of next May 1; official and other observers say Laird's outline of
Vietnamization strategy is most precise to date; emphasize strategy does not
mean end to Amer combat in war; say US forces will continue bombing and arty
shelling, and will help move supplies to Amer arty bases and S Vietnamese
positions; White House press sec says US has indicated its ground combat
responsibilities will be greatly reduced this spring, but says 'we are not
prepared to say' specifically when they will be ended; Laird meets with US and S
Vietnamese delegations to Paris talks and lunches with Min Debre; is accompanied
by Adm Thomas H Moorer; in news conf, cites Nixon Adm record on troop
withdrawals; details on his statements

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 224 words

US mil command unveils program to combat drug abuse among US forces; program is
contained in directive from Gen Creighton Abrams; directive orders comdrs to
search for marijuana plants and to aid S Vietnamese Govt in eradicating unlawful
growing of marijuana; specifies that eradication work not interfere with mil
operations; says US forces will not destroy marijuana fields; says
responsibility for destruction rests with S Vietnamese Govt; estimates more than
65,000 soldiers were involved in drug abuse during '70, including more than
11,000 apprehended or investigated; US command says that, of 9,253 recorded drug
violations by soldiers in 1st 10 mos of '70, 7,065 were for use of possession of
marijuana, 1,452 for use or possession of such 'dangerous' drugs as
amphetamines, barbiturates or LSD, and 736 for use or possession of narcotics,
mostly heroin or opium; has also reptd that during 1st 10 1/2 mos of '70, there
were 25 confirmed drug deaths among soldiers, 64 fatalities in which drugs were
suspected, and more than 700 related hosp cases; marijuana fields have been
burned in some areas for more than 2 yrs; Abrams directs comdrs to develop
programs to counter drug abuse; councils are to be formed in each command down
to bn level; directive also outlines 3 Vietnamese-Amer groups that will be
formed to counter drug abuse

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

Sources in Saigon rept that brigade of US 1st Cavalry Div (Airmobile), expected
to be one of last divisions to be withdrawn from Vietnam, will be withdrawn in
March

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 45 words

N Vietnamese broadcast says Nixon's statement that there is understanding
between Hanoi and Washington over US reconnaissance flights is a 'fiction'; says
Nixon stand on flights is new policy; Vietcong broadcast rejects as 'illusory
logic' Nixon's optimism for peace

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 14 words

N Vietnamese broadcast accuses allies of violating Xmas and New Yr's cease-fires

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 20 words

2 Amers killed and 9 wounded in scattered action in Vietnam; S Vietnamese troops
continue operations in U Minh Forest

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 95 words

Col Robert A Koob, whos says it might be proper to execute a POW in
'unconventional' conflict such as Vietnam war, is tentatively seated as head of
Sgt Chas Hutto jury; is approved as jury foreman despite objections of Govt
prosecutor, Capt Franklin R Wurtzel; 5 officers have been tentatively seated on
nury; Col Kenneth Howard says he will continue to queston prospective jurors;
mil law calls for minimum of 5 officers to hear gen ct-martial; Edward L Magill,
chief defense counsel, urges Koob be accepted; says Koob will be able to
overcome his personal opinions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 124 words

Army announces Lt Gen Jonathan O Seaman drops charges against Lt Cols David G
Gavin, William D Guinn Jr, and Majs Chas C Calhoun and Frederic W Watke in
alleged cover-up of alleged Mylai massacre for 'insufficient evidence'; charges
involved dereliction of duty and other alleged offenses; action leaves only 3
officers, including Maj Gen Samuel W Koster, former Americal Div comdr, still
facing possible ct-martial for handling of field investigation of incident; 14
officers were originally accused after panel headed by Lt Gen William R Peers
reptd evidence indicating that certain information about incident was
surpressed; charges are still pending against Col Oran K Henderson and Capt
Dennis H Johnson; charges include false swearing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 205 words

Defense Dept Deputy Asst Sec Selden testifies before Proxmire subcom on US mil
aid program and its extent beyond figures listed in budget; insists dept is not
trying to hide anything; says that of $4.896-billion in over-all mil aid in last
fiscal yr, $1.4-billion was in sales; subcom that US supplied about 8 times
amount of foreign mil assistance formally listed in Pres's budget for mil aid
last yr; reads statement contending that mil aid program was carefully
coordinated within exec branch and with various coms of Cong that pass on mil
aid legis; says budget figures do not present full picture but insists that
other components of mil aid program were openly presented to Cong in other parts
of budget or in legis separate from foreign mil aid bill; Proxmire says lack of
precise Defense Dept acctg illustrates 'unmanagement' of mil aid program; notes
Pres's budget message listed $625-million for mil assistance while Gen Acctg
Office study showed total was close to 45-billion; Selden acknowledges that Pres
Nixon's total budget figures for US foreign mil aid in '70 did not include US
mil installations turned over to Thai Govt or surplus equipment given to S
Vietnam; says he has sent aide to SE Asia to get figures

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 18 words

Lr scores Nixon's denunciation of of Hanoi's refusal to give news of Amer POWs;
says US is to blame for POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 42 words

Rev Edward I Swanson lr scores Com of Liaison with Families of Servicemen
Detained in N Vietnam aide Mrs C Weiss Dec 8 article castigating Nixon Adm
portrayal of POW issue; scores her belief that US, and not N Vietnam, is to
blame for POW situation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 3

LENGTH: 21 words

Thai Min Thanat Khoman, scoring opponents of US Vietnam policy, lauds policy;
says US helps to save 'victim of aggression'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 156 words

US Sec Laird arrives, Bangkok; illus; assures Thai officials that US mil aid to
Thailand will increase over next 10 yrs, statement at dinner given by Premier
Thanom Kittikachorn; reptdly pledges that aid will be made available from excess
stocks of mil equipment; holds proposed increase will reinforce Nixon doctrine
to help US allies help themselves; current US mil aid to Thailand put at about
$75-million a yr; US Defense Dept has set up Advanced Research Projects Agency
to help Thais in counterinsurgency activities; other US subsidies to Govt noted;
Laird's pledge of increased aid seen following that of Sec Rusk in '62 and Vice
Pres Humphrey in '66; Laird, says Vietnamization permits reduction in Thai
forces; Thai Air Marshal D Chullasapya says last group of replacements for Thai
div in Vietnam will leave next mo; group comprises 1,500 men; withdrawal of div
is scheduled to start in July and will be completed in Feb, '72

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 170 words

US aid mission in S Vietnam has quietly suspended significant part of Food for
Peace program after Fed investigators uncovered widespread abuses; eliminated 1
city and 9 of S Vietnam's 44 provs from program last mo for violations of
regulation that food has to be consumed by recipient and not sold; decision to
suspend program was communicated in lr from US official H E Kosters to Min Tran
Nguon Phieu; Dr Cao Xuan An describes suspension as 'unilateral action' by AID
and says Tran Nguon Phieu will lead meeting of S Vietnamese and US officials to
try to win restoration of program; Amer officials indicate S Vietnamese will
have to carry out substantial reforms before program will be restored; 1
official estimates between 10 and 75% of Food-for-Peace commodities in country
are illegally sold; decision expected to cut program's cost in fiscal '71 by
$5-million; was made after US State Dept and aid officials witnessed corruption
during visits to Food-for-Peace centers in '70; details on program and action;
map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 153 words

Enemy forces attack 2 Amer patrols in widely separated parts of S Vietnam and
wipe out 1 of patrols; US command repts 7 Amers killed, 1 wounded in 2 attacks;
enemy downs US helicopter, 1 Amer killed; S Vietnamese hq repts 677 Vietcong
have been killed, 28 captured since S Vietnamese troops entered U Minh Forest on
Dec 1; repts 62 S Vietnamese have been killed in operation, 296 wounded; US
command repts 4,204 Amers were killed in combat last yr, lowest total since '65;
repts 33 Amers were killed in action last wk, 305 wounded; repts 44,241 Amers
have been killed in war since Jan, '61, 293,529 wounded; S Vietnamese hq repts
319 S Vietnamese soldiers were killed last wk, 841 wounded; 118,183 S Vietnamese
have been killed in war, 252,498 wounded; allies rept 1,506 enemy were killed
last wk, 691,881 in war; spokesman repts 32 Amers died from noncombat causes
last wk, 1,841 died from noncombat causes in '70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 121 words

98th session of Paris talks; Communists charge US Sec Laird takes new war plans
with him on his visit to Saigon; spokesman Nguyen Than Le says the overthrow of
Norodom Sihanouk in Cambodia and US incursion into Cambodia followed his Feb '70
visit to Saigon, Paris statement; says Nixon Adm, in last 2 mos, has 'multiplied
its threats' against N Vietnam; enemy delegations attempt to belie optimism
expressed recently by Pres Nixon and Defense Sec Laird; Xuan Thuy, chief N
Vietnamese negotiator, says Nixon statement that end of Amer combat role is in
sight is 'propaganda'; says allied troops have committed innumerable crimes in
trying to pacify S Vietnam; US spokesman queries why enemy is 'running scared'
if it is winning

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 32 words

Defense Dept spokesman Jerry W Friedheim says US troops are to cease to play
major combat role in Vietnam after May 1, but more than 100,000 Amer combat
troops will remain in security role

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 46 words

N Vietnamese delegation to peace talks identifies 3 US pilots who were killed
when their planes either were shot down or crashed in N Vietnam; names are given
to Com for Liaison with American Families of Servicemen Detained in Vietnam and
Sen McGovern in response to query

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7

LENGTH: 119 words

US aide Douglas Pike says N Vietnamese indicate 'a little less zeal for pursuit
of the war, and leaders in Hanoi are divided on whether to give priority to war
or to domestic problems, s, World Conf of Orientalists meeting, Australia; says
he bases his conclusions on official statements by Hanoi leaders and repts in
controlled press; says Communist propaganda 'has to be taken seriously'; says N
Vietnam has been severely affected by stringent econ problems and steady decline
in living standards since death of Pres Ho Chi Minh, 18 mos ago; says death was
followed by drastic policy change, with more attention to deteriorating econ;
his views are challenged by several Asian scholars belonging to antiwar group

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 118 words

3 witnesses at Sgt Chas Hutto ct-martial, Leonard Gonzalez, Dennis M Bunning and
Tommy L Moss, testify that Capt Ernest Medina ordered his troops to kill
everyone n S Vietnamese hamlet; were in co that swept through hamlet; say they
received instructions from Medina at briefing before mission; say they did not
see Hutto shoot any civilians, although they say they saw group of soldiers fire
into group of unarmed men, women and children; 6 officers are sitting on jury;
prosecution uses its sole peremptory challenge against Col Robert Koob;
witnesses say Medina told soldiers that mission would be chance to gain
'revenge' for men killed or wounded in previous missions in area; details on
their testimony

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 63 words

US officials disclose improved reptg and diagnostic systems show number of drug
deaths among US servicemen may be 70% higher than previously thought; rept total
of 93 Amers died from drugs in 1st 11 mos of '70; comdrs circulate directive to
mil units saying nearly 1/2 of all servicemen in Vietnam are believed to have
used marijuana or hard drugs; outline new enforcement steps

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

Brit Navy helicopter carries food to 150,000 Malaysian flood victims; 1st two of
6 Amer relief helicopters arrive from Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 4

LENGTH: 65 words

Fellowship of Reconciliation member Ron Young, who returns to US from Hanoi,
says N Vietnamese officials told him that lrs and parcels sent to Amer POWs by
strangers tend to delay mail sent by relatives of POWs because of inspection
process; Amer Friends Service Com criticizes Mountain Bell Telephone Co, Denver,
for urging its customers to write lrs to N Vietnam on behalf of Amer POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 9, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 274 words

Statement by Sgt Charles Hutto that he fired his rifle into group of Vietnamese
Hutto that he fired his rifle into group of civilians on orders from his
superiors is read to ct-martial panel by prosecution; admission sets off legal
debate outside presence of jury that touches on Nuremberg trials and mil law
that following of orders does not constitute a defense for soldiers accused of
war crimes; statement is last evidence offered by Govt before it rests case; was
given by Hutto to Army investigator in Nov, '69; in it, Hutto tells of briefing
before mission in which Capt Ernest Medina informed soldiers that everyone in
village was a Communist; says Medina told soldiers to kill all animals and
destroy all food; says he does not recall if Medina told soldiers to burn
village and kill all people; says 'orders came down to kill all the people' as
soldiers entered village; says he does not remember who gave order; relates how
he and other soldiers fired into group of 10 to 15 persons; after prosecution
rests case and jury is excused, Capt Franklin Wurtzel moves that defense be
precluded from giving testimony from psychiatrist and psychologist on Hutto's
mental and intellectual state; in argument that follows; Edward Magill contends
testimony will show that Hutto 'did not possess the adequate capability' to make
judgment on whether order to kill civilians was legal or illegal; Col Kenneth
Howard rules that jury can hear psychiatrist only if he were prepared to testify
as to Hutto's insanity or if he can show mental state in which Hutto felt he was
legally justified in believing that order was legal; other details on session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 9, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 420 words

Prof Telford Taylor, former chief US prosecutor at Nuremberg trials, declares
Gen William Westmoreland might be convicted as war criminal if war crimes
standards established during World War II were applied to his conduct of war,
statement during taping of D Cavett TV show; in telephone int, Taylor says he
stands by his statement; war crimes standard of which he speaks was set by US
Army comm that convicted and hanged Gen Tomoyuki Yamashita for atrocities
committed by Japanese troops in Philippines; Taylor statements are in reply to
questions by Cavett on Taylor book pub last fall; Taylor, in book, says actions
of US in war should be examined under criteria established at Nuremberg and by
Yamashita precedent; Army spokesman says Westmoreland is not available for
comment; US Army counsel Robert E Jordan 3d says Yamashita precedent does not
apply to Westmoreland in Mylai case because Army determined Westmoreland took
'reasonable precautions' to prevent such alleged atrocities; Taylor, in
telephone int, says what responsibility Westmoreland could have for war crimes
under Yamashita precedent is not confined to Mylai situation; says he considers
'far more serious' than Mylai the deaths caused by widespread bombing and
shelling of Vietnamese hamlets in so-called free-fire zones, forced evacuation
of peasants from their hamlets and what he terms failure to care adequately for
civilian casualties; says 'laws of war' hold precautions must be taken to make
sure people that are being killed are really 'guilty'; Jordan says he has found
no evidence of large-scale disregard for civilian lives by Amer mil leaders in
Vietnam; says Army is investigating number of individual atrocity cases says
Army is not contemplating creation of any ct of inquiry into possible war
crimes; Taylor says only civilian leader to whom Yamashita principle might
conceivably be applied is former Pres Johnson; former Army capt Robt B Johnson
also appears on Cavett show; is 1 of leaders of Citizens Comm of Inquiry on US
War Crimes in Vietnam; comm seeks natl inquiry into alleged war crimes; Johnson
says his group has substantial evidence for veterans that 'torture' of POWs is
part of US policy; Taylor says he agrees with Johnson that circumscribed
official inquiries into war crimes like cts-martial of Mylai defendants fall far
short of what is needed; says presidential comm should be created to make gen
war crimes investigation, although he expresses doubts Pres Nixon will appt one;
Westmoreland and Taylor illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 9, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 71 words

US Defense Dept spokesman Jerry W Friedheim, disputing AAAS W Friedheim,
disputing study's conclusions, holds there is no conclusive evidence that
defoliation has had 'catastrophic' effect on forests in S Vietnam; contends
forest indus may have benefited; notes US Natl Acad of Sciences plans thorough
study of damage; says defoliation policy has been mil necessity, but is being
phased out because of changed circumstances

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 9, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 62 words

Cambodia, unable to force open its only major land route to sea, imposes
electricity rationing in downtown Pnompenh because of shortage of fuel to run
city's generators; enemy gunners blockade Mekong River between Pnompenh and S
Vietnam, cut only alternate fuel supply line; hundreds of Cambodian troops
trying to open Route 4 narrowly elude enemy trap, Pich Nil area; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 9, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 21 words

B-52s bomb targets in S Vietnam for 4th time in 5 days; US comdrs turn over
Longbinh naval base to S Vietnamese control; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 9, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 63 words

US Defense Sec Laird arrives in Saigon to discuss pace of future Amer troop
withdrawals; says he will assess mil situation as well as pace of Vietnamization
program; is expected to make his recommendations on withdrawals to Pres Nixon;
confs with Amb Bunker; is expected to get rept on reptdly worsening mil
situation in Cambodia from Gen Weyand; visits US air base at U Ta Pao

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 9, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 41 words

Mrs Nguyen Cao Ky says her plans to acquire land have been misunderstood, news
conf; says she does not try to acquire land illegally; says she has submitted
request to Govt asking for area for cultivation; says request is still being
considered

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 9, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 31 words

US Army dismisses murder charge against Capt John J McCarthy Jr, Green Beret
whose ct-martial conviction in '67 slaying of Cambodian agent in S Vietnam was
thrown out by Army appeals ct

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 9, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 2

LENGTH: 54 words

W Averell Harriman book America and Russia in a Changing World. A Half Century
of Personal Observation revd by T Lask; Harriman says Vietnam war was a major
mistake to begin with and is mistake now; Harriman holds US should set up
timetable and withdraw all its troops; scores Vietnamization as way of
prolonging war; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 9, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

Lr says N Vietnamese film on POWs does not violate Geneva Convs; holds N Vietnam
observes at least as humanitarian a policy on POWs as is required by '49 Conv

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 207 words

Vietnamese villagers in Bachuc, near Cambodian border, charge they are being
forced by S Vietnamese mil officials to risk their lives in pacification effort
to clear heavily mined wooded area that is repeatedly fired on by Vietcong; Amer
officials in Chauduc Prov who know of clearing program have not acted to stop it
despite protests of village leaders and difficulty hamlet chiefs have in
rounding up men who must enter area; program has been suspended until Jan 11;
pause is believed by some to be due to fear of villagers' increasing discontent
and to growing attention being given in Saigon to indignation of Ronald Moreau
and Alexander Shimkin, Amers who quit community development program in area so
they could freely protest situation; villagers object to use of human labor when
armed bulldozers could be used; are told no bulldozers are available; it is
believed 4 villagers have been killed and at least 14 seriously injured;
clearing program recruits male civilians between 15 and 60, but sometimes women
do work; some villagers have been injured; protest lr has been sent to prov
chief, but it has not been acknowledged; Amer adviser denies knowledge of plight
of villagers; details on program and protests against it; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 112 words

US command announces US fighter-bomber attacks missile site in N Vietnam after
pilot finds plane 'locked in' by enemy radar; mil spokesman says plane, flying
escort for bombers raiding in Laos, crosses border into N Vietnam and fires 2
Shrike missiles at AA installation; it is not known if installation is
destroyed; spokesmen describe attack as 'protective reaction'; attack is carried
out in Mugia Pass; plane is not fired at; details on attack; statements by Sec
Laird and Pres Nixon on bombing policy noted; Laird, Adm Moorer, Amb Bunker, Gen
Abrams and Adm McCain conf with other officials on mil situation, progress of
Vietnamization and withdrawal of US troops; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 32 words

US mil command fails to issue morning press release for 1st time in more than 3
yrs because there is nothing to rept; S Vietnamese command repts its troops kill
63 enemy in scattered action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 96 words

Repts in Washington say US plans to withdraw 20,000 more combat soldiers from
Saigon area over coming 4 mos, thus virtually ending combat operations in mil
region around Saigon; say about 5,000 US soldiers will be left in area to
protect Amer mil and diplomatic installations; say US prepares to deactivate 2d
Field Force Hq, 12 mi NE of Saigon; Defense Dept officials decline to confirm
repts; note Sec Laird and Adm Moorer are in Saigon conferring with Amb Bunker,
Gen Abrams and others; 1 official says May 1 deadline for troop ceiling of
284,000 men will be met or beaten

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

Grenade thrown into offices of Saigon paper Than Phong wounds 1 worker

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 8 words

Grenade is thrown into office of Saigon newspaper

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 84 words

Controversy stemming from Cong subcom hearings 3n US mil aid program and on
issue of sales through food-for-peace funds discussed; issues revd; role of Sen
Proxmire in exposing 'unmanagement' of mil aid program cited; notes Defense
Dept, in '67, removed aid for SE Asian nations from mil aid legis and set it up
as separate account in defense budget under heading 'free world forces' aid;
notes Proxmire did not know that 'free world forces' aid was specifically
authorized in '70 mil procurement bill

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 22 words

Comment on lr sent by group of US volunteers in Vietnam to Pres Nixon and Sec
Thant saying US actions in war violate internatl war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 7

LENGTH: 19 words

Comment on recent statements by Pres Nixon and Sec Laird on US Vietnam policy
and combat role; cartoon of Laird

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

Ed, noting recent statements by Pres Nixon and Sec Laird on US policy, combat
role, and bombing of N Vietnam, says Vietnamization can neither end war nor US
involvement; holds killing can only be ended by negotiated settlement, which
implies compromise on central issue on who shall govern S Vietnam; says
contradiction that Vietnamization requires all-out support of Saigon regime
underlies stalemate in peace talks; holds there is good reason to be skeptical
of Adm's optimism about Vietnam; says most difficult choices and decisions still
lie ahead

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 10 words

Lr on recent Pres Nixon statements on bombing of N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 12; Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 13 words

Employment difficulties facing returning Vietnam war veterans discussed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 43 words

Comment on lr sent by group of US volunteers in Vietnam to Pres Nixon and UN Sec
Thant saying US actions in war violate internal law; signers of lr said to have
'terrible wisdom about the war and what it has done to the people of S Vietnam;
some signers noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 187 words

Defense Sec Laird to send Adm Thomas Moorer, chmn of Joint C0S who has
accompanied him to Saigon, to Pnompenh to survey situation; Moorer will be
highest ranking mil official to have visited Cambodia during current crisis; he
had earlier expressed doubts that N Vietnamese could successfully overcome
Cambodia in all-out effort in spring; believes that S Vietnamese troops could
keep Cambodian ports closed to shipment of war supplies without direct US
involvement in the event that N Vietnamese campaign is successful; top mil
officials in Saigon believe that main ground fighting will take place in
Cambodia in coming mos where Communist forces are reptdly trying to rebuild and
establish supply areas; hold serious difficulties in Cambodia could place great
strain on S Vietnamese forces; Laird denies speculation that he will make an
unannounced visit to Cambodia; continues his talks with US mil and civilian
officials; confs with S Vietnamese mil officers; visits Vietnamese hamlet near
Saigon that is used as model village for visiting dignitaries; is accompanied by
Gen Abrams; illus; Pres Nixon in San Clemente

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 192 words

Allied officials in Saigon disclose plans for what is expected to be largest
organized movement of peasants in history of Vietnam; Saigon Govt, with full
Amer support, hopes to move refugees in northernmost mil region, I Corps, to 2
southernmost mil regions, III Corps and IV Corps; estimates of total number of
peasants to be moved vary; US sources cite figures ranging from 200,000 to more
than 1-million; S Vietnamese officials confirm movement could involve between
2-million and 3-million during next 3 yrs; plan is attempt to solve refugee
problems in I Corps; some Amer officials express fear movement will create more
physical and psychological stress than peasants can handle; S Vietnamese
officials feel movement will be acceptable to refugees who have already broken
ties with their ancestral plots; some Vietnamese, sharply critical of plan, say
it is pol move by Govt against Vietnamese of northernmost provs; project is in
final planning stages and will be announced soon by Saigon; War Victims Program
dir Franklin Stewart says project will be financed by US; he and Mins Tran Nguon
Phieu and Phan Quang Dan comment on plan; details; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 39 words

S Vietnamese hq repts heavy fighting NE of Saigon near Tayninh; repts 20 N
Vietnamese killed; discloses new operation in Cambodia near border; US command
announces B-52s attack N Vietnamese supply routes in Cambodia for 1st time in wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 77 words

Govt will recall as witness in Lt Wm Calley trial Paul Meadlo, who has publicly
stated he shot unarmed Vietnamese civilians but who refused to testify last mo;
Calley trial will reconvene tomorrow; Meadlo's lawyer John A Kesler has obtained
writ granting full immunity for Meadlo; says he will probably advise Meadlo to
testify if mil judge, Col Reid W Kennedy, rules that writ gives Meadlo immunity
from civil as well as mil cts; developments in trial discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

Reply to Dec 25 lr on Lt Wm Calley trial and holding 'militarism' is to blame
for alleged massacre of S Vietnamese civilians

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 5

LENGTH: 19 words

Lr scores Nixon Adm statements that all US forces will not be withdrawn from
Vietnam until all Amer POWs are freed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Herbert Mitgang article on Vietnam War views of paraplegics injured in Vietnam
and hospitalized in Bronx, NY, Veterans Adm Hosp

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 5

LENGTH: 22 words

Cortland, New York, community self-help spirit described; comment on effort to
bring troops home from Vietnam for Xmas; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 12, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 261 words

Former soldier Paul D Meadlo testifies that he and Lt William L Calley shot more
than 100 unarmed S Vietnamese civlians at Mylai 4, but that they were only doing
their job, Calley trial session; says he could not tell how many of those who
were shot had been mortally wounded; tells his story under threat of immediate
arrest if he refuses to testify; US Atty and 2 Fed marshals sit near him, ready
to take him into custody if he seeks refuge in 5th Amendment; Meadlo describes
all victims as Vietcong, even the babies; says Medina gave orders; says Medina
told soldiers that there was Vietcong orgn in village and that everything in
village was to be destroyed; says Medina told men that by leveling village, they
would be getting 'satisfaction' for casualties inflicted on them by enemy; says
he was 'emotionally upset' when he shot, but he still thought he was carrying
out orders; testifies soldiers Dennis Conti, Harry Stanely and Daniel Simone
joined in shooting; is questioned by Daniel, is cross-examined by chief defense
counsel George W Latimer; Atty John Kesler says Meadlo testifies reluctantly and
under extreme pressure; says Meadlo is granted full immunity under Organized
Crime Control Act, which means Govt can use none of Meadlo's testimony against
him because testimony is considered 'necessary to the pub interest'; Col Reid
Kennedy disputes defense contention that Meadlo can never be brought to trial;
Ronald D Grzesik testifies; says he refused order from Calley to 'finish off'
victims; his other statements noted; Meadlo and Kesler illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 12, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 38 words

All US Army enlisted men's clubs at Tuyhoa, 240 mi NE of Saigon, are ordered
closed in move to cool tempers following riot in which 27 Amers were wounded by
hand-grenade blast; riot said to stem from rivalry between units at club

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 12, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 64 words

S Vietnamese soldiers reptdly are moving westward along Route 1 and along Route
4 to clear enemy troops from key hwys to Pnompenh; troops along Route 4
described as an advance force moving towards Kirirom Plateau area where
Cambodian soldiers have been stalled for almost 1 mo; Premier Lon Nol flies to
Kompong Som, 2d time in wk, to try to coordinate Cambodian clearing operation;
map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 12, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

US command announces new air strikes in Laos to thwart N Vietnamese
infiltration; says B-52s and smaller bombers pounded Ho Chi Minh Trail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 12, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 233 words

US Sec Laird ends 4-day visit to Saigon; says S Vietnamese forces are improving
so rapidly that 'additional thousands' of Amer troops can be withdrawn this yr,
news conf; provides no figures on troop reductions beyond May 1; says Pres Nixon
will announce in April what withdrawal rate will be after May 1; says next phase
of withdrawal will depend on progress at peace talks, pace of Vietnamization
program and size of enemy threat; says Adm will 'meet or beat' reduction goal
announced for May; his tone on mil situation reflects optimism; was briefed by
Amb Bunker and Gen Ambrams on mil topics; says he cannot go into 'comprehensive
detail' on his findings until he repts to Nixon; seeks to clear up
misunderstanding over his recent statements concerning end of US combat role;
indicates US security troops will be involved in at least minor sweeps and
searches around Amer installations and will engage in 'defensive' or
'protective' actions, little different from what goes on during present low
level of mil activity; says Adm still hopes for progress in peace talks; says US
will watch situation in Cambodia closely; silent on whether or not deterioration
of mil situation could affect pace of withdrawal of US troops from S Vietnam;
says Adm Moorer's scheduled visit to Pnompenh to assess mil situation has been
postponed 1 day; Laird, S Vietnames pres Nguyen Van Thieu and Bunker illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 12, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 146 words

Atty Edw Magill contends Sgt Chas Hutto entered S Vietnamese hamlet 'without any
intent of killing civilians' but 'did what he was told to do', which was to
'walk in there and shoot', Hutto trial session; says Hutto had no concept of
what an illegal order was; says Hutto regarded Ernest Medina, his co comdr, as
'a man who was tough but fair'; says Hutto was given order to destroy village
and its inhabitants by Medina, 'a man who had kept him alive'; Army counsel
agrees to stipulation that Govt did not know whether victims were Vietcong, N
Vietnamese rgulars or people loyal to S Vietnamese Govt; Govt's charge says
victims were 'civilians'; Magill says law under which Hutto is being tried
specifies 'intent' to commit murder; Roger Alaux Jr testifies; says Mylai was
heavily bombarded by arty and helicopter gunships before assault began; his
other statements noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 13, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 153 words

CBC correspondent Michael Maclear article on vast construction drive in Thaibinh
Prov and others S of Hanoi; says drive appears to be calculated shift of
emphasis; thousands of young N Vietnamese men and women of mil conscription age
are assigned to drive; are used in irrigation work in Red River delta and in
crash econ projects in order to release peasant labor to provide manpower for
program of rapid industrial expansion; peasantry is assigned to additional
compulsory work; those who remain on land are being offered material incentives,
including cash bonuses, to spur rice production; fundamental shifts, which
portend traumatic change for people engaged previously almost exclusively in
agr, are planned on scale that indicates huge resources of both men and material
must be diverted from war effort for long time to come; Sec Le Duan has adopted
phrase 'Great Leap Forward' for effort; details; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 13, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 172 words

Statement by S Vietnamese Sgt Nguyen Dinh Phu telling of drinking bout by Amer
infantrymen after they were told that they were going to kill all inhabitants of
village is read at Sgt Chas Hutto trial; sgt served as task force interpreter;
statement says Capt Ernest Medina was asked on day of action why people had been
killed, and Medina said 'that is the order'; Sgt Dennis R Vasquez testifies he
attended briefing of comdrs on morning before action; says meeting was addressed
by Col Oran Henderson, who told men he wanted them to be 'aggressive' and to 'go
in and close with the enemy'; says Henderson indicated he regarded assault as
'final solution' to problem of Vietcong bn, which was reptd to be in area; jury
hears sworn statement by Maj Gen Nguyen Van Toan saying there had been no
immediate investigation of incident because enemy activity prevented Vietnamese
investigators from reaching village; Sgt Dale Stephens testifies that after
incident, village was not 'cleared area' and that Vietcong still operated from
area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 13, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 258 words

Paul D Meadlo testifies he shot some babies in their mothers' arms because he
was afraid babies might be carrying concealed grenades, Lt William Calley trial
session; is guestioned by Capt Aubrey Calley trial session; is questioned by
Capt Aubrey Daniel; says he shot 'a few' babies during mass execution inside
village, and 'a few' more during shooting of 75 to 100 civilians at ditch
outside; says he was instructed at Schofield Barracks, Hawaii, that 'natural
procedure' of handling civilians was to hold them for interrogation by
Vietnamese interpreter and then send them back through channels for others to
decide what to do with them; says action at village was 'search and destroy'
mission and he interpreted 'destroy' to mean killing all people and animals;
says he opened fire on noncombatants only when ordered by Calley to do so; says
he felt sure of correctness of his actions when he saw Capt Ernest Medina walk
past group of bodies without any sign of displeasure; says Medina told troops on
eve of action that 'everyone' found in village should be 'destroyed'; Daniel
challenges Meadlo so vigorously on this point that Defense Counsel George
Latimer asks for mistrial; Col Reid Kennedy denies motion; Nicholus Capezza
testifies; gives partial support to defense contention that Lt Col F A Barker,
task force comdr, or some other superior officer landed briefly at village
during action and gave no orders to stop the shooting; Barker was killed in
action shortly after alleged massacre; Tommy L Moss testifies on Medina's
briefing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 13, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 20 words

Article on signs in Hanoi (Vietnam) of shift from mil to domestic priorities
amid preparations for continuation of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 13, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 7; (UPI)

LENGTH: 43 words

4 black soldiers in Vietnam have been arrested in slaying of white major, which
is said have been arrested in incident, which is said to have followed argument
over playing phonograph loudly; mil spokesmen say incident was not sparked by
racial animosities

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 13, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 193 words

5 members of Concerned Officers Movement, antiwar group within armed services,
say they are asking Sec Resor (Army) and Chafee (Navy) to convene formal cts of
inquiry into question of war crimes and atrocities in Vietnam, news conf; say
they are sending lrs to Secs under provisions of mil law that permit such
requests; pass out copies of lrs; news conf is sponsored by Natl Citizens Comm
of Inquiry on US War Crimes in Vietnam; officers are Capts Robert J Master,
Grier, Merwin, Edward G Fox and Lts Louis Font and Peter Dunkelberger; Fox says
Concerned Officers Movement has about 600 adherents, including 20 officers in S
Vietnam; officers say they are accompanying lrs with 300-page transcript of
statements made last mo by 36 Vietnam war veterans at another meeting sponsored
by comm; veterans made allegations of war crimes and atrocities and some
contended that these acts had been committed under de facto mil policy approved
at highest level of command; lrs cite rept to AAAS on US defoliation program;
mention statements by Prof Telford by Taylor that Amer civilian and mil leaders
may have committed war crimes; will be sent by registered mail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 13, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 42 words

Allied troops reptdly move southward along Route 4 from Pnompenh and up from
Kompong Som; column of over 1,000 S Vietnamese soldiers, backed by heavy
equipment and arty, reptdly are moving south to join Cambodian troops stalled
near Pich Nil Pass; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 13, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 100 words

US command, which recently disclosed 'protective reaction' attack against N
Vietnam, says there were 2 such attacks; newly reptd attack, staged by USN jet
110 mi N of buffer zone, is said to have missed its target, a coastal radar site
at village of Hatinh; spokesman says Shrike missile fell into sea; says jet was
returning from rescue mission of escorting reconnaissance plane over N Vietnam
when its sensing devices signaled that radar site had begun tracking it
preparatory to firing; says pilot 'expended his ordnance' because of 'offensive
act'; does not disclose reason for delayed rept; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 13, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 160 words

Scholars attending 28th Internatl Cong of Orientalists are gloomy over outlook
for many SE Asian nations in yrs immediately ahead despite some progress in
certain areas, Canberra conf; see more warfare even after end of war in Vietnam;
cite enigma of Communist China, dynamics of a resurgent Japan and other factors;
Prof Richard C Butwell concludes that remainder of '70s will be more bloody,
destructive and tragic than past 10 yrs; agr expert Wolf Ladejinsky holds land
reform efforts have failed in most Asian nations despite sharp increase in farm
output in recent yrs because of 'green revolution'; Prof M L Dantwala contends
land reform programs in Japan and Nationalist China have succeeded because they
were started during period of gen econ growth in countries; Prof L C Ojna,
calling Communist Chinese policy 'cautious and realistic,' cites Chinese
pullback when Communist forces were in position to expand into India during
brief border clash in '62

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 13, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 43 words

US Pres Nixon signs bill authorizing loan of 8 USN ships to Greece, Pakistan, S
Vietnam and Turkey; signs 12 bills making minor changes in US Fed Internal
Revenue Code; signs bill extending US participation in Internatl Coffee
Agreement; works at San Clemente

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 13, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 8 words

N Vietnam protests newly reptd US air attack

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 14, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 107 words

Over 13,000 S Vietnamese and Cambodian troops push forward in drive to reopen
Hwy 4; illus; kill 31 enemy soldiers in fighting south of Stung Chhay; Cambodian
and N Vietnamese troops clash in Trapeang Kea; S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao
Ky flies to Pnompenh to conf with Premier Lon Nol; visits S Vietnamese forward
units; map; blockade of route 4 has caused critical shortage of oil and gasoline
in Pnompenh and interruption of supplies from Cambodia's only refinery has
contributed to inflation; gasoline rationing continues and power usage
reductions are imposed to save oil that runs generators; small skirmishes reptd
in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 14, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 141 words

Sec Laird rejects request from Joint Cs/S to permit Amer transport planes and
helicopters help ferry ammunition and S Vietnamese reinforcements to S
Vietnamese forces operating deep in Cambodia; Joint Chiefs argue such use of
aircraft was not specifically barred either by Pres Nixon's pledge not to use
either Amer ground troops or mil advisers in Cambodia or by like prohibition
written into supplemental mil aid bill; Laird reptdly feels such use would
violate spirit, if not the lr, of ban on use of Amer troops in Cambodia; some US
State and Defense Depts officials comment; Defense Dept sources say Laird,
particularly interested in whether further deterioration of mil situation in
Cambodia might interfere with plans to continue or step up US withdrawals from
Vietnam, discussed Cambodian situation with senior Amer comdrs in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 14, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 26 words

Pres Nixon signs bill with provision repealing Gulf of Tonkin Resolution; signs
bill authorizing $200-million in easy credit arms sales to foreign countries

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 14, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 162 words

W Averell Harriman, after meeting with Soviet Foreign Min Gromyko, Moscow, says
he is confident that despite 'cooler winds,' US and USSR can reach agreements on
key issues such as arms limitation, Mideast and Berlin, news conf; says both
sides want to see end to Mideast fighting and peace but that each is unwisely
indulging in blaming other for difficulties that are occurring, which is issue
between Israel and Arabs and should not be confrontation between US and USSR;
says he discussed with Gromyko and others recent charges and countercharges
resulting from harassment of Soviet personnel in US by Jewish Defense League and
Soviet retaliation in Moscow; says he has informed USSR leaders that US Govt and
Dem party back W Ger chancellor Brandt E Eur policy; urges Vietnam war be
brought to close; says there have been no real negotiations since he left Paris
in Jan, '69; discusses with Gromyko agenda of Moscow meeting between Sen Edmund
Muskie and Premier Kosygin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 14, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 2

LENGTH: 102 words

Defense rests its case in Sgt Charles Hutto trial; both sides to offer closing
arguments tomorrow; Edward Magill offers as evidence copy of standard oath given
to all enlisted men who enter Army voluntarily; oath includes phrase that
soldiers will obey 'orders by officers' apptd over them and 'according to
regulations'; Col Kenneth Howard tells counsel for both sides, outside presence
of jury, that his instructions to jury will indicate that it is up to it to
decide whether order given Hutto to shoot S Vietnamese civilians was 'manifestly
illegal' or merely illegal; his other statements to counsel noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 14, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

Sp/4 Alfred B W Flint is charged with murder and attempted murder in shooting of
2 US Majors in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 14, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 238 words

Rept by Lt Col Frank Barker, which was filed 2 wks after alleged massacre of S
Vietnamese civilians, is disclosed at closed session of Lt William Calley trial;
describes action in village as 'well planned, well executed and successful';
says noncombatants were evacuated and civilian wounded were given med aid; says
about 200 persons, described as Vietcong supporters, 'created a problem in
population control and med care' and were caught in cross-fire; says troops
encountered '2 local force cos' of Vietcong 'supported by 2 or 3 local guerrilla
platoons'; lists 2 Amers killed in action, 11 wounded, 128 enemy dead, 11
captured; document is shown to jury disclosing that 4 wks after incident,
Americal Div leader issued order banning use of term 'search and destroy';
defense attys seek to show that senior US officers, including Barker, 'knew what
was going on' during incident; produce 2 helicopter pilots, Dean Lind and
Christopher D Garbow, who testify that Barker (and perhaps Koster or Henderson)
alighted near scene of mass slaying soon after Calley allegedly shot several
civilians; details on their testimony; other witnesses testify Barker talked
briefly with Capt Ernest Medina; defense receives setback when Varnado Simpson
refuses to testify; defense atty George Latimer says he will seek to obtain
grant of immunity for Simpson; statements made last yr by Simpson on incident
noted; details on trial; Lind illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 130 words

Sgt Charles E Hutto is acquitted of murder charges in connection with alleged
massacre by US troops in hamlet of Mylai in S Vietnam in '68; jury takes little
more than 2 hrs to evaluate evidence and testimony; decision is read by jury
pres Lt Col Donald M Laffoon; Hutto smiles broadly when he hears decision; his
wife breaks into tears; he says he feels 'real good', impromptu news conf
outside courtroom; says he plans to leave Army as soon as possible; defense atty
Edward Magill comments; says any forthcoming trials of officers involved in
alleged massacre will prove more difficult for defense; summations by Capt
Franklin Wurtzel and Magill discussed; Col Kenneth Howard reads long series of
legal instructions to jury before it begins deliberating; Hutto illus with wife

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Cambodian and S Vietnamese troops come under violent enemy attack in attempt to
clear Route 4; US B-52 bombers join in campaign; allied troops heading toward
Pich reptd to be only 5 mi away

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 94 words

US Defense Dept spokesman Jerry W Friedheim leaves open possibility that US may
provide logistic and airlift support for S Vietnamese forces in Cambodia if
required by deteriorating situation, news briefing; says Sec Laird 'has not
foreclosed and will not foreclose possibility;' declines to discuss Laird's
reptd rejection of Cs/S request for US planes to ferry ammunition and S
Vietnamese reinforcements to their troops in Cambodia; he and other Govt
spokesmen insist there are no plans to commit US ground troops or advisers to
Cambodia under any circumstances

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 96 words

Premier Lon Nol scheduled to fly to Saigon for meetings on future S Vietnamese
mil support for Cambodia; belief that Cambodia will hold up during current dry
season is based on hope that mobility of S Vietnamese and air power of Amers
will ease enemy pressure; S Vietnamese mil sources believe that Cambodian troops
are high in elan but low in mil capability; enemy forces in Cambodia, committed
to combat, put at 10,000 to 12,000; about 30,000 more are believed to be
concentrating on new supply and logistics facilities disrupted by allied
incursions in May and June; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 33 words

US command repts 27 Amers were killed in Indochina last wk, 83 wounded; combined
toll is said to be lowest such figure since Oct, '65; US command repts S
Vietnamese and enemy casualties for last wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 3

LENGTH: 24 words

Lr says blame for alleged Mylai massacre should be placed on those who committed
'untried young men to the incredible savagery of jungle warfare'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 277 words

Sgt Dennis Vasquez says Col Oran Henderson, on eve of alleged massacre, told co
leaders to 'rush in aggressively, close with the enemy and wipe them out for
good', Lt William Calley trial session; says Capt Ernest Medina was at briefing;
says Henderson made no specific mention of women and children; says Henderson
told leaders they had not been aggressive enough; other details on his
testimony; Michael Adcock testifies; says Lt Col Frank Barker and Henderson
observed Mylai action from helicopters, and that Henderson's crew put down to
apprehend 2 male S Vietnamese suspected of being Vietcong; James H Flynn
testifies, says 2 small Vietnamese girls were taken under protection of troops
just before Medina gave order to stop killing; says Medina, at pre-battle
briefing, said, in response to soldier's question on killing of women and
children, that soldiers were to kill 'everything that moves'; says Medina shot
girl lying face down on trail; says Medina, a few days after alleged massacre,
said that Army was investigating action and cautioned soldiers not to say
anything; Louis B Martin testifies; says he stayed close to Medina throughout
action and observed 'close to 100 bodies'; other details on his testimony;
Medina has denied any large number of civilians were killed; jury has received
classified documents relating to rules of combat for Amer troops; has been given
copy of order telling American Div to cease using phrase 'search and destroy';
order is dated 4 wks after alleged massacre; Govt is seeking to subpoena tapes
of int of Calley by John Sack, who has written some articles purporting to be
Calley's 'confessions'; Vasquez illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 219 words

US delegate to peace talks David D E Bruce is rediculed by NLF repr Mrs Nguyen
Thi Binh as 'pub amuser' after he tries to hand to Communist side list of 1,534
Amers Pentagon carries as missing in action, talks session; says he wants N
Vietnamese and Vietcong 'to provide any information' on those on list; neither N
Vietnamese nor Vietcong accepts list; Bruce and his deputy, Philip C Habib, read
off 156 names that were not on list given to Communists in Dec, '69; Nguyen Thi
Binh accuses Bruce of trying to sabotage work of talks; Bruce says US concern
for POWs is serious; N Vietnamese spokesman insists recently released list of
339 names of Amer POWs is 'complete and definitive'; Vietcong spokesman cites
difficult conditions under which his side holds POWs as reason for not issuing
separate list; US spokesman says list of 1,534 includes those known to be held
prisoner; makes clear US does not accept N Vietnamese list as final; Saigon
delegation informs N Vietnam that on Jan 24 it will release 40 sick and wounded
N Vietnamese soldiers; N Vietnamese delegation head Xuzn Thuy indicates those
soldiers who with to go to N Vietnam will be accepted does not explicitly
acknowledge that N Vietnamese troops are operating in S Vietnam; US Army
spokesman says list of 1,534 covers period up to Dec 31, ;70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 57 words

Pentagon spokesman says Gen Abrams's role as comdr in Vietnam will not be
affected by reorganization of US hq command structure; says reorganization will
be made as Vietnamization progresses and as more US forces are withdrawn;
Defense Sec Laird says no changes are contemplated this yr as far as Abrams is
concerned, news conf, Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 104 words

Sir R Thompson, Brit expert on guerrilla warfare who is being sent back to S
Vietnam by Pres Nixon for urgent evaluation of several S Vietnamese Govt
programs, will also look into joint Amer-S Vietnamese pacification activities;
Civil Operations and Rural Development Support Program, which is in over-all
charge of pacification, is to be reorganized, effective March 1, as Community
Defense and Local Development Program; State Dept says proposal for Thompson to
accept another mission was made by Saigon Govt with concurrence of US; say
request was forwarded by Amb Bunker; there is strict secrecy in Washington about
trip

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 133 words

Lt William Calley trial; maimed veteran R Van Leer testifies US troops that
invaded Mylai were frightened by earlier losses to Vietcong mines and booby
traps and embittered by repts of atrocities; recalls story of mistreatment of
Amer prisoner; says story was typical of repts that were widely circulated and
considered true by troops; Capt K W Boatman testifies; says mines caused 95% of
casualties inflicted on troops by 'phantom enemy that always eluded battle';
says his own co comdr at Mylai, Capt E Michaels, did not condone 'indiscriminate
shooting' and took prisoners; Vasquez testifies that arty rounds that fell on
village did not reach area where Calley and Meadlo allegedly killed 30 to 40
civilians; other details on session; defense plans to call 3 psychiatrists;
Kennedy comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 119 words

Presence of 2 USSR warships near Singapore seen bolstering Prime Min Heath's
argument for resumption of Brit arms sales to S Africa just as Heath was
presenting his case to Commonwealth of Nations leaders conf there; ships,
19,200-ton cruiser Aleksandr Suvorov and 3,800-ton destroyer Blestyashchi,
sailed through Strait of Malacca toward Indian Ocean; Zambian Pres Kaunda says
'so what'; warns that 'second Vietnam' is in making in S Africa and Western
nations that sold arms are failing in their duty to avert it; Heath reiterates
view that Western nations must leave no weaknesses in their defenses in face of
growing USSR mil power; makes plea against allowing fragmentation of
Commonwealth by misunderstanding

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 27 words

About 40 US soldiers march on Amer hq Saigon, S Vietnam on birthday of M L King
Jr; chant 'Free Angela Davis' and call for end to racial discrimination in Army

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Former US aide J C Thomson Jr says we can end Indochina war by 'having the
greatness to admit natl error, the intelligence to act on that admission, and
the compassion to do it quickly'; says every effort to avert acceptance of error
or failure in war is formula for further evasion and self-deception and for a
longer, wider war; urges Nixon to tell Amer people that Vietnam was 'lost' to
Vietnamese natl Communism many yrs ago; speculates on results of such a message;
indicates Nixon is deluded about US role

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Anthony Lewis comment on US Defense Dept spokesman Jerry W Friedheim views
defending S Vietnam defoliation program on grounds that it has destroyed part of
hardwood forest and can now be lumbered; AAAS rept opposing defoliation program
noted; notes questions raised recently by Taylor concerning war crimes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 60, Column 3

LENGTH: 122 words

NJ Higher Educ Bd revokes accreditation from fundamentalist Bible inst Shelton
Coll, which is headed by evangelist Rev Dr C McIntyre; bd charges coll is ridden
with substantial acad deficiencies, lack of institutional integrity and adm
incompetence; also claims coll lacks candor in dealing with pub, students and
state; students protest action, march in protest to state auditorium; McIntire
says he will appeal bd decision in state cts, claiming loss of accreditation
violates const rights of free speech and religion; will also file $5-million
damage suit against bd; says revocation is left-wing conspiracy against his
efforts to generate support for war in Vietnam; 16 yrs of controversy
surrounding coll since '54 revd; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 127 words

Sen Muskie, accompanied by W A Harriman, recd by Premier Kosygin in Kremlin
meeting lasting nearly 4 hrs; illus; visit viewed by Muskie's staff as high
point in his 1st foreign trip as likely candidate for Dem Pres nomination;
Kosygin said that US and USSR would both benefit from gen improvement in
relations; says USSR and US would benefit from peace in Indochina; indicates
USSR inability to influence course of action by N Vietnam and Vietcong; implies
continuation of war aggravates tension and aids Chinese Communists; unusual
length of visit viewed as demonstration of his desire to maintain dialogue with
US despite current tensions; Muskie later attends luncheon given by Amb Beam;
several ranking USSR officials, including Amb Dobryinin, also present

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 182 words

Mil spokesmen rept USAF fighter-bombers, escorting B-52s on raids along
Laotian-N Vietnamese border, attack 3 missile sites in N Vietnam; B-52s raid Ho
Chi Minh Trail; sensing devices aboard escort planes pick up indications that
missile sites begin tracking aircraft preparatory to firing; US command says 2
fighter-bombers fire 3 Shrike missiles at N Vietnamese positions, which do not
fire in return; Amer planes are not damaged; strikes are termed 'protective
reaction'; map; S Vietnamese task force in Cambodia reptdly is locked in battle
with Communist troops on Route 4 at Stung Chhay, 1 of 2 enemy-held mt passes
connecting Pnompenh with oil-refinery city of Kompong Som; battle details; mil
sources, Saigon, rept Amer pilots would fly med evacuation helicopters into
Cambodia to pick up wounded S Vietnamese troops if necessary; say action would
fall into category of air and logistic support; move would raise question of
whether helicopters could land without some Amers on ground; presence of Amers
would violate US Cong ban on use of Amer ground troops or advisers in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 17, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 112 words

S Vietnam command repts Govt force, after 2 days of fighting, has dislodged
enemy troops from Stung Chhay, pushes northward to link up with southbound
Cambodian troops moving toward Pich Nil pass; repts 72 N Vietnamese killed
during fighting; puts S Vietnam losses at 5 killed, 30 wounded; press
photographer repts 2 US helicopter gunships were observed flying over Stung
Chhay Pass; US command, Saigon, says they were flying 'interdiction missions';
denies US combat support aircraft are taking part in Cambodian operation; map;
US command repts US fighter-bomber, escorting B-52s on raid over Ho Chi Minh
Trail in Laos, fires Shrike missile at N Vietnamese missile site

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 17, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 55 words

US Defense Sec Laird, in Washington after visit to SE Asia, says next few mos
will be critical for Cambodia but sees nothing to slow rate of US troops
withdrawal from S Vietnam, news conf; holds N Vietnamese are trying to test
Cambodian Govt; says he is impressed with progress made by Cambodians in
building up their armed forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 17, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 11 words

Woman being questioned by S Vietnamese soldier near Danang illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 17, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 35 words

State Dept censors delete from recently released Congressional transcript
answers by Sgt R D Wallace to questions by Sen Fulbright concerning derogatory
terms applied by Amer soldiers to Vietnamese; excerpt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 17, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 90 words

CBC correspondent M Maclear repts Le Duan, 1st Sec of N Vietnamese Communist
Party, has emerged as leading power in N Vietnamese leadership and as popular
figure; notes 2 most recent special sessions of Natl Assembly were notable for
absence of its chmn, Truong Chinh, long regarded as Le Duan's chief rival; says
stress was placed at sessions on collective leadership that includes Premier
Pham Van Dong and Min Vo Nguyen Giap, together with Ton Duc Thang as figurehead
Pres; discusses Le Duan's policies; Le Duan and Vo Nguyen Giap illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 17, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 7 words

US withdraws 540 more men from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 17, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

Pres Bokassa says second Vietnamese girl brought to Central African Repub is his
real daughter; first girl to be sent back to Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 17, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 7; (AFP)

LENGTH: 22 words

Statistics pub in Hanoi show indus production in N Vietnam rose by 5% in '70,
compared with '69; consumer prices went down in '70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 17, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 52, Column 4

LENGTH: 28 words

Phila Evening Bulletin repts that filter-tip marijuana cigarettes are being sold
in Phila; says Park Lane Cigarettes are product of Amer tech and Vietnamese
agriculture

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 17, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 26 words

Worsening mil situation in Cambodia and outlook discussed; map shows areas held
by N Vietnam and Vietcong troops; compares mil strength of involved forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 17, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 89 words

C L Sulzberger discusses US policy dilemma in Cambodia; says US ex-Amb Bowles,
in his memoirs and in a lr, repts that US Defense Dept, in '68, pressed for an
invasion of Cambodia to clean out Vietnamese Communists but invasion was
postponed as a result of his own diplomatic mission to Pnompenh at that time;
repts Bowles indicates that US State Dept and Pres Johnson overruled Defense
Dept; discusses fact that US gens and Cambodian ex-Premier Norodom Sihanouk were
aware that Communists, since '66, were using Cambodia as a sanctuary

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 17, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3, Column 8

LENGTH: 13 words

17 NFL football players to tour US mil outposts in Vietnam and Far East; list

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 68 words

US fighter-bombers attack 2 missile sites in N Vietnam in 3d straight day of
'protective reaction' strikes; spokesmen say 2 planes escorting B-52s on raids
along Laotian-N Vietnamese border fire 3 Shrike missiles with unknown results;
say US pilots fire after radar units at missile sites lock onto aircraft, posing
threat; Cambodia repts Govt troops have reached and retaken crucial Pich Nil
Pass on Hwy 4

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 7 words

Capt B C Ewing lr deplores Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 4

LENGTH: 35 words

Adm Sharp, noting that Vietnamization is succeeding and that S Vietnamese forces
may assume completely ground combat role by end of yr, discusses need for
continued presence of large Amer force in Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 54, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Article on problems involved in doing business in Saigon; bureaucracy cited;
many of 33 Amer businesses in city are profitable; comments of some businessmen
noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 55, Column 1

LENGTH: 123 words

N Vietnam's econ, bolstered by significant food production increases last yr,
rebldg of some industries and annual flow of more than $1-billion from its
Communist allies, appears to be relatively sound in judgment of Washington
sources; US econ specialists hold N Vietnam is capable of sustaining war effort
indefinitely; hold N Vietnam could allocate most of its own resources to
civilian econ tasks; recent econ successes discussed; illus; map; US agr experts
estimate N Vietnam's '70 rice crop at 4.5-million tons, about 1.5-million above
'68 level and only 500,000 short of self-sufficiency; N Vietnam is believed to
have begun planting 'miracle rice,' high-yield variety developed by US and
apparently brought into country by Vietcong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 509 words

NY Times survey on US Army intelligence operations on civilians from '67-68
notes initial efforts began in '65 with Watts, Los Angeles, race riots; says
Army instructed mil intelligence groups to collect basic data about cities with
potential disorders in event Fed troops were needed; says plan gained little
impetus till '67 Newark and Detroit riots when Maj Gen William P Yarborough
ordered nationwide teletype network set up which would handle data from FBI,
local police depts and mil intelligence agents; notes attempt by intelligence to
predict site of disorder ended when rioting broke out in 100 cities following
'68 assassination of Rev Dr King; US Army fed names of about 18,000 Amer
civilians into its computers, dossiers and files in wide-ranging intelligence
operation during tumultuous days of civil disturbances from summer of '67 to
fall of '69; in operation, which was ordered ended in '70, 1,000 Army agents
gathered personal and pol information on obscure persons, as well as prominent,
on advocates of violent protest and participants in legitimate pol activity;
orgns on which data were gathered include NAACP, J Birch Soc, Black Panthers,
KKK, SDS, DAR; emphasis was on radicals, black militants and Vietnam war
dissenters; mil operation picked up much of its data from local police officials
and FBI, but supplemented that data and collected its own through agents posing
as members of groups under surveillance, as newsmen, or merely as interested
bystanders; details of operation, known as Continental US Intelligence, or Conus
Intel, gathered from ints with civilian and uniformed Pentagon officials, Cong
sources, Secret Service agents and ex-agents, and from study of Army documents
and files; findings include following: directives from Cabinet-level officials,
authorizing intelligence gathering to help Army carry out its mission of
quelling civil disorders, were imprecise; Army guidelines for subordinate
commands were loosely drawn; each subordinate expanded on his instructions to
please his superiors and to protect self from charges that he did not do his
job; once started, intelligence operation generated demand for its product from
Justice Dept, FBI, police depts and other govt agencies; Conus Intel was but 1
part of vast, interlocking intelligence exchange that Pres Kennedy and Johnson,
and probably Pres Nixon, knew was in operation, although they may not have been
aware of all its details; there was no conspiracy, as far as could be discerned,
by mil to subvert pol liberties; mil intelligence-gathering apparatus, its
methods and burgeoning activities and difficulties of slowing it down described;
role of Gen Yarborough in its creation noted; details on use of Army
intelligence agents at '68 Dem and Repub Natl Convs; growing concern of civilian
and mil officials about mil intelligence activities and events leading to Army
order in '70 to destroy data banks at Fts Holabird, Hood and Monroe described;
illus of a mil intelligence rept and of photo taken by ex-Army agent of
antidraft demonstration

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 19, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 46 words

Lt Col Fish, UN command briefing officer in Saigon, confirms repts that
helicopters are flying missions in Cambodia from US ships in Gulf of Siam;
identifies vessels but declines to give their positions; insists there are no US
ground combat troops or US advisers in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 19, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 14 words

N Vietnamese forces overrun 3 Laotian Govt defensive positions in Bloven
plateau; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 19, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 307 words

US Defense Dept says US intends to employ full range of its air combat power
throughout Cambodia against enemy troops and supplies that 'ultimately' might
threaten Amer mil men in S Vietnam; J W Friedheim, Pentagon spokesman, says this
includes use of Amer-flown helicopters to carry S Vietnamese troops into combat
into Cambodia, even under hostile ground fire, news briefing; insists that only
things proscribed are use of Amer ground troops or mil advisers; concedes Amer
air crews might sometimes leave their craft while on the ground in Cambodia in
the course of moving supplies or troops but denies rept from Saigon that US air
liason officers might have operated from Cambodian soil; says S Vietnamese and
Cambodian liason officers are aboard some US spotter planes to help coordinate
Amer fire support; says some few troop-ferrying missions were flown recently in
support of efforts to open Route 4; insists that use of US helicopters,
transports and fire-bombers represents no change in US policy; reiterates that
objective of US combat support is prevention of establishment of enemy
sanctuaries there; high Pentagon official says that Sec Laird, prior to his
visit to SE Asia, turned down a request for like authority to ferry troops and
ammunition to a major S Vietnamese operation north of Pnompenh; Laird and Adm
Moorer brief Nixon and Natl Security Council on their findings during their
visit to area; US command repts that 2 US helicopter carriers are stationed off
Cambodia staging 'interdiction' missions against enemy lines and supplying
allied forces operating in Cambodia; US helicopter gunships reptdly have made at
least 3 attacks in direct support of Cambodian troops trying to clear major
Cambodian supply line; Moorer says he has confidence that Cambodian armed forces
will eventually win their battle for survival

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 19, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 321 words

Sen McGovern announces candidacy for '72 Dem Pres nomination, TV s in SD and in
lrs to 1,500 newspaper eds and 275,000 potential backers; pledges to withdraw
all US troops from SE Asia if elected; says his campaign will be based on
'candor and reason'; says 'it will be rooted not in manipulation of our fears
and divisions, but in natl dialogue based on mutual respect and common hope';
says that kind of campaign takes time and that is why he is announcing far ahead
of traditional date; another reason is that he is far behind Muskie and needs
'71 to make himself well enough known to make '72 primary campaign feasible;
McGovern calls Vietnam war 'dreadful mistake,' but rejects neo-isolationism;
seeks to picture self as proponent of new pol and as logical heir to tradition
of Sens R F Kennedy and McCarthy; describes self as 'uniquely qualified to meet
special requirements of today' in Pres candidate because of his early opposition
to war and 'conviction of many Dems' that party was not responsive in '68 to
their views and concerns; McGovern's office says B Clark, who was McCarthy's
campaign mgr, will be McGovern's campaign mgr; co-chmn will be J Douglas and Mrs
J Westwood; Sen Muskie, in televised s declaring candidacy for Dem Pres
nomination, says econ problems can best be solved by ending 'needless war and
mil waste'; says US should seek broadest possible accord at SALT despite USSR
proposals that talks be limited to curtailing antiballistic missiles; says
Middle East situation does 'more to poison US-Soviet relations' than any other
issue; says that Soviet Premier Kosygin was 'completely frank and cordial' but
declines to say if there is any special 'rapport' between them; Muskie says he
has had 2d thoughts on Sen Mansfield's resolution to withdraw substantial number
of US troops, thinks withdrawals should be considered along with other
developments, including Eur security conf, news conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 20, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 104 words

About 300 S Vietnamese paratroopers, airlifted by helicopter, raid camp inside
Cambodia where 20 Amers are believed to have been held; find no one; Amers
captured in S Vietnam reptdly are being held in border camps in Cambodia; Saigon
sources rept abortive S Vietnamese effort, led by Lt Gen Do Cao Tri, to rescue
20 Amers believed held prisoner at enemy camp just inside Cambodia; S Vietnamese
troops found camp empty; captured 30 enemy soldiers; raid was part of operation
in wide area of S Vietnam and across border in Cambodia; Saigon sources rept
abortive S Vietnamese effort to rescue 20 Amers believed held prisoner

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 20, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 176 words

US acknowledges recent step-up in type and intensity of US air operations in
Cambodia but insists Adm policy has not changed from guidelines laid down by
Nixon in '70; Adm spokesmen fail to give precise explanation for AP photo
showing an Amer in camouflage uniform racing to helicopter that landed in
Cambodia not far from heavy fighting along Route 4; photo illus; White House
press sec Ziegler says there are no US ground troops or advisers in Cambodia,
insists US policy has not changed; Freidheim suggests that Amer in photo may be
assigned to US Embassy in Pnompenh; US State Dept takes contrary view; Friedheim
says he erred in reptg US ferrying operations but they may be considered in the
future; State Dept spokesman McCloskey admits increase in US mission in Pnompenh
from 77 to 95; links increase in US aid to Cambodia; Pentagon spokesman, denying
Hanoi repts, says only US air activity affecting N Vietnam recently has been
attacks on missile sites along Laotian border by planes protecting bombing
missions against enemy supply lines in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 20, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

Mil situation in Cambodia analyzed; comment on reasons behind expanded US air
role in Cambodia; growing US role seen as move to buy time to withdraw US combat
troops from S Vietnam, help Cambodia and S Vietnam do likewise; issue of whether
increased US air activity violates US Cong prohibition discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 20, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 25 words

Cambodian Premier Lon Nol arrives, Saigon, for talks with S Vietnamese leaders;
met by US Amb Bunker, S Vietnamese Premier Tran Thien Khiem and others

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 20, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 70 words

S Vietnamese armored force reptdly pushes closer to link-up with Cambodian
troops in drive to clear Route 4; Cambodia repts the 2 forces are only 10 mi
apart, that its troops are stalled at northern entrance to Pich Nil Pass; over
1,000 S Vietnamese marines and their arty reptdly airlifted by helicopter to
Cambodian garrison of Kompong Seila; US helicopter gunships and fighter-bombers
fly air strikes over pass; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 20, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 149 words

Sen McGovern charges Pres Nixon has violated '70 Cooper-Church resolution by
authorizing intensive air activity over Cambodia, press conf, Washington; holds
US is following 'same path in Cambodia, step-by-step involvement, that we
followed in Vietnam' and 'may well be setting stage for expanding conflict to
all of SE Asia'; holds raids on POW camps endanger lives of all Amers in
Vietnam; says he will enter '72 primaries all over US, including NH, which he
says he expects Muskie to win; denies he is stalking horse for Sen Kennedy;
notes differences between self and Muskie; holds Nixon has not been able to
broaden base of his '68 support; says SD backers have contributed $100,000 to
his campaign as 1st gesture; large contributors he has lined up include M
Palevsky, H L Kimelman, J Floyd, M S Dees Jr; correction on key aides; Douglas
will be campaign chmn, Clark and Westwood vice chmn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 20, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 142 words

Saigon sources rept US helicopters have been supporting Laotian ground troops in
Laos for some time and have been attacking enemy troops and supplies along Ho
Chi Minh Trail; say US is conducting 1 of biggest aerial campaigns of war in
Laos, using diverse equipment such as B-52s, tactical fighter-bombers, aircraft
with special secret equipment and other gunships; say aim is to slow flow of N
Vietnamese troops and supplies into S Vietnam and other countries and to prevent
enemy forces from establishing sanctuaries; US command repts 13 helicopters have
been lost over Laos since last March; US command issues clarification of Defense
Dept statement on role of US helicopter gunships in Cambodia; denies they have
transported S Vietnamese reinforcements for allied drive in Cambodia; claims it
is within guidelines laid down for use of US air power

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 21, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 33 words

US Air Force aide announces that Air Force Col G V Kehrli will be tried by gen
ct martial in S Vietnam on Feb 8 on charges of possession of marijuana and
solicitation for illegal transfer of drug

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 21, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Lts John Kent, Edward Shallcross, James Skelly and Norman Banks call for
investigation 'of the responsibility' of Gens Westmoreland, Zumwalt and other US
mil leaders for 'war crimes' in Indochina, news conf; say they support call by
Concerned Officers Movement members for inquiry bd; cite Gens Abrams, Momyer and
Walt, and Lt Gen Cushman; say they will send lrs requesting inquiry to armed
services secs and House and Sen coms; are introduced by Natl Com for a Citizens
Comm of Inquiry into US War Crimes aide

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 21, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 78 words

N Vietnam pub what it calls detailed list of recent US air raids against it; mil
experts in Hanoi hold raids are aimed at completely isolating N Vietnam from S
Vietnam; list charges US sprayed quantities of chems, apparently to defoliate
forests and prevent them from being used as refuges and supply dumps; N
Vietnamese communique says raids are 'grave acts of aggression and are part of
Nixon's plans to get out of critical situation' in SE Asia; details on list

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 21, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 37 words

Amer advisers and S Vietnamese officers reptdly travel together on command and
control helicopters in Cambodia and periodically set foot on ground; Amer in AP
photo partly identified as US Army major with name like 'Hawks'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 21, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 60 words

Defense Dept spokesman denies N Vietnamese rept that US carries out bombing
offensive against N Vietnam; says only US attacks against N Vietnamese territory
during period specified in rept consisted of 'protective reactions' by US
aircraft covering bombing operations in Laos especially Ho Chi Minh Trail; says
no defoliation operations have been carried out

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 21, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

Scene from Japanese news agency film depicting US prisoners in N Vietnam singing
Xmas carols illus; CBS news program shows film

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 21, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

S Vietnamese troops will observe 24-hr cease-fire at Tet, lunar new yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 21, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 119 words

Tape-recorded message to Weatherman underground, attributed to Rev D J Berrigan,
pleads with US radical group to return to nonviolence; version of taped text is
pub in Village Voice; Voice repr says authenticity of tape was established
through Berrigan's friends who made contact with him in prison, where he is
serving sentence for destroying draft files; Voice says message was taped 3 days
before his arrest Aug 11; Berrigan says mark of inhuman treatment of humans is
'mark of beast, whether its insignia is the mil or the movement'; says
revolutionary movement can have historic meaning only as it is dedicated to
human dignity and protection of life; exempts from his prohibition Vietcong and
Black Panthers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 21, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 122 words

Sen Humphrey int on return 'back home' to Sen; illus; he is 93d in seniority;
has asked for assignments to Appropriations and Govt Operations Coms; has staff
of 22, mixture of long-time aides and Sen specialists; has no '72 campaign staff
operating from other qrs; scores Pres Nixon's plan for withdrawing Amers from
Vietnam; says US has to make decision to 'get out and then get out'; says Nixon
is 'getting trapped by the mil rationale' that US air support in Cambodia is
used to protect withdrawing Amers; says he has serious doubts whether Nixon will
run; urges Dem colleagues not only attack Nixon but also attack natl problems;
speaks highly of McGovern and other possible nominees, naming Sens Muskie, Bayh,
Hughes and Jackson

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 21, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 121 words

Advance elements of S Vietnamese and Cambodian troops reptdly link up in their
rd-clearing drive; 10-mi stretch of Route 4 remains mostly under enemy control;
Cambodian troops engage in heavy fighting with enemy troops at entrance of pass;
enemy attacks S Vietnamese troops at Khet Kandol not far from S Vietnamese
border; map; 56 enemy soldiers reptd killed; Lon Nol, in Saigon, confs with Pres
Nguyen Van Thieu, Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky, Premier Tran Than Khiem and S
Vietnamese mil comdrs; private talks between them reptdly snagged on Cambodian
refusal to pay some costs of S Vietnamese troops fighting in Cambodia and also
pay debts that S Vietnam claims date from '54 and estimates at between
$1-million to $4-million

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 21, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 205 words

US Defense Sec Laird says '69 Nixon doctrine pledging US readiness to provide
'material assistance and air and sea assistance' to Asian allies while
encouraging them to help themselves and Dec '70 mil aid supplemental bill
provide rationale and authority for expanded US air power in Cambodia, news
conf; says after returning from SE Asian tour he reptd to Nixon that such air
power in Cambodia is crucial to success of program of Amer troop withdrawals
from S Vietnam; concedes Nixon said that after June 30,'70 there would be 'no US
air or logistics support' to S Vietnamese operating in Cambodia; abandons term
'interdiction' which has been used in past to mean permissible efforts to cut
off flow of enemy supplies and instead uses broader term 'air power'; insists
Adm lives up to 'letter and spirit' of Cong ban on use of Amer ground troops and
advisers in Cambodia; says 'we will use air power, and as long as I am serving
on this job I will recommend we use air power to supplement S Vietnamese
forces'; insists US will not commit ground combat forces or advisers; Sen Church
calls for prompt Sen Foreign Relations Com hearings to determine whether current
US operations are respecting Cong's intent to avoid US involvement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 6

LENGTH: 21 words

Text of lr he wrote Jan 15, '69 to then Sec C M Flifford as head of task force
that wrote Pentagon study on Vietnam war; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 108 words

Amer mil spokesman in Saigon corrects earlier statement by US Command that no
combat marines are aboard 2 Amer helicopter carriers off coast of Cambodia; says
all such 'amphibious readiness groups' routinely carry Amer combat marines;
describes US air strikes in Cambodia as 'interdiction' of enemy lines; denies
Amer advisers are flying in S Vietnamese helicopters to coordinate support for
troops on Route 4; says Amers seen on the ground in Cambodia were logistics
personnel who alight for short time when a helicopter lands; Amer and S
ietnamese mil commands announce 24-hr cease fire for Tet; Vietcong has already
announced 4-day cease-fire

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 28 words

6 marines killed, 16 injured in crash of USMC CH-46, 20 mi SW of Danang, S
Vietnam; US command, in delayed rept, announces sharp attack on allied team in
Mekong Delta

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 31 words

US command repts 37 Amers killed last wk, 211 wounded; repts 44,305 Amers have
been killed in war, 293,823 have been wounded; S Vietnamese and enemy casualties
for last wk and war listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

100th Paris peace talks session; both sides cite 2-yr record of failure and
blame each other for it; US spokesman repts nothing of news value happened in
session; Xuan Thuy says talks are deadlocked because Nixon Adm pursues 'policy
of colonial aggression' and seeks mil victory; Bruce accuses other side of
distorting US policy and actions to justify other side's 'recalcitrance' at
table; Nguyen Thi Binh accuses US of aggression against S Vietnamese people;
Pham Dang Lam says N Vietnam has committed aggression; other details on session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 115 words

Cambodian Premier Lon Nol ends visit to Saigon; announces agreements to expand
relations and reduce tensions with S Vietnam, news conf; illus; says he will
soon send Cambodian delegation to S Vietnam to sign accords; also announces an
accord on setting up mixed comm to oversee treatment by each nation of the
other's nationals; accord stems from charges that Cambodians have massacred
Vietnamese and that S Vietnamese troops have conducted themselves badly; says
Cambodia is prepared to exch 17 N Vietnamese and Vietcong prisoners for 17
journalists missing in Cambodia and believed captured by anti-Govt forces; says
more US helicopters are needed, need for US troops has not yet arisen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 13 words

Lr backs AAAS study conclusion that program has despoiled forests in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 4

LENGTH: 37 words

Algernon D Black lr on Fed revenue sharing sees tax revolt possible with
citizens deducting cost of Vietnam war, money so deducted put into fund set
aside for needs of cities; says tax revolt is not new in Amer history

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 208 words

64 US Dem Reprs, headed by Repr Bingham, offer legis to ban use of funds to
'provide US air or sea combat support for any mil operations in Cambodia'; bill
is designed as an extension of Cooper-Church amendment; 64 US Congressmen, who
protest US operations in Cambodia, take issue with Defense Sec Laird's statement
that expanded use of US air power in Cambodia is 'crucial to the success' of
policy of withdrawing Amer forces from S Vietnam; group of 13 Reprs, led by Repr
Ryan, presents resolution calling for immediate halt of all 'offensive actions'
by US in SE Asia and demanding withdrawal of all Amer troops by next June; Sen
Mondale, in lr to Nixon, says US actions in Laos jeopardize hopes for further
withdrawals of Amer troops from Vietnam; Repr Lowenstein says, after tour of
Indochina, total US withdrawal of armed forces is only road to peace, news conf;
says US will 'tie all of Indochina into one war' if it continues to escalate air
strikes in N Vietnam; Nixon Adm officials say N Vietnamese infiltration of at
least 20,000 troops into southern Laos since last Sept was probably intended
both to protect trails from north, which lead into Cambodia and S Vietnam, and
to protect Communist sanctuaries in Laos from allied incursion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 23, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 119 words

Sec of State Rogers reassures Sen Cooper that Nixon Adm is abiding by US Cong
curbs on Amer involvement in Cambodia; Rogers to testify at closed session of
Sen Armed Services Com; officials disclose that Defense Dept has issued new
instructions to forbid landing of Amer mil personnel in Cambodia; acknowledge
that some Amers had been on the ground; describe incidents as 'mistakes'; State
Dept says US is discouraged by attack on airport but holds Cambodian Govt is not
in danger of imminent collapse; describes damage to airport as 'minimal'; US
officials say survival of friendly govt in Cambodia that would permit allied mil
operations there is considered essential to program of US withdrawals from
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 23, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 82 words

US command sponsors tour for correspondents to US helicopter base in S Vietnam,
near Cambodia, from which S Vietnamese officers and Amer 'airborne coordinators'
participate in support operation involving 2 US helicopter carriers in Gulf of
Siam; US officers clarify many aspects of US air role in Cambodia; describe
operational procedures; say Amer whose photo was carried by AP was US logistics
officer from helicopter base, that such officers often must step out of
helicopters on the ground

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 23, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 35 words

Terrorist bomb rocks central Pnompenh, blows up police immigration post; at
least 10 persons wounded; S Vietnamese Amb to Cambodia, Tran Van Phouc, injured
by flying glass when blast rocks his home in Pnompenh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 23, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7

LENGTH: 28 words

Top mil sources in Saigon doubt attack on Pnompenh's airport foreshadows any
immediate upsurge in war; describe attack as isolated effort to flaunt enemy's
capabilities

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 23, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 11 words

Vietcong gunners down 2 US helicopters, killing 8 Amers, wounding 3

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 23, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 25 words

Amb Bunker says pacification program in S Vietnam has been so successful it will
now be called Community Defense and Local Development Plan, s, Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 23, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 126 words

At least 39 persons reptd killed and 170 wounded in raid on airport and nearby
installations; map; casualty list includes many civilians, wives and children of
soldiers; fires continue to burn among wrecked planes and devastated ammunition
dumps and at shipyard in Pnompenh; Lon Nol assesses damage; urges that airport
be rushed back into operation as soon as possible; Cambodian command believes 10
enemy commandos carried out raid; entire Cambodian air force, including 10
planes, 4 helicopters and 3 hangars reptd destroyed; illus; Cambodian and S
Vietnamese mil forces link up at pass on Route 4; map; hwy badly damaged and
will not be in usable condition for some time; 3 clashes within 30 mi of Pich
Nil reptd; 28 N Vietnamese soldiers reptd killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 24, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Fighting in Cambodia stalls work indefinitely on $27-million Prek Thnot power
and irrigation project begun in '69 as 1st major step to develop Mekong River
basin; project dirs hopeful that reopening Route 4 will permit resumption of
work

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 24, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 11 words

Vietcong gunners down helicopter 65 mi S of Danang; 2 Amers wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 24, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 95 words

US mil intelligence sources rept rate of infiltration of enemy troops dropped
surprisingly in Dec and Jan after sharp rise at start of dry season; say recent
upsurge of fighting in Cambodia is not related to infiltration trends; mil
experts hold likelihood of major enemy actions this spring is limited; hold
Hanoi still applies concept of 'protracted warfare'; details on infiltration; US
intelligence experts hold enemy is concentrating on low-cost spectacular action,
using small but highly trained and mobile units, to keep Cambodians and S
Vietnamese off balance

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 24, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 9 words

Fire rages through Saigon, S Vietnam, slum; many hurt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 24, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 20 words

Dem Natl Chmn O'Brien issues criticism of State of the Union Message; charges
Pres Nixon ignored Indochina war and econ

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 24, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 48, Column 4

LENGTH: 135 words

Sen Muskie opens 1st campaign swing with news conf, Sacramento, Calif, in his
undeclared bid for '72 Presidency; plans meetings with potential backers and
fund-raisers in Calif; he and McGovern s, Calif Dem Conv; McGovern says aim is
to retire Pres Nixon, not to fight against rivals for Dem nomination; Muskie
criticizes use of Amer helicopters in Cambodia; says 'rd out of S Vietnam does
not lead through Cambodia'; charges Adm disregards voice of Cong and pledge that
mil actions would not be undertaken in Cambodia; scores Nixon's econ policies
and veto of manpower training bill, contends Dem party does not want and does
not need unemployment as pol issue but charges Adm has made it one; says Nixon,
in State of the Union Message, tried to 'put the monkey on the back of Cong' for
his past shortcomings

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 24, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 14, Column 6

LENGTH: 66 words

Lr on G E Allen Jan 10 article hopes Pres Nixon's policies will result in
improvement in business activity in '71; backs Nixon econ policies, holds Nixon
correctly predicted econ slump in '70 based on Adm programs and policies and now
predicts improvements in '71 and '72; comments on Nixon's withdrawal plan; notes
there are 40% fewer mil personnel in Vietnam now than when Nixon took office

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 24, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

Comment on widened US air involvement in Cambodia; map shows area of intensified
attacks; Defense Sec Laird's statement noted; illus of allied helicopters
landing on rd in Cambodia to pick up S Vietnamese troops needed for action
against Communists

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 24, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 15, Column 0

LENGTH: 116 words

Former Pres Johnson aide John P Roche article, noting difficulty of 'instant
history' assessments of former Pres Kennedy-Johnson era, discusses several
events involved in formulation of US policy by Kennedy and Johnson; notes he
(Roche) opposed bombing strategy against N Vietnam and that Johnson was fully
aware of his position; discusses conflicting repts by several authorities on '63
TV int with Kennedy and Johnson's '68 s, in which Johnson cut back air war on N
Vietnam and announced his retirement; discusses different accounts of former Sec
Rusk role; holds former Asst Sec R Hilsman shifted his views on war during
course of time; discusses dispute over Tonkin Gulf Resolution; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 24, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

Lrs on Dec 27 (VII,pp4,5) revs by Prof R Falk and N Sheehan of books by Prof T
Taylor (Nuremberg and Vietnam) and M Lane (Conversations With Americans) on
atrocities committed by US in war; Sheehan replies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 24, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 67 words

S Vietnamese command repts it will soon withdraw its 5,300 troops who helped
clear Route 4; fails to say if they will be sent elsewhere in Cambodia; about
9,000 other S Vietnamese soldiers are operating in Cambodia; US repts that daily
Amer mil program assistance flights from Saigon to Pnompenh have been resumed;
says US has been flying logistical missions in support of S Vietnamese since
Nov; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 132 words

US fighter-bomber pilots flying over Laos have been given instructions that
foreshadow increased Amer attacks on AA installations in N Vietnamese border
regions; informed sources rept that instructions, issued last mo, direct pilots
to take 'more aggressive actions' when they are 'locked in' by enemy radar;
instructions appear to represent subtle shift in policy for pilots; shift is
cited to explain recent series of 'protective reaction' strikes by US pilots;
some mil sources suggest N Vietnam may understand new policy; no significant
threats by enemy radar have been reptd in last wk; underlying policy shift is
concern expressed at mil command in Saigon of growing threat to B-52s and
smaller bombers attempting to slow enemy supplies moving through Laos into
Cambodia and S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Ed says S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu's advantages are enormous as pres
election campaign gets under way; says possibility that he might be defeated by
peace candidate cannot be ruled out; notes special S Vietnamese Sen session is
considering electoral law, put forward by Nguyen Van Thieu's supporters, that
would limit number of candidates; notes efforts by Nguyen Van Thieu to bolster
his power; says Gen Duong Van Minh projects peace image; holds Duong Van Minh's
election might be possible if opposition can unite around him

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 3

LENGTH: 12 words

Lr scores several frequently enunciated plans for solution of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 55 words

S Vietnam frees 40 disabled N Vietnamese POWs; 37 return to N Vietnam; 3 decide
to stay in S Vietnam; S Vietnamese troops give account of release; say freed
prisoners shout anti-S Vietnamese slogans; say enemy fires 8 mortar rounds at S
Vietnamese soldiers; 3 prisoners who decide to stay tell, in int, why they
changed their minds

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 26, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 49 words

US withdraws its 2 vessels off Cambodia which were supporting and fueling US
armed helicopters supporting S Vietnamese troops; map; S Vietnam withdraws 1,500
troops from Route 4 operation; returns about 3,800 troops to S Vietnam; US
continues air strikes against enemy forces and supply lines

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 26, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 80 words

Amer officials disclose development of program for 'mil equipment delivery team'
that would send US mil reprs through Cambodian countryside to check on
deployment of Amer mil equipment; insist Amers would not fall into an advisory
role and conflict with Cong curbs on US involvement; program described; it would
be centered in Saigon, start with about 16 Amer mil under jurisdiction of US
Amb; US reptdly plans to replace most of 15 aircraft destroyed in enemy attack
on airport

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 26, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 72 words

Article on improvement in S Vietnamese armed forces, which are rapidly assuming
major part of ground fighting; S Vietnamese leaders and Amer advisers are aware
that war is far from over and serious problems persist; S Vietnamese forces are
still largely untested; problems include shaky morale, low pay, climbing
desertion rates, social and class distinctions, and ultimate effect of US
withdrawal of most of supply system; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 26, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 143 words

Nixon Adm, working to equip S Vietnam to take over full responsibility for air
war within its boundaries once Amer air power has been removed, has decided on
another substantial increase in size of S Vietnamese air force; Deputy Sec
Packard says US will probably have to keep some fighters in region to provide
emergency protection over interim period after Amer ground and air forces have
left Vietnam, int; says this protection would be aimed at deterring N Vietnam
from introducing large numbers of fighter-bombers over S Vietnam after departure
of US forces; Packard illus; most of buildup will be completed by summer of '73;
1 element will not become available until '74 or '75; expansion of air force
discussed; Pentagon sources say latest expansion decision will raise number of
aircraft to more than 1,200 and number of squadrons to 50; other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 26, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 26 words

S Vietnamese Govt spokesman repts Vietcong violations of Vietcong's announced
4-day Tet (lunar new yr) truce; repts 6 persons killed, 22 wounded in 2 attacks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 26, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 43 words

Thai Deputy Premier Praphas Charusathien repts Thai army reinforcements have
been sent to Thai border with Cambodia following increase in Vietcong activity
around Pnompenh; says border has been closed to prevent infiltration by
Communists among Cambodians

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 26, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnamese Govt proposes that it and N Vietnam release immediately all sick
and wounded POWs, including Amer airmen held in N Vietnam; Min Tran Van Lam
comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 27, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 112 words

US Defense Dept spokesman acknowledges that 15 to 20 Amers in civilian clothes
landed at Pnompenh airport to retrieve 2 damaged helicopters and take them back
to S Vietnam for repairs, reply to queries on CBS TV and radio repts on episode;
identifies men only as 'US personnel' and declines to say specifically that they
were mil men, explain why they wore civilian clothes or confirm that they
carried weapons; CBS correspondent in Pnompenh, D Webster, quoted participant as
identifying mission leader as a Col McKinley and saying men changed into
uniforms or flight suits once they returned into their own craft; illus of Amers
in civilian clothes at Pnompenh airport

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 27, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 31 words

S Vietnamese civilian population begins celebrating Tet, lunar new yr; illus; S
Vietnamese command repts enemy troops have violated Vietcong truce 5 times,
killing 6 persons, wounding 25

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 27, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 55 words

Defense Sec Laird renews his plea to N Vietnam to live up to Geneva Conv and
permit IRC to inspect its POW camps, s, Washington; Repr Montgomery says he sees
possibility that Congressional group will be allowed to visit camps within next
few mos, lr to HR members; tells of his recent meeting with N Vietnamese
diplomats in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 27, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 3

LENGTH: 148 words

Sen Mansfield, delivering Dem response to Pres Nixon's State of Union Message on
TV, dismisses suggestions that Nixon, with his eye on '72 Pres campaign, might
have pol motive in presenting ambitious program that he did not expect Dem Cong
to approve; says major programs outlined in message are so comprehensive and
revolutionary that it is not reasonable to expect all would be passed by Cong;
most he pledges is that all of proposals will be considered by Cong; Mansfield,
rather than making s, borrows conversational format from Nixon and is int by 4
network correspondents; expresses reservations about Nixon's unrestricted
revenue-sharing plan, contending it might be 'dangerous procedure' to give money
to states without 'guid pro quo'; criticizes Nixon Adm failure to withdraw
forces from NATO; says Adm has 'advanced in the right direction' in withdrawing
troops from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 28, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 60 words

Cambodian command repts start of large drive to clear out enemy concentrations
west and northwest of Pnompenh; enemy forces step up small-scale attacks on
posts outside Pnompenh; attacks on Saang and Bat Doeung described; map; Amer
airlift of ammunition, fuel and other supplies continues; S Vietnam repts 2,000
of its troops have been pulled out of Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 28, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 276 words

Sen Stennis, chmn of Sen Armed Services Com, says, after briefing by Defense Sec
Laird, that it might become necessary to relax present Cong curbs on US mil
operations in Cambodia if situation worsens; raises possibility that US would
have to send in ground controllers to direct Amer plans providing air support
for Cambodian and S Vietnamese troops; says Laird gave com 'strongly confident'
rept that situation is improving and that 'fair progress' is being made through
use of Amer air support; Laird, after testifying at hearing, says there has been
no violation of Cong ban on US mil activity in Cambodia; Stennis backs view;
both insist Cooper-Church amendment does not prohibit US air support; Sen
Mansfield hold opposing view; Laird explains that Amers who retrieved damaged
helicopters at Pnompenh airport wore civilian clothes at the suggestion of Amb
Swank who felt that US should 'keep its profile as low as possible'; says he
will recommend 'most strongly' that on any such future mission the men wear
their uniforms; describes such missions as part of US aid program; defends
assignment of 'mil delivery teams' to Cambodia to 'audit' shipment of Amer arms;
says assignment carries out commitment he gave to Cong in '70; Sen McGovern says
'any Sen who talks about sending Amer forces into Cambodia ought to lead the
charge himself'; Laird illus with Stennis; group of Sen critics of war
introduces legis requiring withdrawal of all Amer troops from Vietnam by Dec 31;
Sens McGovern, Hatfield, Hughes and Cranston are principal sponsors; 13 other
Sens sign as co-sponsors; McGovern says withdrawal deadline is necessary to
produce pol settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 28, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 48 words

US fighter-bomber crashes in southern Cambodia while on mission near Route 4;
pilot killed; allied commands rept at least 53 enemy violations during allied
cease-fire; Tet holiday said to be quietest in recent yrs; casualties noted;
allied cease-fire ends; Vietcong cease-fire continues

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 28, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 36 words

US command in Saigon says it has turned over to Cambodian Navy 8 river patrol
boats under US mil aid program; boats carry machine guns and rifle grenade
launcher as well as radar for detecting river traffic in dark

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 28, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 6 words

People in Saigon celebrate Tet; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 28, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 4

LENGTH: 93 words

NYS Legis approves $127.1-million in loans for Albany S Mall project, deficiency
budget; Dems denounce project, Assemblyman Berle terming it adm's 'Vietnam';
Repubs support financing request but agree to name supervisory subcom for
investigation; Repub Assemblyman Field deplores cost but defends benefits for
community; Sen Zaretzki, Assemblyman Eve critical, latter charging laborers are
imported from other countries while state residents cannot find work; Repub
leader Kingston denies that charge, also noting minority-group workers hold 11%
of Mall jobs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 28, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 6

LENGTH: 30 words

Assemblyman Peter A A Berle, in Quotation of Day about Albany's South Mall
project, says 'It's become the Legislature's Vietnam. We've got to continue it
and finish it to get out'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 29, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 115 words

US command repts 50 Amers died in combat last wk; spokesmen attribute rise
largely to 2 plane crashes that killed 14 Amers; command lists 295 Amers wounded
last wk; S Vietnamese and enemy casualty figures for last wk reptd; 44,355
Amers, 118,966 S Vietnamese and 696,528 enemy have been killed in war; mil
sources rept all USAF combat units will be withdrawn from S Vietnam by end of
'72, leaving only advisers and technicians, if S Vietnamese Air Force is
sufficiently strong by then; little ground action reptd; 3 grenades rip through
theater in Binhdinh Prov, killing 10 Vietnamese and wounding 19; bomb explodes
in mkt place about 80 mi farther N, killing 9 Vietnamese and wounding 22

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 29, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 48 words

US Rear Adm Herbert S Matthews reptdly organized and commanded by radio a S
Vietnamese convoy in which fuel ships were escorted to Pnompenh from S Vietnam;
US spokesman, Saigon, says he does not know if such action can be construed as
violation of Cong curbs on US mil activity in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 29, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

Vice Pres Agnew says US aid to Cambodia is designed primarily to protect Amer
troops in S Vietnam as Pres Nixon's troop withdrawal time-table continues

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 29, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7

LENGTH: 74 words

Official sources, Saigon, say US mil teams that are to move through Cambodia to
check on use of Amer mil aid are to travel in civilian clothes with instructions
to remain out of combat areas; do not rule out possibility that mil equipment
delivery teams will provide some advice to Cambodian soldiers; rept 16 teams
will operate out of Pnompenh, 44 others out of Saigon; say each trip by a Saigon
team will need express approval of Amb Swank

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 29, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 8

LENGTH: 46 words

US command, Saigon, makes pub gen summary of Amer involvement in last wk's joint
Cambodian-S Vietnamese operation to clear Route 4; declines to reveal number of
Amer bombing strikes or other aid missions; repts total of 39 US airmen have
been killed over Cambodia since May

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 29, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 7; (UPI)

LENGTH: 30 words

Univ of Mass announces plan to admit Vietnam veterans to school who have lower
than avg scholastic aptitude test scores; will overlook poor grades recorded
prior to mil service

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 29, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Ed sees history repeating itself with 'insidious insertion of Amer mil power
into Cambodia in support of a faltering regime'; revs US growing involvement in
Vietnam and queries if Adm has learned nothing from tragic experiences of the
past

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 29, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Lr from 3 Buddhist monks in S Vietnamese prison urges peace and tells of
hardships of 500 monks who are mainly imprisoned for their refusal to bear arms;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 30, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 43 words

Vietcong new year cease-fire ends; allies rept Vietcong violated its cease-fire
at least 74 times; S Vietnamese Govt spokesman repts at least 39 S Vietnamese
mil personnel and civilians were killed and 125 wounded during cease-fire; enemy
downs US helicopter

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 30, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Pres Nixon asks $76-billion, fiscal '72 Budget Message; sum is $1.5-billion
above expected spending for fiscal '71 and ends 2 yrs of decline in defense
spending; Defense Dept officials say that, priced in fiscal '72 dollars, new
budget represents drop of $3.6-billion from current yr; budget contemplates
force level drop of 194,000, to 2.5 million men, lower by almost 200,000 than
pre-Vietnam war force

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 30, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 2

LENGTH: 131 words

A Lewis says Vietnamization has always been policy with inconsistent objectives;
holds events in Indochina now suggest Nixon, while pulling ground forces out of
Vietnam, is intensifying Amer mil effort by other means; says lesson of Vietnam
is that Amer mil intervention in Indochina can only be distorting; says we must
accept necessity for pol settlement in Vietnam, not fool ourselves that we can
impose a mil one; says getting out should be overwhelming objective of US
policy; criticizes Stennis suggestion that expanded Amer mil operations may be
necessary as more deception on US role in Indochina; holds Amer pub must surely
know that Amer involvement in another SE Asian war can help no one; says US must
accept need for pol settlement and US withdrawal and end self-Deception

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 30, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 142 words

Pentagon announces Lt Gen J O Seaman, 'in the interest of justice', drops all
ct-martial charges against Maj Gen S W Koster, div comdr of troops who were
involved in alleged Sonmy massacre; says Seaman found 'some evidence' that
Koster heard that about 20 civilians were killed during battle and that he
failed to investigate it, but concluded that he was not guilty of any
'intentional abrogation of responsibilities'; R MacCrate, who served as special
counsel to inquiry panel under Lt Gen W R Peers, says dismissal of charges is
'serious disservice to the Army'; makes other comments; Repr Stratton scores
action; details on charges against Koster and others; war crimes inquiry comm
com terms action a 'travesty'; repts that it received testimony in its hearings
from former servicemen who said troops under Seaman committed atrocities in
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 30, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 58 words

US continues massive saturation raids against N Vietnamese infiltration and
supply routes in Laos; map; drops hundreds of tons of bombs on trail; S
Vietnamese sources say small-unit operations involving S Vietnamese forces have
been conducted on ground against trail network in Laos, with ground troops being
lifted in and out of key points along it

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 30, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 328 words

Sec of State Rogers holds open possibility US air power may be used to support S
Vietnamese expedition against Communist supply bases in southern Laos, news
conf; rules out use of Amer ground combat troops in Cambodia or Laos, but says
US will use its air power in any way necessary throughout Indochina to prevent
enemy forces from massing strength for attack; warns US withdrawals from S
Vietnam are entering critical stage and that danger increases as US troops are
reduced; specifically expresses concern about large buildup of N Vietnamese
forces in panhandle area of Laos, just across border from northwestern S
Vietnam; his remarks stir speculation that S Vietnamese move into Laos might be
in offing; major new allied offensive in northwestern corner of S Vietnam is
another possibility; Laird says US will continue intensive bombing of Ho Chi
Minh Trail; insists current US air activity in Cambodia is intended to protect
Amer forces fighting in S Vietnam, not to guarantee survival of Lon Nol Govt;
says period between now and May 1 will be critical because of continuing US
withdrawals and probability of increased enemy activity in dry season; says
Nixon intends to use air power as he sees fit to cope with this dangerous
period; Rogers illus;; Rogers specifically refuses to state, as previous Adms
have done, that US regards Govt of Taiwan as rightful Govt of all china,
including mainland; infers change in traditional posture might be in offing;
says US is encouraged by recent developments in mideast talks and hopes they can
move into more active phase with oral exchanges in private sessions; urges quiet
diplomacy and mil restraint and expresses hope that cease-fire will be extended
beyond Feb 5; says that although SALT has so far been 'somewhat unproductive'
accord is still possible; holds E Berlin traffic harassment will hinder 4-power
talks; says US will propose that fishing dispute with Ecuador go to Internatl Ct
period; Rogers illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 31, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 174 words

Adm officials in Washington decline to discuss speculation that S Vietnamese,
with Amer air support, are about to invade southern Laos; other sources at State
Dept and Pentagon say there was no unusual activity this weekend and suggest
that if there is a major new operation in Indochina, it will not come today and
possibly not tomorrow either; NY Times correspondents in Saigon rept regularly
available seats on mil aircraft going to northern regions of S Vietnam cannot be
booked from Saigon; mil sources in Saigon say normally scheduled troop and cargo
flights have been pre-empted by 'higher priority traffic'; Observer (London pub)
says allied authorities have imposed news blackout on mil activities in S
Vietnam's northern area; repts meeting between Nguyen Van Thieu, Bunker and
Abrams; says further extension of war appears imminent; US command announces
B-52s continue to pound Ho Chi Minh Trail; B-52 mission is flown near Khesanh,
former bastion in NW corner of S Vietnam; US planes raid in Cambodia; illus of
Cambodian soldiers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 31, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 107 words

Laotian Premier Souvanna Phouma says he is convinced that N Vietnamese are
beginning a gen offensive against Laotian Govt positions, int; says N Vietnam's
strategy may be to attempt conquest of Cambodia and Laos now and leave S Vietnam
to be dealt with later; thinks offensive will have 3 objectives, Boloven Plateau
and Savannakhet in the south and Govt stronghold of Long Cheng and Sam Thong at
southwestern edge of Plaine des Jarres; estimates N Vietnamese in Laos total
60,000 troops; says he now believes that contacts made by Souk Vongsak,
ostensibly for peace talks, were insincere; says his forces badly need more
weapons from US; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 31, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 21 words

Hanoi radio says US planes bombed northern part of buffer zone recently; says US
planes have raided N Vietnam for last 5 days

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 31, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (GP)

LENGTH: 59 words

Gallup Poll repts upsurge of pub support for Hatfield-McGovern amendment, which
calls for end of US troop involvement in S Vietnam by end of yr; repts latest
survey shows 73% of those surveyed support amendment; 55% supported amendment in
survey taken last Sept; latest survey also repts 59% of Amers believe US made
mistake in involving itself in war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 31, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Objective of S Vietnamese incursion into Laos reptdly would be to sever Ho Chi
Minh Trail; 9 civilians killed, 35 wounded in explosion set by terrorists at
ferry crossing 44 mi S of Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 31, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 38 words

Dr H A Jack opens office, NYC, to establish inter-religious presence at UN with
aim of ending Vietnamese war, promoting disarmament and combating racism;
rejects extremist tactics; clergymen of all major world religions involved

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 31, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 22 words

S Vietnamese sailors and Cambodian soldiers clash after argument, Pnompenh; 1
Cambodian bystander killed, 10 other persons injured

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 31, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

Jack Gould comments on recent situation in which jokes about marijuana told by B
Hope during his Xmas tour for US soldiers in S Vietnam were deleted from NBC
special TV show on tour, but Hope repeated those jokes on J Carson show; notes
special show gave no indication that marijuana jokes evoked perhaps heartiest
laughter among troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 31, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 7

LENGTH: 12 words

Comment on dropping of Vietnam atrocity charges against Samuel Koster

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 31, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 43 words

Lr on plight of Cambodia holds its best hope of freeing itself from Communist
control is to have US and S Vietnam minimize their mil role in country; says
Cambodians nationalism and will are its indispensable ingredients for survival;
Cambodian soldier illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 254 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 31, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 4

LENGTH: 119 words

Tom Wicker, noting Secs Laird and Rogers say US air strikes in SE Asia serve
Nixon Adm's ultimate goal of protecting withdrawal of Amer troops from S
Vietnam, says Nixon, in guise of winding down war, widens it in most destructive
way; notes destructiveness of air warfare; says Cong can do little to make Nixon
desist from SE Asian air war; says widened air war is direct consequence of
Vietnamization; queries how S Vietnamese army can be expected to protect S
Vietnam once Amers have left if it cannot now even protect Amer withdrawals;
queries why Vietnamization is preferred to negotiated settlement; says Nixon
'owes it to humanity' to explain how his policy can bring generation of peace;
cartoon of Nixon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
