
                               1 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 19 words

Internatl Control Comm, set up 21 yrs ago to bring peace to Indochina, ends
activities in Laos on Dec 31 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 1-76-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 93 words

Ed holds that Apr 29 '75, day on which Pres Ford announced that evacuation of
all Amers from S Vietnam had been completed, stands out as turning point in US
affairs.  Notes that Ford then pointed out folly of belief that 'if we do not
succeed in everything everywhere, then we have succeeded in nothing anywhere'.
Points out that US acceptance of Vietnamese refugees proved that US public's
conscience had not been eroded by long misadventure.  Says that day marked not
withdrawal into new isolationism but recognition that US power has proper
limits.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 3-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

Total of 4,600 people reptdly have been flown out of Saigon (S Vietnam) since
Aug 12 '75 in 85 special flights arranged by France.  2,100 of total reptdly are
French nationals.  French community in Saigon now numbers about 5,500, of whom
only small minority is French-born.  Indian, Cambodian, Hong Kong, Filipino and
Vietnamese Govts have also used airlift to fly out relatives of repatriates (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 4-3-9

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 8

LENGTH: 40 words

N Vietnamese Communist party newspaper Nhan Dan repts rail link between Hanoi
and Saigon should be fully back in service by end of '76 after repair of
extensive war damage.  Says parts of line are already open to traffic in S
Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 4-4-2

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY LAURIE JOHNSTON

SECTION: Page 24, Column 3

LENGTH: 38 words

Former US Army deserter Veto H Baker, last known US soldier to leave S Vietnam,
reptdly is living with wife and children in Honolulu (Hawaii) after receiving
gen discharge from armed forces on Jan 1 '76.  Case recalled (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 6-76-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 32 words

Soviet State Com for Foreign Econ Relations 1st Deputy Chmn Vitaly Morozov says
USSR plans to grant extensive econ aid to N Vietnam during next 5 yrs.  Some of
planned projects described (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 6-76-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 15 words

North Vietnam and Jamaica establish diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 6-76-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD D LYONS

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 257 words

ACLU makes public final rept of Pres Clemency Board for Vietnam war resisters,
disputing rept stand that program was successful, news conf.  ACLU amnesty
project dir Henry Schwarzchild charges White House tries to suppress rept, which
shows only 21,729 persons applied for clemency.  White House aide John Carlson
says rept is available to public and that bd chmn Charles E Goodell will answer
questions.  Goodell's office refers questioners to White House and Govt Printing
Office says White House has not approved public sale of copies.Rept holds
113,377 persons were eligible for program.  ACLU aide Ramsey Clark holds some 2
million, including hundreds of thousands who failed to register for draft during
war era, could be in legal jeopardy.  ACLU holds 750,000 would be affected by
gen amnesty.  ACLU charges FBI harasses groups seeking amnesty for war
resisters.  Says thousands of men, including some who have gone through clemency
program are targets of discrimination by prospective employers and Veterans Adm.
Rept holds much of work remains unfinished and urges continuation of program.
Notes 5,052 men have been recommended for outright pardons, 7,551 have been
given varying periods of alternative service, 911 have been denied clemency and
8,215 cases have yet to be resolved.  Schwarzchild charges FBI gathers data on
peaceful pol activists without justification.  Plans suit to force FBI to turn
over files on amnesty movement.  FBI repr says bur does not probe any amnesty
groups solely because they advocate amnesty (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 7-76-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM L SAFIRE

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 139 words

William Safire scores 'idea-killers,' those who riddle with ridicule new ideas
from pol candidates without examining them first, and sees these killers already
entered into battle in '76 with Ronald Reagan's plan to decentralize welfare.
Claims that potential for intelligent debate is there, but because it is new, it
is puzzling, and Reagan's opponents will misrepresent conservative position
while liberals ridicule it.  Recalls idea-killers of past Pres campaigns.  Notes
that in '64, Barry Goldwater's idea for reform of Social Security system was
twisted.  Says in '68, George Romney's call for reassessment of Vietnam policy
was ridiculed.  Recalls in '72 George McGovern was made to look foolish about
his idea on redistributing wealth.  Wonders whether public really wants its Pres
candidates to talk about their ideas (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-76-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 5

LENGTH: 32 words

Vietnam war veteran Larry Thompson arrested, Spokane, Washington, for murdering
his mother Lavonne Thompson, his sister Sandra Kerns and nephews Justin Kerns,
5, and Jason Thompson, 4 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-76-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DAVID K SHIPLER

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 122 words

Analysis of Angolan civil war as test of detente between US and USSR.  USSR,
with its intervention, violates US assumption that detente means backing off
from confrontations everywhere, and US, through its protests and
counter-intervention, violates Soviet assumption support for natl liberation
movements is not inconsistent with detente.  USSR seen assuming US resistance in
Angola will be minimal because of Vietnam war experience and its aftermath.
Moscow diplomats, noting Sec Kissinger linked to Angola detente elements of
trade concessions to USSR and offensive strategic arms limitation agreement,
suggest US position is relatively brittle, or that US may be bluffing by
resorting to issues more important than Angola (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 8-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY MICHAEL RYWKIN

SECTION: Page 24, Column 4

LENGTH: 48 words

City Univ Prof Michael Rywkin lr holds that there is no similarity between
Vietnam and Angola.  Contends that, since USSR is not likely to repeat US
mistakes, limited US material aid to forces fighting USSR-back Popular Movement
for Liberation of Angola will not exacerbate situation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 10

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD C HOLBROOKE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 4

LENGTH: 21 words

Gareth Porter book A Peace Denied.  The United States, Vietnam, and the Paris
Agreement revd by Richard Holbrooke.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 11

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD C HOLBROOKE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 4

LENGTH: 11 words

Gareth Porter book A Peace Denied.  The United States, Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 11

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KENNETH A BRIGGS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

Article on ebbing of ch activism in US in recent yrs.  Attributes diminution of
action programs to difficulty in fund-raising and displacement of such issues as
civil rights and Vietnam by more global matters.  Cites sporadic activism of RC
Ch, Center for Corporate Responsiblity, an interfaith alliance, and United Ch of
Christ (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 11-5-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DONALD G BRENNAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 41 words

Lr by Donald G Brennan, of Hudson Inst, challenging attack by Prof Gil Carl
Alroy on Sec Kissinger in his Jan 4 lr.  Disputes particularly statement that
Vietnam peace accord was disaster and that Kissinger had earlier deceived Cong
on issue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 11

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 2

LENGTH: 118 words

Pentagon repts only 14% of Army deserters who participated in Pres Ford's
clemency program mentioned Vietnam as being in any way responsible for their
decision to leave.  Says reasons for leaving were generally unassociated with
war.  Notes half of men said they deserted because of personal, family or
financial problems while most of remainder were unable to adjust to Army life.
Says only 19% of these deserters saw service in Vietnam and only 1% had deserted
from combat.  Says about 46% of them had previously been absent without leave.
Says generally deserters were less likely to be well-educated, intelligent and
white and more likely to have been under age of 20 when they entered service
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 11-7-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 2

LENGTH: 118 words

Pentagon rept only 14% of Army deserters who participated in Pres Ford's
clemency program mentioned Vietnam as being in any way responsible for their
decision to leave.  Says reasons for leaving were generally unassociated with
war.  Notes half of men said they deserted because of personal, family or
financial problems while most of remainder were unable to adjust to Army life.
Says only 19% of these deserters say service in Vietnam and only 1% had deserted
from combat.  Says about 46% of them had previously been absent without leave.
Says generally deserters were less likely to be well-educated, intelligent and
white and more likely to have been under age of 20 when they entered service
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 11-7-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY WALTER A SHELDON

SECTION: Page 26, Column 5

LENGTH: 31 words

Walter A Sheldon reply to Robert W Berry's Jan 1 lr opposing amnesty.  Says US
admission that Vietnam involvement was mistake would help undo some of damage it
inflicted on citizenry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 12

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY WALTER SULLIVAN

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Col Roy K Flint, specialist in mil history at US Mil Acad, West Point, says GB
lost Amer Revolutionary War for combination of reasons with striking
similarities to Amer experience in Vietnam, annual meeting of Soc for Historical
Archeology, Phila.  Avoids direct reference to Vietnam.  Attributes Brit defeat
in large measure to harassment by hostile rural population.  Illus of
contemporary Brit cartoon (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 13-76

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 199 words

Some econ and pol changes that have taken place in N and S Vietnam since Apr '75
Communist takeover described.  N Vietnam reptdly now has proliferation of goods
from closed US post exchanges in S Vietnam that have been shipped northward.  N
Vietnamese reptdly have also packed contents of well-equipped 7th-Day Adventist
hosp, textile mill and large quantities of S Vietnamese rice for shipment north.
Other evidence of redistribution of property, which is part of reunification
process, noted.  Speculation on types of work being performed by tens of
thousands of N Vietnamese who have traveled to S Vietnam given.  N Vietnamese
Natl Assembly's recent disclosure that Hue, one-time imperial capital of S
Vietnam, and 2 northernmost provs of S Vietnam have been merged into N Vietnam's
southernmost prov recalled.  Steady decline in Saigon's standard of living as
result of war's end which disbanded civil service and S Vietnamese Army noted.
Fragmentary and 2d-hand repts say armed resistance continues in S Vietnam
concentrated in Montagnard tribe center of Ban Me Thuot, in Darlac Prov and
Mekong Delta.  Intense N Vietnamese propaganda barrage against Thailand reptdly
continues (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 13-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 259 words

Much of 3d world is gradually joining Communist nations in closing itself off
from critical inquiry, demonstrating suspicion toward correspondents and
reducing their access to sources of news.  During '75 number of countries that
grant entry visas routinely has greatly diminished.  India, S Vietnam, Cambodia,
Loas, Mozambique and Angola have joined nations that often make access
conditional on what they deem positive attitude to policies of country.  Former
dictatorial regimes in Saigon and Phnom Penh have been replaced by regimes that
ban access.  Because much of 3d world is given to 1-party or even 1-man govt in
which natl press in controlled by govt, foreign press has often been important
channel of expression for critical sentiment within country.  In Ethiopia,
Revolutionary Mil Govt keeps foreign press from seeing unrest in countryside and
civil war in Eritrea by issuing accrediatations valid only in Addis Ababa.
Internatl Press Inst in Zurich notes in its annual press-freedom rept that cases
of expulsions or visa denials have been reptd from 21 countries, 15 in 3d world,
3 in Communist countries and South Africa and Spain.  NY Times correspondent
Henry Kamm was denied visas by Czechoslovakia, Libya and Algeria in '75.  Other
Times correspondents were refused visas to visit Chile, Nigeria, Laos and
Vietnam and 1 was expelled from Cambodia.  Coverage of Middle East remains
difficult because only Jordan, Lebanon and Israel permit generally unhampered
access to people and places in news.  Incident in Tanzania noted (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 14-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY EMANUEL MAIER

SECTION: Page 32, Column 5

LENGTH: 42 words

Emanuel Maier lr holds Dec 28 ed runs counter to NY Times's ed policy.  Says
arrogant elite that led US into Vietnam war and gave us Watergate is, by and
large, still in positions of trust and honor and that Times has done little to
discredit them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 15

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 5

LENGTH: 97 words

Former Pres Clemency Bd Chmn Charles E Goodell calls on Pres Ford and Cong to
reopen and widen program to aid Vietnam war resisters and draft evaders, news
conf.  Notes sharp rise in number of applicants for program in last 2 mos of
program and says if program were reopened, many more men would apply.  Terms
program limited success even though number of applicants was held down by
bureaucratic delays.  Says he opposes bill before HR Judiciary Com that would
reduce further legal liabilities of men who did not register for draft, deserted
their mil units or went AWOL (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 16-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 3

LENGTH: 60 words

US Sen George McGovern returns to Hanoi (N Vietnam), Jan 16, after 1-day visit
to Saigon (S Vietnam).  Conferred in Saigon with Foreign Min Nguyen Thi Binh.
Met with former N Vietnamese delegate to Paris peace talks Xuan Thuy.  Is
highest ranking Amer to visit Saigon since Apr '75 collapse of Govt.  Is
expected to visit Bangkok (Thailand) shortly (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 17-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 261 words

NAACP annual rept contends that slow and hard gains made by black wage earners
during past 25 yrs were 'fragile and temporary'.  Assn dir Herbert Hill sees
role of blacks in labor force as grim for at least another decade unless current
trends are reversed.  Rept says that in unemployment rates, duration of
joblessness, earnings and labor force entry of young workers, blacks are being
forced back into patterns that were commonplace during '30s Depression.  Rept
alleges that condition is not only caused by gen econ decline but also is direct
consequence of Fed Govt's 'failure' to enforce extensive prohibitions against
job discrimination.  Official jobless rate for US whites is 7.6%, while black
rate is 14.1%.  NAACP and Natl Urban League argue that 'hidden unemployment' or
'discouraged workers' no longer in labor force or part-time workers give truer
picture of 13.6% jobless rate for whites and 25.5% for blacks.  Hill says
information from 25 areas of major black urban population concentration shows
black unemployment rate to be 30% while black teen-age unemployment level
exceeds 40%.  Rept shows joblessness among Vietnam veterans exceeds 22%.  NAACP
data showing that proportion of middle income black families in US dropped
sharply, '73-present, from 1/4 to 1/5 of population decisively refute Apr '73
Commentary rept on 'remarkable development' and 'mighty strides' made by blacks.
Hill contends employment discrimination is not result of individual bigotry but
rather is consequence of systematic institutionalized patterns rooted in soc
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 18-5-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Algeria to supply 300,000 tons of oil products to N Vietnam in '76.  Shipments
will be made on special terms similar to those in contract signed in June '75
with S Vietnamese Govt (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 18-4-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY NICHOLAS M HORROCK

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 367 words

Associates of ex-Pres Nixon say Nixon testified in Morton H Halperin civil suit
that he never personally selected persons to be wiretapped under '69 FBI
operation to find sources of leaks of information.  Say Nixon defended his
decision to use wiretapping.  He reptdly said he left selection of targets to
then-Natl Security Council head H A Kissinger.  Testimony appears to contradict
that of Kissinger, who said that at Apr 25 '69 meeting with Nixon, then-FBI Dir
J Edgar Hoover and then-Atty Gen John N Mitchell, Nixon specifically directed
the electronic surveillance of 4 persons whose names were suggested at meeting
by Hoover, including that of Halperin.  Sources say Nixon did not criticize
Kissinger during questioning but said that Kissinger was 'in full accord' with
use of wiretaps and was instructed to select targets.  Nixon says he did not
order tap to to be placed on phone of Halperin or any of 3 other persons tapped
on May 9 '69.  Says he believed it was up to Kissinger to halt given wiretap if
it proved unproductive.  Case revd.  Sources say Nixon denied any knowledge of
plan in White House to prepare paper to counter criticism of his Vietnam policy
being planned by Clark M Clifford.  Evidence shows John D Ehrlichman learned in
Dec '69 from FBI rept on conversation between Halperin and Clifford that
Clifford planned to write article in magazine criticizing Nixon's Vietnam
policy.  Documents show Ehrlichman, with H R Haldeman's approval, ordered Jeb S
Magruder to prepare material to counter Clifford's charges.  Nixon says he did
not order this chain of events and was unaware it was taking place.  Nixon's
behavior at deposition noted.  He did not drink water, he was loquacious and
occasionally lectured listeners on foreign policy decisions.  Nixon confirms
that in May '70 he ordered that FBI repts on telephone conversations be sent to
Haldeman and not to Kissinger and himself.  Sources say Nixon did not want
Kissinger spending his time reading logs of FBI surveillances and decided to
centralize responsibility for reviewing repts in Haldeman because Hoover wanted
to deal with only 1 person at White House.  Nixon reptdly said he regarded
operation as legal (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 18-4-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

More than 350,000 people reptdly have left Saigon (S Vietnam) and migrated to
countryside since Apr '75 Communist victory.  Total of 121,822 went to newly
created 'econ zones' and 233,790 returned to their native villages (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 19-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 104 words

Saigon radio broadcast says N and S Vietnam will elect joint natl assembly, Apr
25, with jurisdiction in both parts of country.  Says election date was approved
by body called Consultative Conf on Reunification and endorsed by other Govt
groups in Saigon and Hanoi.  Natl assembly will be legis orgn for reunified
Vietnam.  Will have task of approving ruling body to run country's day-to-day
affairs and set policy subject to nominal approval of assembly.  Will devise
official name for reunified country and approve flag design.  Radio rept says
authorities have ordered gen census of S Vietnam to facilitate voting (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 20-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY GEORGE MARGOLIS

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 55 words

Dr George Margolis lr lauding proposal in UN by US Amb Daniel P Moynihan for
amnesty for pol prisoners, exiles and refugees but objecting to suggestion by
Paul K Stewart in Jan 9 lr to extend amnesty to persons convicted in Watergate
affair so long as resisters to Vietnam war are excluded from unconditional
amnesty by US Govt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 21

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Rev of Pres Ford's fiscal '77 budget proposals, which would: halt GI bill educ
benefits for those who join all-volunteer, peacetime armed services.  Limit time
for using educ benefits for Vietnam veterans from 10 to 8 yrs.  Halt educ
benefits for correspondence courses or flight training for new enrollees.  Inst
tougher methods to collect funds from veterans paid in advance for courses but
who fail to proceed with educ.  Require private insurers to pay for veterans
with nonservice disability for services in Veterans hosps.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY PETER KIHSS

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 157 words

Ex-Nixon aide Charles W Colson, in forthcoming book Born Again, says Nixon
called him one midnight in Dec '73 and said he was worried that he might be
'wiped out financially' if he fought impeachment and was afraid of possible
jailing.  Quotes Nixon as saying that then-Vice Pres Ford was 'nice, clean,' but
'isn't ready just yet' to be Pres.  Title of book refers to Colson's religious
experience after he left White House staff in Mar '73.  Says in Dec 18 '73
meeting Nixon said White House tapes were H R Haldeman's idea and that he told
Haldeman twice to have system removed.  Says Nixon told him in May '72, after he
ordered mining of Haiphong Harbor and all-out bombing of N Vietnam, that Gen
Alexander M Haig Jr, Treas Sec John B Connally, Haldeman and Colson were only
Adm members 'who favored this decision'.  Says Nixon added that Haig and
Connally are 'the only 2 men around here qualified to fill this job when I step
down' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 66 words

US Sen George McGovern says Vietnamese leaders appear eager to open peaceful
relations with US and other countries, news conf upon return from S and N
Vietnamese trip.  Suggests that US move could await all-Vietnam elections.
Urges that US not delay unduly in opening relations with Vietnam.  Holds US
experience with Cuba shows nothing can be gained from continuing to isolate
country (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD D LYONS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 146 words

Article assessing Adm's clemency program for Vietnam war resisters and mil
deserters.  Notes problems of draft evaders have not ended with clemency.  Cites
polls by clemency bd and other groups indicating approximately 50% of
prospective employers would discriminate against war resisters and deserters.
Notes contention of groups seeking blanket amnesty that stigma of ct martial
will shadow many resisters for rest of their lives in absence of some judicial
relief.  Notes bill pending before HR Judiciary Com that would absolve draft
resisters and deserters from punishment, release those remaining in prison,
dismiss pending legal proceedings for desertion or draft evasion, expunge
references to arrests, indictments or convictions from official records and
restore citizenship and replace dishonorable discharges with ctfs of resignation
from armed forces.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 25-7-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Analysts in Hong Kong express concern over series of recent moves by China,
Taiwan, Vietnam and Philippines apparently designed to reassert their claims to
disputed Spratly Islands.  Moves noted.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 25-4-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 118 words

Study circulated in Defense Dept, written by Geoffrey Kemp and commissioned by
Asst State Sec Robert F Ellsworth, says that Pentagon planners are concerned
over ability of US 'to protect mil force' into Western Pacific and Indian Oceans
in post-Vietnam era.  Says that in changed strategic situation, many
installations on which Amer naval and air forces have been based in past will be
unavailable and ability of area powers to challenge US forces will be enhanced.
Study concludes that scope of mil missions in area is likely to be seriously
limited unless steps are taken to develop 'alternative, forward, politically
invulnerable support bases' for Amer operations.  Study's recommendations noted
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 25-4-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 26, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 57 words

Natl Union for Total Independence of Angola leader Dr Jonas M Savimbi says that
USSR and Cuba will find themselves in Vietnam-type situation if they try to take
enemy strongholds in Angolan civil war.  Says that it would be impossible for
Popular Movement for Liberation of Angola to establish control of southern and
central Angola (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 26-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 55 words

Schools in Cambodia have remained closed since Communist takeover of country.
Regime is hostile to students and teachers.  By contrast, schools in S Vietnam
and Laos are reopening and functioning.  All schools have been taken over by
Communist Govt in S Vietnam.  Stress, as in Laos, has been on new instructional
materials (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 28-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 121 words

Former US Amb to S Vietnam Graham A Martin says that final US evacuation of
Saigon will be judged in long run as 'hell of a good job,' HR Internatl
Relations Subcom statement.  Martin has come under sharp criticism over his
handling of evacuation.  Some officials have charged that he unnecessarily
aggravated situation by not ordering all Amers out of Saigon sooner.  Martin
says actions were dictated by need to avoid panic and possible S Vietnamese
retaliation against departing Amers.  Says he has received thousands of lrs
indicating support for way evacuation was handled.  Notes that Pres Ford and
State Sec Kissinger publicly commended performance of Saigon Embassy during last
days before Saigon Govt's downfall (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 28-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY PETER KIHSS

SECTION: Page 23, Column 4

LENGTH: 87 words

Notre Dame Univ Center for Civil Rights, under $225,000 Ford Foundation grant,
is studying continuing problems of Vietnam war veterans, deserters and draft
evaders.  Univ Pres Rev Theodore M Hesburgh says aim of study is to describe
what has been done and may be done to relieve 'injustices' in mil system.  Says
Pres Ford's clemency program reached only 15 or 20% of those it might have.
Experience of Australia, which declared unconditional amnesty for draft evaders
or mil offenders, will be studied by univ (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 29-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 73 words

CORE natl dir Roy C Innis black civil rights leader, says that he is returning
from Angola to encourage black Amer veterans of Vietnam to go to Angola to fight
on behalf of Western-backed Natl Union for Total Independence of Angola.  Says
he also will try to persuade Sen John V Tunney (Calif) to introduce legis
granting direct US mil assistance to forces in fight against USSR-backed Popular
Movement for Liberation of Angola (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 29-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 31, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY LAURIE JOHNSTON

SECTION: Page 18, Column 6

LENGTH: 11 words

Takaaki Hasegawa named 1st Japanese ambassador to N Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 31-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 31, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 159 words

US Justice Dept has asked FBI to look into apparent violations of Fed neutrality
statutes by mercenary soldiers signing up to fight in Angola and by those who
are recruiting them.  No sources would say if criminal indictments could be
expected in case.  FBI would not comment on nature or scope of inquiry.  Under
Fed Criminal Code, any Amer citizen who is convicted of aiding a foreign govt in
act of war can be sentenced to 3 yrs in prison and fined $2,000.  About 200
Vietnam-era combat veterans, mostly black, reptdly have been recruited through
newspaper ads to fight alongside troops of Natl Union for Total Independence of
Angola, led by Jonas Savimbi.  That faction, with support of arms and material
from Amer Govt, is opposing Popular Movement for Liberation of Angola, backed by
USSR.  Larry Mitchell, Vietnam vet who heads recruiting program here, declines
to say who is financing his campaign, which promises volunteers $1,500 per mo
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 31-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY WARD JUST

SECTION: Section 7; Page 5

LENGTH: 32 words

Gen William C Westmoreland book A Soldier Reports about Vietnam war by Gen
William C Westmoreland, who was comdr of US forces in Vietnam from '64-68, revd
by Ward Just.  Westmoreland por.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 32

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY WARD JUST

SECTION: Section 7; Page 5

LENGTH: 21 words

Gen William C Westmoreland book A Soldier Reports, about US policy and his role
as US troops comdr in Vietnam, revd by Ward.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 32

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY PAUL ZWEIG

SECTION: Section 7; Page 5

LENGTH: 20 words

Gen William C Westmoreland book A Soldier Reports, about his role in Vietnam
war, revd by Ward Just.  Westmoreland por.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 32

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 120 words

Recent allegations by former US Amb to S Vietnam Graham A Martin, during HR
Internatl Relations Subcom hearings, that fall of S Vietnam was fault of
'pressure orgn called Indochina Resource Center, recalled.  While Martin has
charged that orgn has supporter in each of 500 Cong offices, former center assoc
said orgn has only 8 staff members and annual budget of between $50,000 and
$75,000.  Martin apparently agreed to testify before subcom because he reptdly
is seeking another diplomatic post.  Martin, while US Amb to Italy, reptdly won
approval, over CIA objections, of payment of $800,000 to Ital gen now facing
trial on charges of involvement in right-wing plots to overthrow Ital Govt in
'70.  Martin por (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 32-3-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY LESLIE H GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 68 words

Article on difficulty Ford and Sec Kissinger are having now in countering Soviet
expansionism, as in Angola, because of failure to get Cong to provide more mil
aid to prevent victory by Soviet-backed forces.  Parallels of Angolan situation
to closing days of Vietnam war, relationship of problem to detente, and some
possible alternatives for Ford and Kissinger discussed.  Drawing of Kissinger
cooped (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 32-3-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 169 words

USSR reptdly has increased econ aid to N Vietnam recently as part of process
aimed at strengthening Moscow-Hanoi relations at expense of People's Repub of
China relations with N Vietnam.  Western diplomats in Moscow reptdly are unable
to make precise estimates of size of aid package.  1 analyst estimates it at
$500-million.  Vitali G Morozov, State Com for Foreign Econ Relations 1st deputy
chmn, listed 40 capital projects to be financed by USSR during recent Tass int.
Some projects described.  Morozov says USSR will help construct some light indus
in addition to major projects.  While some aid is to be provided as
interest-free credit, other assistance includes outright grants.  USSR aid
agreements reptdly usually avoid explicit discussion of S Vietnam, which leads
Western analysts to assume that Soviet aid to S Vietnam is being channeled
through N Vietnam.  USSR reptdly is strongly encouraging reunification of 2
Vietnams.  Analysts reptdly believe USSR wishes to bring N Vietnam into Comecon
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 32-3-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 2, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY LESLIE H GELB

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 343 words

N Vietnamese leaders reptdly recently told visiting US Cong team members that
former US Pres Nixon sent memo, early in Jan '73, that they say promised
$3.25-billion in US aid after signing of Paris peace accords.  Cong sources say
N Vietnamese did not show document but quoted it.  Say N Vietnamese apparently
expect promised aid before fulfilling their part of agreement to provide more
information about US troops missing in action.  Cong members reptdly have been
seeking meeting with US Sec of State Kissinger to discuss memo in light of Jan
24 '73 statements by Kissinger 3 days before signing of agreement.  Kissinger
had said US made no secret understandings to obtain agreement and made no
promises on specific sums of postwar construction aid to N Vietnam.  Kissinger
is unavailable for comment.  Repr Paul N McCloskey Jr, 1 of Cong members who met
with N Vietnmese leaders, says meeting's substance has been conveyed to Pres
Ford recently.  Cong sources say Ford is revg several State Dept proposals to
make new gestures toward N Vietnamese in order to learn more about missing
Amers.  McCloskey says N Vietnamese leaders did not specifically link aid and
information on missing, but said '2 should go forward together'.  Nixon memo
reptdly was addressed to Premier Pham Van Dong.  Cong sources say N Vietnamese
officials gave team members copies of Joint Econ Com final agreement,
established by Paris accords to carry out terms of article on postwar
reconstruction, which pledged to give N Vietnam $3.25-billion in aid.  Figure is
exact amount said to be in Nixon memo.  US State Dept position at time was that
Econ Com activities were dependent on gen N Vietnamese compliance with accords.
US charged N Vietnam in July '74 of consistently violating accords.  Previous
allegations that Nixon and Kissinger made secret arrangements with N and S
Vietnamese Govts in order to obtain agreement recalled.  White House and State
Dept officials decline to comment on Nixon lr, saying they will stand by
Kissinger's Jan '73 news conf statements (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 33-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 55 words

Natl Council for Universal and Unconditional Amnesty scores new Ford
Foundation-financed study of problems of Vietnam veterans, deserters and draft
evaders as 'academically discredited'.  Says it sees no need for any new
studies, and that its members will refuse to participate.  Study to be carried
out by Notre Dame Univ (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 34-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DUANE SHANK

SECTION: Page 30, Column 5

LENGTH: 36 words

Conscientious Objectors Service assoc dir Duane Shank lr holds Defense Dept
claim that only 14% of deserters expressed opposition to Vietnam war (Jan 11) is
attempt to cover up extent of opposition to conflict.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 34

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 147 words

Ed holds recent disclosure in claim by N Vietnamese leaders that secret lr from
former Pres Nixon committed US to supply $3.25-billion in reconstruction aid to
N Vietnam is further evidence of erosion of trust that Cong can bestow upon exec
branch in conduct of day-to-day foreign affairs.  Says no such figure was
submitted to Cong.  Recalls that Sec of State Kissinger, in public announcement
about time of alleged memo, specifically declared that 'definition of any
particular sum' would come only in subsequent discussions between US and N
Vietnam and stated that there were 'no secret understandings' and 'no secret
formal obligations' in connection with Paris accords.  Contends memo cannot be
dismissed by Ford Adm as historical oddity.  Notes that Cong delegation that
visited Hanoi in Dec '75 has been unsuccessful in attempts to discuss
allegations with Sec Kissinger.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 34

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 120 words

Correction of Dec 4 '75 article on HR Intelligence Com testimony on estimates of
Communist troop strength in Vietnam which incorrectly quoted Lt Gen Daniel O
Graham concerning N Vietnamese and Vietcong troop figures, corrected quote says:
'estimates of total number of VC-NVA forces in the Tet offensive range between
67,000 and 85,000 troops.  Neither (Samuel A) Adams nor anyone else has ever
challenged these estimates.  That is not to say that those figures are
unchallengeable, but even if we grant the possibility that they are 100% too low
and that attacking VC-NVA troops bordered on 170,000, the Tet offensive
indicates that figures of enemy strength provided by intelligence were too high,
not too low' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 34-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY LESLIE H GELB

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 167 words

Memo written by HR Select Com on Missing in Action consultant Gareth Porter
reptdly recounting Dec '75 conversation between N Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min
Phan Hien ancom members indicates that if Ford Adm denies that former US Pres
Richard Nixon pledged $3.25-billion in postwar Amer aid to country, N Vietnam
may make supporting documents public.  Ford Adm spokesman reptdly has refused to
deny or confirm publicly aid pledge.  State Dept spokesman has said privately
that Nixon made such a pledge in lr dated Feb 1 '73.  White House press sec Ron
Nessen says, Feb 2, that regardless of whether there was private communication,
issue became moot because of Cong opposition to aid and because of N Vietnamese
violations of Paris accords.  Phan Hein reptdly said Nixon's lr stated US Govt
would contribute to postwar N Vietnamese reconstruction 'without any pol
conditions'.  Dept official says phrase may have been in reference to Ames
missing in action.  Other elements in dispute recalled (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 34-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY CRAIG R WHITNEY

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 136 words

Plight of 120 crippled and burned Vietnamese children at Oberhausen Peace
Village (W Ger) described.  Question of whether they should be sent back to
Vietnam has arisen as result of war's end and fact that most are not parentless.
86 are receiving intensive rehabilitation therapy while others are being cared
for by W Ger families.  30 of children have heard from families since war's end.
Former village dir Peter Stobe accuses current chmn Rev Fritz Berghaus and
village teachers of bringing up children to be anti-Communist and fearful of
returning home.  Berghaus denies charges.  Says he has gone to S Vietnamese
Embassy in E Berlin to discuss possibility of children's return.  Says he has
received cable signed by Saigon Health Min Duong Quynh stating that Foreign
Affairs Min has been contacted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 34-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 4, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JOHN M CREWDSON and NICHOLAS M HORROCK

SECTION: Page 65, Column 1

LENGTH: 337 words

Ex-CIA Dir William E Colby says he wants to keep both his secrecy agreement with
CIA and his pension and declines to answer for the record a number of questions
about sensitive CIA operations, int.  Says some of CIA's present public
difficulties are as much a product of sensationalism and lack of perspective by
its critics as of CIA's own transgressions.  Says CIA never 'engaged in an
effort to manipulate the Amer press'.  Says last 5 correspondents for major Amer
news-gathering orgns who served CIA as clandestine agents were 'phased out'
beginning in late '73 and by end of '74 all had severed their relationships with
CIA.  Concedes that part-time or freelance correspondents abroad who might at
times sell articles to Amer publications are continuing in some cases to gather
intelligence for CIA on the side.  Says CIA has planted stories with foreign
news orgns.  Says State Dept is reconsidering advisibility of allowing CIA
officers to pose as diplomats assigned to Amer embassies abroad and some
business concerns have withdrawn from arrangements in which CIA men passed
themselves off as corp employes overseas.  Justice Dept sources say ex-CIA Dir
Richard Helms's sworn assurance to Sen Foreign Relations Com that CIA did not
give financial support to opponents of late Chilean Pres Allende and did not
engage in surveillance of Amer citizens protesting against Vietnam war is being
probed.  Dept is also investigating Helms's authorizing of CIA-conducted
burglary of photographic studio in Washington suburb.  Colby says that although
CIA provided money to some Chilean orgns prior to '70 Chilean elections, he
believes that 'narrow construction' of questions asked of Helms in that area
preclude possibility that Helms perjured himself.  Says he believes Helms
answered Sen com correctly with respect to domestic surveillance by CIA since
CIA's role in what has become as Operation Chaos was confined, with small number
of unintended exceptions, to finding links between protesters and foreign govts
(L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 35

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 7, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY EDMUND OSYSKO

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 60 words

Edmund Osysko lr on Jan 27 editorial supporting Israeli and US attitude of
nonparticipation in Geneva peace talks because of presence of PLO, which does
not accept existence of Israel.  Says that during Vietnam peace conf in Paris,
US accepted presence of Vietcong, which also did not recognize other party.
Urges Israel to change its negotiating strategy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 38

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES ANTOINE DE NERCIAT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 84 words

AFP correspondent Charles Antoine de Nerciat repts on current reunification
process being undertaken in Saigon.  Saigon scene described as Govt mobilizes
city dists, hamlets and provs to honor reunification.  Scope and complexity of
administering Saigon which is vastly different than before war's end described.
Work of mil com chmn Gen Tran Van Tra to make Saigon more viable economically
described.  Problems encountered by continued high jobless rate noted.
Re-education programs outlined (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 39-2-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS BUTSON and BRYANT ROLLINS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Recent N Vietnamese allegations that former US Pres Nixon promised in writing
that US would provide country $3.25-billion in postwar aid summarized.  Accuracy
of allegations has been confirmed privately by 1 State Dept official.  White
House press sec Ron Nessen said question of whether such a promise was made is
moot because of Cong opposition to aid and because N Vietnam violated Paris
peace accords (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 39-2-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 11 words

Bus co is formed to run between North and South Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 42-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY LAURIE JOHNSTON

SECTION: Page 17, Column 3

LENGTH: 60 words

James A Mulligan, former Navy pilot who was prisoner of war in North Vietnam for
7 yrs, announces he will seek Dem nomination for Cong from Norfolk (Va) and from
own town of Virginia Beach.  Seat has been held by Repub Repr G William
Whitehurst since '68.  Mulligan faces possible challenge from Robert E
Washington, veteran state legislator from Norfolk (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 44-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 2

LENGTH: 28 words

Giai Phong (pub) says Saigon City Bank has drafted check-payment regulations and
provided clients with checkbooks for 1st time since Communist takeover in Apr
'75 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 46-5-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 136 words

Neutral Asian observers, after recent trips to Saigon (S Vietnam), say USSR has
apparently defeated People's Repub of China in struggle for influence in new S
Vietnamese Govt.  Observers call presence of Soviet citizens and allies and
absence of Chinese in Saigon remarkable.  Several reasons cited, including
age-old Vietnamese fear of being controlled by Chinese, desire to prevent
Chinese from infiltrating and exploiting large Chinese community in S Vietnam
and prospect of getting far more aid from USSR and allies.  Visitors say they
saw no evidence that USSR may get naval base at Cam Ranh Bay.  Econ aid projects
currently being undertaken by USSR in country described.  Say Amer Embassy bldg
in Saigon has been refurbished and purportedly will be turned over to USSR as hq
for trade and other missions (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 46-5-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Top Laotian and N Vietnam leaders, in joint statement broadcast from Hanoi,
demand that US withdraw all remaining forces from SE Asia and dismantle mil
bases there (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 46-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 4

LENGTH: 30 words

US Cath Conf official Dave Lewis says many Vietnamese refugees are homesick but
few want to return to S Vietnam.  He is directing follow-up program to aid
resettled refugees (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 47-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 17, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ABDUL KARIM AL- SHAIKHLY

SECTION: Page 30, Column 5

LENGTH: 180 words

Lr from Iraqi UN Amb Abdul Karim al-Shaikhly says that if allegations in W
Safire's Feb 5 column are true it would reveal that Kurdish faction, led by Gen
Mustafa Barzani, was pawn of foreign powers attempting to interfere in Iraq's
internal affairs, that US was engaged in another act of 'internatl adventurism'
and did not learn from its disastrous interference in Cuba, Vietnam and other
parts of world, that Barzani was collaborating with Israel, with which Iraq was
and still is at war, that Safire's real concern is loss of pawn for Israel, that
Safire is unware of fact that vis-a-vis Israel and Palestinian people US policy
has always been 'tough on the weak and weak on the tough,' that Safire is
ill-informed when he asserts that majority of Kurds live in Iraq, that Safire is
either misguided or is deliberately giving his readers wrong information when he
refers to Iraq as 'Communist-dominated'.  Says that if there is any truth to
Safire's article, US Govt is to congratulated for having come to its senses and
withdrawn from 'edge of a precipice' at last moment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 48

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Page 35, Column 2

LENGTH: 35 words

H Mitgang revs books A Soldier Reports by Gen William C Westmoreland and A Very
Human President by Jack Valenti.  Westmoreland summarizes Vietnam War.  Valenti
on relationship with late Pres Lyndon Johnson.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 49

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Page 35, Column 2

LENGTH: 20 words

Gen William C Westmoreland book A Soldier Reports, about US policy and his role
as US troops comdr in Vietnam, revd by.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 49

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY JOHN M CREWDSON

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 291 words

Private humanitarian orgn headed by Leo Cherne, 1 of Pres Ford's appointees to
new com that will investigate possible abuses of authority by CIA, reptdly recd
some $15,000 of CIA funds in mid-'60s that were channeled through a NYC
philanthropic orgn.  Norman Foundation pres Frank Weil says he was approached by
man from CIA in '63 or '64 and asked to pass about $15,000 in Govt funds to
Internatl Rescue Com (IRC), of which Cherne was then bd chmn, telephone int.
Says funds were earmarked for medical services project in what was then Belgian
Congo that was being supported by rescue com.  Says he is uncertain whether
Cherne or anyone else there was told that money was from CIA and not from
foundation's endowment.  Cherne says neither he 'nor any official' of IRC had
'slightest knowledge' that money was from CIA.  Foundation was among insts
identified publicly in '67 as those that had served as 'conduits' for CIA
financing of a number of domestic orgns principally the Natl Student Assn.  1
foundation identified in '67 as having cooperated with CIA in covert financing
efforts was J M Kaplan Fund, which contributed to rescue group and to Freedom
House, of which Cherne is exec com chmn.Kaplan Fund exec says foundation's
cooperation with CIA was ltd to underwriting of a single program in '60s and
that none of $21,500 given by it to rescue com or the $3,500 given to Freedom
House was supplied by CIA.  Kaplan Fund, according to tax records compiled by
Group Research, gave IRC $10,000 in '68 for assistance to refugees fleeing
Czechoslovakia after Soviet invasion that Aug.  Com recd another $10,000 from
fund in '71 for assistance to Begali refugees displaced by Pakistani war and
$1,000 in '63 to aid refugees in S Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 51

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JUAN DE ONIS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 113 words

Article on Sec Kissinger's tour of Latin Amer countries notes trip seems too
late for his diplomatic 'magic' to have much effect on inter-Amer relations.
Says Kissinger's speeches in public and private added no new substance to US
policy, but were primarily concerned with reassuring Latin Amers that US still
feels a 'special relationship. ' notes Kissinger's attention to inter-Amer
affairs has also been affected by '74 negotiations in Middle East and collapse
of South Vietnam in '75.  Says message that US will not 'stand idle' if Cuba
repeats Angolan exercise elsewhere was intended primarily to reassure Central
Amer and Caribbean countries worried by Cuban arms (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 53-1-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 12, Column 2

LENGTH: 100 words

Amers will not be allowed to claim Vietnamese refugees as dependents in their
'75 tax forms.  Under long-standing tax law, person who is not relative must
have lived in taxpayer's home for entire yr to qualify as dependent.  War in
Vietnam ended in late Apr '75, and vast relocation program that brought 133,000
refugees to US did not begin until several wks after, not in time to satisfy
all-yr requirement for '75.  Because almost everyone who took in refugees did so
on behalf of sponsoring charitable orgn, taxpayers can qualify for charitable
deductions for out-of-pocket expenses.  Illus (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 53-2-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

Remains of US Marine Lance Cpl Darwin L Judge and Pvt William McMahon are
brought to Bangkok (Thailand) from Saigon (S Vietnam) by Sen Edward M Kennedy
aides Dale S de Haan and Jerry M Tinker, Feb 22.  Are turned over to Amers at
Tan Son Nhut air base by S Vietnamese Govt official Trinh Van Anh.  Judge and
McMahon were killed by rocket attack on air base during last day of US
evacuation flights, Apr 29 '75.  Bangkok airport scene described (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 24, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DON LUCE

SECTION: Page 34, Column 5

LENGTH: 72 words

Lr by Don Luce, dir of Clergy and Laity Concerned (orgn), holds CIA endangers
lives of almost every Amer abroad by operating and recruiting secretly.  Says as
dir of Internatl Voluntary Services in Vietnam during '60s, he tried to get
assurances from different US Ambs that IVS members would not be recruited by
CIA.  Says 1 of IVS's members was killed and 1 wounded because, he believes,
Vietnamese could not tell who was who.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 55

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY CHRISTOPHER S WREN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 360 words

L I Brezhnev, in keynote speech Feb 24 opening USSR Communist Party 25th Cong,
holds USSR will continue to seek accommodation with West but will not back down
from ideological struggle, including support for natl liberation movements.
Says USSR sees detente as way to create more favorable conditions for peaceful
socialist and Communist construction.  In apparent ref to complaints by Ford and
Sec Kissinger about Soviet involvement in Angola, holds detente cannot alter or
abolish laws of class struggle.  Offers 'peace program'.  Sharply attacks China,
charging efforts to 'torpedo' detente and provoke world war.  Says USSR, in SALT
talks, proposed bans on US Trident submarine and B-1 bomber and similar systems
in USSR but that US rejected proposal.  Speaks for 5 hrs, not including 2
recesses, and appears to be in good form.  Hails USSR's econ progress, holding
Soviet people better off materially and richer spiritually, but does not renew
his promise, made at previous cong, to shift production priorities in favor of
consumer.  Appeals for more quality and efficiency in indus.  China and Albania
are only 2 Communist countries not represented at cong.  French party leader
George Marchais has personally boycotted cong.  Brezhnev implicitly criticizes
new independence of French party.  In reply to charges of Soviet domestic
repression, says 'democracy is inconceivable without discipline and sound soc
order'.  Does not discuss Soviet inability to convene meeting of Eur Communist
parties but hints it could be bypassed by noting many parties are calling for
new world Communist conf.  Hails Communist victory in Vietnam and says Soviet
people are proud of having aided it.  Dismisses Japanese demands USSR return 4
islands seized from Japan at end of World War II.  Recalls turning down trade
agreement with US because of Cong 'attempts to interfere in our internal
affairs' by making trade benefits conditional on Soviet policy of freer
emigration.  Repts Soviet party has grown to 15,694,000.  Says 347,000 members
have been dropped for various offenses.  Says work continues on new Const to
replace one enacted in '36.  Illus speaking (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-76

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 26, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 2

LENGTH: 227 words

Ed holds Soviet Communist Party chief Leonid Brezhnev's rept to 25th party cong
represents most up-to-date exposition of party line--detailed recital of all key
foreign and domestic policy positions of small group that rules USSR.  Says rept
is also pol platform on which Brezhnev and his colleagues expect to be
reaffirmed in power at end of cong, whose final decisions have been planned well
in advance.  Holds Brezhnev declares that he is for detente, progress on
disarmament, increased US-USSR cooperation and trade, but professes to see no
conflict between those laudable ends and heavy participation in Communist
conquest of S Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia and in Cuban conquest in Angola.  Says
many Amers will see detente as merely convenient setting for USSR and its allies
to apply 'salami tactics' to destroy non-Communist world, nation by nation.
Holds there is not much reassurance in Brezhnev's attitude toward Western
Communist parties and toward People's Repub of China.  Contends causes of Soviet
failures in producing food and consumer goods lie ultimately in top priority
that mil enjoys to commandeer USSR's best human and material resources, and also
in lack of incentive for civilian production inherent in Soviet econ system.
Contends standard of living remains disgracefully low in country that may be
militarily most powerful in world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 57

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 26, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY CHRISTOPHER LYDON

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Sen Hubert H Humphrey expected to get major share of Minn's 65 conv delegates at
Dem caucuses in state.  Now has support of many who opposed him in '68 and '72
because of Vietnam.  Fred R Harris, only declared candidate to show organized
support in state, wins 5% of vote.  Jimmy Carter, Repr Morris K Udall and Ellen
McCormack win scattered caucus support but less than 1% apiece.  On Repub side,
Pres Ford appears to be favorite against Ronald Reagan, getting 53% of vote in
straw poll to Reagan's 36% (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 57-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 26, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY CHRISTOPHER S WREN

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 128 words

Article on Soviet Communist Party's 25th Cong focuses on 103 foreign Communist
and leftist delegations from 96 nations that are attending parley.  Holds some
diplomatic analysts contend Govt has encouraged pilrimage of so many foreign
delegations to bolster its claim to world Communist movement.  Notes such an
image has become especially important for Govt now when Western Communist
parties such as French and Ital have staked out more ind course.  Among
delegates attending cong are Communist Party leaders Gus Hall (US), Fidel Castro
(Cuba), Dolores Ibarruri La Pasionaria (Spain), Edward Gierek (Poland), Erich
Honecker (E Ger) and Le Duan (N Vietnam).Absent from cong is French Communist
Party chief Georges Marchais, who sent his deputy G Plissonnier (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 57-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 26, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DAVID K SHIPLER

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 133 words

Soviet Communist Party's 25th Cong settles down to series of routine speeches on
Feb 25 praising and endorsing party chief Leonid Brezhnev's speech at opening
session on Feb 24.  Session is not televised as Feb 24 session had been and hall
remains closed to non-Communist newsmen.  Information comes from official
briefings, excerpts on TV news programs and repts by Tass.  N Vietnamese leader
Le Duan, in address, offers thanks for Soviet mil aid during Vietnam war.  His
remarks seem to underline Hanoi's leaning toward USSR as N Vietnam's postwar
relations with China have cooled.  Cuba's Prime Min Fidel Castro, attending his
1st Soviet cong, hails USSR as 'most reliable bulwark of peace in world'.
Attacks Maoism.  Illus of Castro and Portugal's Communist Party leader Alvaro
Cunhal (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 57-76

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Vietnamese officials say constituent natl assembly, to be elected for all of
Vietnam Apr 25, will have 488 seats.  S Vietnamese Provisional Revolutionary
Govt will send 240 deputies to assembly, while N Vietnam will have 248 seats.
Saigon area is to be represented by 35 deputies.  Hanoi will have 21.  S Vietnam
has been divided into 20 provs, except Saigon and its surrounding dist, which
under name of Ho Chi Minh City, will form special adm unit (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 58-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 5

LENGTH: 119 words

Article originated in Armed Forces Journal recounts Feb 17 '68 incident at Pope
Air Force Base (NC) when then-Pres Johnson wanted to personally bid farewell to
group of paratroopers leaving for Vietnam war.  Notes group leaving for war was
in midst of farewell party and was hastily substituted with group of war-weary
troops that had just arrived from war.  Says Johnson insisted on watching troops
actually take off.Reaction by troops asst comdr Brig Gen Donald Blackburn and
div comdr Maj Gen Richard Seitz recalled.  Incident reptdly remained secret
until about 1 yr ago, when Johnson's former mil aide Col Hugh Robinson,
commenting on how touched Johnson was by farewell, was told truth by Blackburn
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 58-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY EVERETT R HOLLES

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 301 words

Sharp disagreement between Vietnamese refugees in US reptdly is emerging as
result of formation of Vietnamese liberation front in exile, led by former
Vietnamese Socialist Sen Pham Nam Sach.  Many of 35,000 refugees settled in
southern Calif reptdly are distrustful of Force of Renaissance for Vietnam out
of fear of incurring reprisals against relatives living in S Vietnam.  Group,
headquartered in Chula Vista (Calif), reptdly was formed to combat what its
leaders call 'rampant and unchallenged Communist propaganda' spread among
refugees living in US, mainly through widely-read periodicals Doidien and Thai
Binh, and to give material assistance to more than 60,000 S Vietnamese troops
that group contends are continuing to wage guerrilla warfare in conquered areas.
Spokesman Nguyen Van Nghi says group will recruit volunteer expeditionary force
of S Vietnamese veterans possessing special mil skills and eager to return to
country to take up arms against Communists.  Says internatl operation will
include volunteers from US, France, Japan, Canada, England and other countries.
Says group is willing to accept funds from 'almost any source except the Amer
intelligence agency from which we want no assistance of any kind'.  Movement's
organizing body reptdly totals no more than about 200 refugees.  Pham Nam Sach's
pol and mil role in S Vietnam during last days of war recalled.  Vietnamese
Alliance Assn is urging members and other Vietnamese to reject new front and
remain non-pol.  Vietnamese Assn for Culture Preservation, Vietnamese Community
Foundation and Vietnamese Cath Com reptdly support liberation front.  Sach says
front's immediate objective is to mobilize world opinion in insisting that
forthcoming S Vietnamese elections be free in accordance with '73 Paris peace
accord (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 60-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 236 words

Series of negotiations between US and Thailand to determine shape and size of US
presence in country assessed.  Discussions reptdly are subject of increased
comment in Thailand and new Indochinese Communist countries.  Thai Foreign Min
document circulated at secret meeting 2 wks ago reptdly contained 7 negotiating
points.  Document reptdly called for complete redrawing of status-of-forces
agreement that would include top-secret US electronic espionage base at Ramasun.
Issue is which of facilities will be turned over to Thai Govt, which will remain
under US control, what that control will be and how many US personnel will
remain in country.  Thai Govt's increased sensitivity during '75 Communist
takeovers in S Vietnam and Cambodia recalled.  Thai mil leaders, fearful that
country would be dragged by Communists away from US mil protection, reptdly did
not join in consensus calling for total US withdrawal.  Royal Thai Army comdr
Gen Boonchai Bamrungphong's Jan 30 statements recalled.  While fewer than 7,000
US mil personnel are currently in country, Amer officials reptdly say US would
like to keep about 3,000 mil personnel in Thailand.  Withdrawal of US combat
personnel reptdly was completed on Dec 20 '75.  US reptdly turned Korat Air
Force Base, including $30-million worth of bldgs and mil equipment, over to Thai
officials on Feb 29.  Map shows where remaining US troops are in Thailand (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 60-76

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD J H JOHNSTON

SECTION: Page 26, Column 3

LENGTH: 48 words

James Michener describes most Bicentennial activities as 'junk, junk and more
junk,' int.  Says 'Watergate and Vietnam took care of any hope that it would be
celebrated properly'.  Group of San Antonio residents use '76 Leap Day to give
Bicentennial 'abuse and vulgarity' awards (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 61-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY CHRISTOPHER LYDON

SECTION: Page 21, Column 2

LENGTH: 158 words

James Killilea, aide of anti-abortion Pres candidate Ellen McCormack, expects
McCormack to win more than 8% of vote needed to win delegates in most of Mass's
12 Cong dists and to win some at-large delegates in addition.  McCormack, noting
Pres Ford's margin of victory in NH, says as little as 2% of vote would be
sufficient to worry professional politicians.  Says she is as antibusing as she
is anti-abortion.  Racial aspects of campaign are complicated by facts that
leader of local right-to-life movement is Dr Mildred Jefferson, a black, and
that proponents of const amendment outlawing abortion cite Dred Scott case as
instance of bad Sup Ct decision that required changing const.  Although
opponents of abortion appear to have come from same group that accepted
patriotic justification of Vietnam War, many members of movement are been
radicalized retroactively on war issue.  McCormack aides Bernie Shannon and
Farley Clinton comment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 61-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 70 words

Vietnamese authorities issue new, official map of Vietnam that eliminates
North-South border for 1st time in 22 yrs.  While formal reunification will not
be official until Apr 25 nationwide election, most Vietnamese consider unity
accomplished fact.  Map reptdly includes Paracel and Spratly Islands, which have
been claimed by Vietnam, People's Repub of China and Taiwan.  Philippines also
claims Spratly chain (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 61-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY R W APPLE JR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 196 words

R W Apple Jr analysis of Mass Pres primary results.  Finds domestic issues such
as econ, disgust with Washington, and race-related matters, have replaced
Vietnam war as key voter issue.  Notes Sen Henry M Jackson, who outspent all
other Pres candidates in state, proved for first time that he could win outside
his native state.  Sees his success in Mass boding well for his efforts in other
big Northern indus states.Notes that Jimmy Carter, who won in NH and Vt where he
had no conservative competition, had to fight with Jackson and George C Wallace
for moderate and conservative votes in Mass.  Says NY Times/CBS News poll of
Mass voters shows that programmatic purity was not enough for 1/3 of Mass Dems
who consider themselves liberal.  Holds that Morris K Udall ran strongly because
he was able to project image of integrity, not because of his liberal positions.
Sees Sen Birch Bayh and Sargent Shriver withdrawing from race because of
disappointing results in Mass.  Says Jackson was big winner in Mass, and must
now be considered one of favorites in NY primary.  Notes George C Wallace was
strongest in city of Boston, where court-ordered busing is hot issue (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 62

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES GARDNER

SECTION: Page 55, Column 7

LENGTH: 37 words

Charles Gardner, in quotation of day eulogizing Cpl Charles McMahon Jr, 1 of
last 4 US servicemen to die in Vietnam war, says 'Let there be no more violence,
no more weapons, no more hurt, no more deaths, no more wars'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 66-5-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 7

LENGTH: 52 words

Body of 21-yr-old US Marine Cpl Charles McMahon Jr is returned to family in
Mass, Mar 3. Was killed during Apr '75 withdrawal of Amers from Saigon at
Vietnam war's end.  Scene at airport, attended by family members and Sen Edward
Kennedy, who aided in body's release by Vietnamese authorities, described (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 31, Column 5

LENGTH: 134 words

Anthony Lewis claims Henry Jackson may have won Mass Dem Pres primary, but real
beneficiary may turn out to be Sen Hubert H Humphrey.  Holds Jackson's hawkish
views on foreign policy alarm many Dems, and prospect of Jackson nomination
could make liberals forgive Humphrey his Vietnam stand.  Notes new chumminess
between Humphrey and Sen Edward M Kennedy, and speculates on Humphrey-Kennedy
ticket.  Concedes Jackson played shrewdly on sensitive nerve of Mass pol by
proclaiming his opposition to forced busing 1 week before primary day.  Notes
Jimmy Carter mishandled Mass, and may have slowed momentum of his campaign.
Holds that if Dems hold brokered conv, power brokers will look for someone who
can appeal to working people pinched by unemployment and inflation, and Humphrey
may be their man (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 63

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 130 words

US Sup Ct rules that striking union members have no 1st Amendment free Speech
right to picket inside shopping center to advertise their strike against owner
of 1 of stores.  Revs earlier cases of '68 and '72.  In '68 case, Ct found that
under 1st Amendment, shopping center could not bar union members from picketing
retail store in center.  In '72 case, Ct ruled that pickets at shopping center
who wanted to hand out handbills protesting Amer mil involvement in Vietnam had
no 1st Amendment right to do so.  Dispute currently before Ct involved warehouse
employees of shoe co who wanted to picket co's retail stores.  They entered
shopping center in Georgia and were threatened by gen mgr with arrest.  At
union's request, NLRB entered case with cease-and-desist order (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY R W APPLE JR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 156 words

Sen Birch Bayh and Sargent Shriver expected to withdraw from Dem Pres race
following their poor showings in Mass Pres primary.  Sen Henry M Jackson, Jimmy
Carter and Repr Morris K Udall seen as leading contenders for Dem Pres
nomination.  Jackson's win in Mass seen vastly improving his chances, but strong
signs exist that liberals still resent his hawkish posture on Vietnam.  He is
expected to trail in Fla primary.Carter's poor showing in Mass broke his string
of strong showings.  He was hurt by his lack of orgn in state.  He has yet to
prove himself capable of success in large indus state.  Udall has established
himself as leading liberal, but he has yet to win a primary.  He is entered in
none of Mar primaries, and he may be hurt by hiatus.  His advisers feel it is
crucial that he pick up strong Bayh slates in NY, and that he broaden his appeal
to include traditional blue-collar Dems.  Jackson, Bayh and Udall illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-76

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 432 words

HR, 240-169, approves controversial $4.8-billion foreign aid authorization bill,
including funds to effect Middle East peace accord negotiated by Sec Kissinger
in '75.  Bill significantly changes US policy toward transfer of arms to foreign
govts by phasing out giving away of weapons and placing limits on purchases of
munitions by other countries.  Greatly increases power of Cong to halt overseas
shipments of weapons, 1 facet of measure objected to by Ford Adm.  Contains
$400-million more in program authorization than version passed by Sen in Feb.
Contains $3.37-billion for Middle East, of which Israel will receive
$2.25-billion, including $1.5-billion for foreign mil sales credits of which
$750-million will be forgiven.  Intent is to replace equipment lost by Israel in
'73 war.  Egypt to receive $750-million in econ aid, Jordan $222.5-million in
mil and econ aid and Syria $90-million.  Legis authorizes $50-million to
implement Sinai accord and support for UN relief program for Palestinian
refugees.  Provides $50-million in outright grants of mil aid to Greece, and
$90-million in econ aid.  Allocates $50-million in mil grants for Turkey, which
will be allowed to purchase $125-million in additional mil equipment.  Repr
Thomas E Morgan sponsors amendment to halt further arms sales to Turkey after
Sept 30 in absence of progress with Greece to settle dispute over Cyprus.  Bill
requires disclosure of identities of sales agents receiving fees or comms
connected with sales of munitions.  Amendment by Repr J J Pickle to crack down
on countries whose officials recd, extorted or attempted to extort bribes in
connection with arms deals.  Requires Pres to rept incident to Cong with
recommendation as to whether US aid to country involved should be severed.
Legis sets ceiling of $9-billion on amt of contracts for Amer-made munitions by
other countries.  Gives Cong right to disapprove any commercial arms sale of
more than $25-million meeting other conditions.  HR defeats amendments to: halt
all munitions sales to Chile, prohibit use of funds for either assassinations or
foreign pol campaign activity abroad, direct Adm to enter into negotiations with
USSR in efforts to relieve tensions in Indian Ocean, prohibit any trade with N
Vietnam, even if Hanoi Govt agrees to provide further information on Amer
soldiers missing in action.  Passes Repr Fortney Stark Amendment ordering Sec of
State to provide Cong with periodic repts of status of legal rights of Amers
jailed in Mex.  Vote on legis comes after 6 hrs of debate, defeat of 10 and
passage of 3 amendments (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 69 words

US Pres Ford awards US Medal of Honor to Vietnam war veterans Air Force Capt
Lance P Sijan, Navy Rear Adm James B Stockdale, Air Force Col George E Day and
Navy Lt Thomas R Norris.  Sijan's father accepts award posthumously.  Sijan,
Stockdale and Day were prisoners of war in Vietnam.  Ford, in honoring 4, says
every effort will be made to determine fate of those Amers still listed as
missing in action (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 64-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY JAMES M NAUGHTON

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 137 words

Ford, his campaign chmn Howard H Callaway and press sec Ron Nessen dismiss as
unfit for reply Ronald Reagan's attack in Orlando, Fla, on Ford's foreign
policy, particularly policy of detente.  Appearance of nonchalance is belied by
hurried meetings and other indications of obvious concern.  Ford, at Medal of
Hon ceremony earlier in day, in apparent anticipation of Reagan attack, stresses
US policy cannot be described by 'detente' but by 'peace through strength'.
Ceremony honors 4 Vietnam veterans, 1 posthumously.  Ford told group of Fla
editors Mar 4 he did not intend to respond if Reagan attacked him sharply, but,
as Reagan prepared to issue his statement, campaign aides Callaway, Stuart
Spencer and Peter F Kaye are summoned to White House for meeting.  White House
officials listen to Reagan's statement (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 64-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 6, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 50, Column 2

LENGTH: 75 words

Adm map of reunified Vietnam reptdly will consist of 38 provs, including Hanoi,
Saigon and Haiphong.  S Vietnam was divided into 44 provs and N had 23 provs,
with Hanoi and Haiphong designated as cities before end of Vietnam war.  Number
of provs in S Vietnam has been reduced to 20.  Former southern provs of Quang
Tri and Thua Thien, which included former imperial capital of Hue, have been
merged with former northern prov of Quang Binh (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 65-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 55, Column 5

LENGTH: 83 words

Cornell Univ special faculty com on acad freedom issues rept assailing treatment
of Nguyen Cao Ky, former S Vietnam vp, who was booed off stage by students
during campus speech in Dec '75.  Cites violation of freedom of speech and
recommends suspension or dismissal of any faculty member who interferes with or
incites others to interfere with free speech.  Rept is of special significance
in view of scheduled appearance of William E Colby, former CIA head, another
controversial speaker (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 66-3-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Page 47, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Funeral services for Cpl Charles McMahon Jr, 1 of last 2 US servicemen killed in
Vietnam war, whose body had been left behind in confusion of US withdrawal,
described.  McMahon died along with Lance Cpl Darwin L Judge in Apr 28 '75
rocket attack on Tan Son Nhut Air Base.  Woburn (Mass) boy's club dir Charles
Gardner's eulogy noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 66-3-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 5

LENGTH: 18 words

NY-NJ-Conn HR roll-call on foreign aid bill providing for trade with Vietnam.
Bill was rejected 223-185.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 66-4-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 5

LENGTH: 20 words

NY-NJ-Conn HR roll-call vote on amendment to strike section of foreign aid bill
providing for trade with Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 66-4-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 258 words

S Vietnamese Foreign Min Nguyen Thi Binh, in int conducted in S Vietnamese
Embassy in Moscow at end of official 2-wk visit to attend 25th Soviet Party
Cong, says S Vietnamese officials have developed long-range plan for more
privately oriented econ that N Vietnam is expected to have.  Explains that after
reunification of both countries, southern area's econ will be arranged in 5-tier
system allowing considerable private enterprise to exist alongside form of
limited socialism.  Says farmland will remain in private hands and Govt
ultimately will buy all rice produced by individual farmers.  Aim is to
eliminate hoarding and speculation that continues to drive prices higher.  Says
5 econ sectors will be: private sector, joint private-state sector, state
sector, collective sector and individual sector.  Explains each.  Describes some
of most serious problems facing country as extensive unemployment, food
shortages and acute urban crowding.  Holds country needs large doess of
internatl aid, including substantial help from US.  Says that Govt regards its
power as secure despite small number of opponents that have engaged in sabotage.
Asserts evidence has been obtained showing that those who are resisting have had
contact with US CIA.  Says of country's total population of 18- to 19-million
people, 3-million are jobless.  Binh's remarks reptdly clearly imply that false
urbanization caused by war has not been eliminated.  She describes ways in which
Govt is attempting to bring radical soc and econ change to country.  Por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 66-3-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 8

LENGTH: 17 words

South Vietnam to begin training tourist guides to cope with expected rush of
internatl travelers (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 67-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Large vote for Pres aspirant George Wallace in Mass primary seen as reflection
of depth of antibusing sentiment in Boston's working-class neighborhoods.
Wallace recd 28.42% of vote while Sen Jackson, who took a less-vocal antibusing
stance, recd 20.45.  Liberal front-runner Morris K Udall got 12.63%.  Change in
voting habits in city from '72 when Vietnam war was issue noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 67-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 146 words

Cuban Prime Min Fidel Castro has obtained Yugoslavian Pres Tito's full approval
of Cuban armed intervention in Angola.Tito's endorsement is latest move in
series of diplomatic initiatives opposing US policies throughout world.
Yugoslavian Govt earlier had announced belief in Cambodian charge that US planes
bombed Siem Reap.  Also has sided with Algeria in dispute with Morocco, which
has received US backing, over Western Sahara.  Yugoslavian Govt-controlled press
has been giving particular support to N Korea, Vietnam and PLO and virtually all
other adversaries of US foreign policy.  Tito will begin state visits on Mar 10
to Panama and Mex, where he is expected to reiterate denunciations of continued
US control of Canal Zone and is expected to give public support to Mex Pres Luis
Echeverria's charges of 'neo-colonialism' by great powers in Latin Amer.  Illus
(L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 68-76

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY LEONARD S SILK

SECTION: Page 57, Column 4

LENGTH: 124 words

L Silk analyses econ policies being adopted by newly Communist countries in SE
Asia, including S and N Vietnam and Cambodia.  While S Vietnamese official
Nguyen Thi Binh has indicated southern section of Vietnam will be more privately
oriented than N Vietnam, Swedish Amb to Peking Kaj Bjork, after recently
visiting Cambodia, says country is expected to create radically Communized soc
that will entail abolition of money, payment of wages and all private ownership.
S Vietnam therefore will probably be furthest-right Communist soc in Asia and
Cambodia will be furthest left.  S Vietnamese move seen as replication of USSR
natl econ policy that began in '21 after revolution and lasted until 1st 5-yr
plan of '28.  Policy described (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 69-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 101 words

S Vietnamese Air Force pilot Ho Kan Hai, wife, 4 children and mechanic reptdly
flew to Thailand, Mar 8, in stolen helicopter.  Flight is 1st known airborne
escape from S Vietnam since May '75 Communist takeover.  Because Thailand grants
only temporary asylum to refugees and because helicopter was apparently headed
for US air base at U Taphao when it ran out of fuel, escapees reptdly will seek
refuge outside Thailand.  Chantaburi Prov Gov Boonchuay Sisalakam says pilot had
been flight lt in S Vietnamese Air Force before Communist takeover.  Says Hai
apparently took off from Can Tho.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 69-76

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 42 words

S Vietnamese Air Force pilot Ho Kim Hai who escaped recently from S Vietnam
aboard helicopter with family, says he fled because past US ties doomed him and
children to dead-end future in new Communist soc.  Reptdly hopes to make new
life in US (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 70-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 12, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 70 words

H R Haldeman, ex-Pres Nixon's chief of staff, testifies that he found nothing
improper in White House's use of information gleaned from natl security wiretap
on Morton H Halperin to prepare counterattack on Clark Clifford, critic of Nixon
Adm's policy in Vietnam, sworn deposition taken last Jan and filed in Fed Dist
ct, Washington, DC, on Mar 11.  Clifford was preparing to attack Nixon Adm in
magazine article (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 71-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY GRACE LICHTENSTEIN

SECTION: Page 38, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Article on women park rangers at natl pks.  There are 79 women as part of
permanent staff of 1,432 rangers employed by Natl Park Service, which is trying
to hire more but efforts are slowed down because of current hiring freeze and
priority given to Vietnam veterans.  Illus 2 women rangers (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 74-76

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY JAMES WOOTEN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 101 words

Jimmy Carter's mixture of honesty and glibness has brought him from obscurity to
forefront of Dem Pres aspirants but has also left many propective voters
suspicious that he wants both sides of every issue.  He is said to have strong
opinions, but his desire to be elected and his belief that he can win only by
appealing to voters on basis of his personal honesty and not by trying to rally
them around some ideological standard sometime allow his rhetoric to obscure his
views.Comments on Gov George Wallace, Rev Martin Luther King, ex-Pres Nixon and
amnesty for Vietnam war resisters noted.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 74-76

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 16, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY CHRISTOPHER LYDON

SECTION: Page 24, Column 4

LENGTH: 168 words

Jimmy Carter, in Mar 15 speech to Chicago Council on Foreign Relations, outlines
his foreign policy views, stressing US course in world affairs should be charted
with more open consultation with Cong and public than it has been under Sec
Kissinger's direction in Nixon and Ford Adms.  Sees need for reassertion of US
leadership but opposes mil intervention in affairs of other countries unless US
is directly endangered.  Endorses 'objective of detente' but, in ref to Sen
Henry M Jackson, rejects 'bellicose voices' that would return to cold war days.
Elaborates vaguely populist notion that openness at home is best check against
mistakes abroad.  Says Kissinger does not trust judgment of Amer people.  In
later news conf, acknowledges aid on speech from Prof Zbigniew Brzezinski, Prof
Milton Katz, Richard Gardner, Richard Cooper and Cyrus R Vance.  Says he had
been wrong in supporting US effort in Vietnam as long as he did.  Says essential
mistake was getting involved in 1st place.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 75-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 17, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 82, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

Danish Govt decides to let 200 Vietnamese war orphans stay in Denmark as long as
they wish.  Reverses earlier decision to send them back at earliest possible
moment.  Children were removed in Feb from care of their guardian, W Ger newsman
Henning Becker, who opposed Govt plans to return them to Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 76-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 20, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 124 words

Delegation of Laotian Communist leaders leaves Peking after signing econ aid
agreement apparently perserving at least minimal Chinese role in Laos despite
growing USSR and N Vietnamese influence in country.  Delegation, led by Prime
Min Kaysone Phoumvihan, has already visited N Vietnam and USSR.  No details of
new agreement have been released.  N Vietnam reptdly has estimated 30,000 troops
stationed in Laos, while USSR has estimated 500, including engineers,
technicians and pilots.  Visit was 1st by active head of state since current
'anti-rightist' activity broke out in China after Prime Min Chou En-lai's Jan 8
death.  Prominent role reptdly played by leading radical polemicist Yao Wen-yuan
during Laotian delegation trip noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 79-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 5

LENGTH: 60 words

Sen George McGovern, in rept on Jan '76 trip to Vietnam, says N Vietnamese Prime
Min Pham Van Dong has offered to give status rept on available information on
Amers missing in action in SE Asia.  Offer reptdly was made after McGovern
suggested that status of investigation by N Vietnamese be given even if
description says no information is available (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 80-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 43 words

Scene at My Lai (S Vietnam) during Mar 16 commem ceremonies attended by 12,000
Vietnamese described.  While Vietnamese Govt maintains that US infantry co
killed 504 villagers, US says 347 were killed.  Signs of reconstruction efforts
in town described (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 80-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

WHO repts that South Vietnam, after 30 yrs of war, is land of widespread
malaria, bubonic plague, leprosy, TB, VD and 300,000 prostitutes.  WHO Western
Pacific dir Dr Francisco Dy, on basis of studies outlining med needs in both
South Vietnam and North Vietnam, has invited regional member countries to
meeting Mar 30-31 to consider helping 2 countries.  Needs are estimated at
$75-million, 2/3 of it in South Vietnam.Study says main problem is construction
because of many hosps, health centers and research insts that were destroyed
during war (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 80-3-

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

Student involvement in '76 Pres campaign is far less marked than it was in Sen
George McGovern's '72 campaign.  Students in and out of current campaign link
move to elimination of Vietnam issue, absence from present campaign of Richard
Nixon and McGovern, whose personalities elicited very strong responses from
students of '72, and to souring of student mind caused by '72 defeat.  Student
forces of Dem aspirants noted.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 81-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 23, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 19, Column 3

LENGTH: 175 words

Repr Morris K Udall, campaigning in NY Dem Pres primary, says on Mar 22 that if
elected Pres he would fight crime with array of Fed programs costing as much as
3 or 4 billion dollars.  Contending that blacks in large urban areas are most
vulnerable victims of crime, says that it is unacceptable for NYC to have to
discharge policemen at time when crime is increasing.  Says that Fed funds now
allocated to Law Enforcement Assistance Adm should be reallocated to cts and
criminal justice system to reduce 'logjam at courthouse door'.  Says this would
reduce plea-bargaining and tendency to release 'guilty' too soon.  Chides
opponents Jimmy Carter and Sen Henry Jackson for failing to show leadership on
major issues of last decade, including Vietnam War, civil rights and effort to
stop election campaign abuses.  Proposes better Fed effort to curtail drug
traffic.  Says that while he is opposed to Fed regis of firearms and all but ltd
forms of gun controls, says he would lead fight against illegal interstate
traffic in handguns.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 82-76

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 23, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 141 words

Analysis of factors crippling efforts of NYS Gov Carey and State Dem Chmn
Patrick J Cunningham to lead large uncommitted delegation to Dem natl conv.
Uncommitted slates are not on ballot in all dists, and many of them are really
committed to Sen Hubert Humphrey.  Difficulties linked to corruption charges
brought against Cunningham, unpopular budgetary decisions made by Carey,
relatively quick narrowing of Dem Pres field and newly amended state election
law allowing Dem slates to be identified as to their Pres preference.  Carey and
Cunningham will still wield considerable power at conv, but will not have power
to deadlock conv that control of state's 274 delegates would have given them.
CUNY Prof Richard Wade predicts Carey Pres nomination in event of conv
deadlock.Says Vietnam issue would prevent conv from turning to Humphrey (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 82

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 24, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 126 words

Repr Morris K Udall campaigns in NYC, calling himself friend of the city.
Promises more Fed money for mass transit systems.  Suggests new 'comprehensive
transportation fund' be created, using monies from Fed Highway Trust Fund and
Airport Trust Fund.  Says he would add 5% 'surcharge' on rail freight shipments
to be paid by shipper.  Says his proposal would allow Cong to allocate funds
among various means of transportation by 'need'.  Says states could divert to
mass transit highway funds collected from gasoline taxes.  Visits Bklyn
firehouse being occupied by residents who are protesting its closing.  Addresses
audience at Columbia Univ.  Scores Sen Jackson for his support of Vietnam War
and Jimmy Carter for allegedly not discussing issues (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 83-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

US reptdly has sent carefully worded message to Hanoi (N Vietnam) through
foreign govt, probably France, stating its willingness to begin talks on
normalization of relations.  Response from Hanoi is being awaited.  Fate of
Amers missing in action is to be 1st item on agenda.  Ford Adm reptdly has been
especially concerned about pressures on Thailand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 85-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 97 words

US State Dept spokesman says Ford Adm is prepared to open normalization of
relations talks with Vietnamese officials.  Declines to say when or where talks
may take place.  Adds that talks will include accounting of Amers missing in
action in Vietnam war.  Nov 14 '75 statements by Sec of State Kissinger noting
that he planned to meet with Vietnamese Communist leaders in Hanoi and Paris
recalled.  During Mar 12 '76 meeting with HR Select Com on Missing Persons in SE
Asia members, Kissinger reptdly promised he would consult Pres Ford about
diplomatic talks with Vietnamese (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 85-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY DOUGLAS E KNEELAND

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 171 words

Sen Henry M Jackson seen edging toward left of pol spectrum in recent
appearances around NYC.  Placing heavy emphasis on programs to provide jobs for
unemployed, saving cities from financial disaster and aiding poor, elderly and
ill.  Pointedly calls himself 'liberal' in address at Social Dems, USA, dinner
in NYC.  His popular image as conservative, despite substantial liberal
credentials on most domestic issues, seen as result of his positions on Vietnam
war, Soviet Union, defense and school busing.  His criticism of 'Nixon-Ford
mismanagement of detente' is less dominant theme in recent speeches, as he woos
liberal vote.  Holds news conf at Waldorf Astoria to set forth '6-point plan to
save America's cities'.  Plan outlined.  It includes Fed takeover of welfare
costs, full natl health ins under Kennedy-Corman bill, increase in Fed aid to
educ from 7 to 33 1/3% over 3 or 4 yrs, natl housing program aimed at bldg
3-million units per yr, Fed ins of munic bonds and full employment under
Humphrey-Hawkins bill (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 85-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY RUDY JOHNSON

SECTION: Page 58, Column 6

LENGTH: 20 words

Veterans Adm repts obstacles to job placement of handicapped Vietnam veterans
are 'phenomenal' despite therapy (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 86-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Official Vietnamese press agency says that there will be choice between
candidates when nation's voters go to polls on Apr 25.  In Hanoi, which is to be
capital of unified country, 28 candidates will vie for 21 seats.  In Saigon,
there are expected to be 43 candidates for city's 35 seats (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 86-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 243 words

HR Select Com on Missing Persons in SE Asia chmn Repr G V Montgomery says Ford
Adm has sent message to N Vietnam inviting discussion of all issues related to
Vietnam that it hopes will lead to eventual normalization of relations.  Ford
and Sec of State Kissinger confirm rept.  Kissinger says key issue for US is
obtaining information and cooperation from N Vietnam concerning approximately
850 Amer servicemen still listed as missing in action.  Says he is interested in
discussing restraints on N Vietnamese behavior in rest of SE Asia.Says there is
not much prospect for US aid to N Vietnam.  N Vietnamese officials have stated
that postwar reconstruction aid from US is vital issue of principle and was
price for having signed Paris peace accords.  Recall former Pres Nixon's pledge,
in note dated Feb 1 '73, to give N Vietnam $3.25-billion in postwar
reconstruction aid 'without pol conditions'.  Various Cong members and peace
groups say they are concerned that Ford announcement represents attempt to head
off Cong approval of amendment lifting trade embargo on Hanoi.  Amendment, which
has already passed in HR, is being discussed by HR-Sen conf on foreign aid bill.
Sen Mark O Hatfield's comments noted.  State Dept official says message, which
was delivered Mar 25 to member of N Vietnamese Embassy in Paris, was serious and
in no way connected with embargo.  Denies Kissinger wants to hope trade prospect
in reserve as bargaining issue (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 86-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 121 words

Statement from N Vietnamese Embassy in Paris, in reply to US request for talks
aimed at normalizing relations, demands US fulfill promise under Article 21 of
Paris accords to provide postwar reconstruction aid.  Says new Vietnamese Govt
is prepared to apply Article 8-B of agreement about Amers missing in action.
Reply's wording makes it uncertain whether N Vietnam is rebuffing US overtures
or moving toward negotiations.  Statement reptdly appears to indicate little
interest in renewing talks with US at this time.  US has refused to attend WHO
meeting scheduled for wk of Mar 28 in Manila (Philippines) where 7 member
countries and 3 observer countries are to discuss med and health needs of
Vietnamese people (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 89-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

Japanese Foreign Min spokesman says Japanese Embassy in Saigon will close, Mar
31, in anticipation of Apr reunification of N and S Vietnam.  Embassy in Hanoi,
which opened in Oct '75, reptdly will remain open.  3 Japanese diplomats in
Saigon are to leave in mid-Apr (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 90-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Section 7; Page 5

LENGTH: 21 words

Gen William C Westmoreland book A Soldier Reports, about US policy and his role
as US troops comdr in Vietnam, revd by Ward.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 91-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 79 words

Working People's Daily repts that Communist guerrilla movement in Burma's Shan
State has taken on 'new dimension' since end of Vietnam War.  Ed notes that
Burma Communist Party has used heavy weapons and large quantities of ammunition
in its battles with Burmese troops and says this suggests that Communists might
have benefited from spillage of large quantities of arms and ammunition across
border of S Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos when old regimes there collapsed (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 91-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 2

LENGTH: 161 words

Sec Kissinger issues 'fact sheet' rebutting criticisms of Ford Adm by Ronald
Reagan, accusing Reagan of 'false and irresponsible inventions'.  Appears most
irked by use of quote from Adm Elmo R Zumwalt Jr saying Kissinger has likened US
to Athens and USSR to Sparta.  State Dept spokesman Robert L Funseth denies
Kissinger said such.  Kissinger, in his rebuttal to Reagan criticisms, says
US-backed factions in Angola had every possibility of acceptable outcome until
Cong on Dec 19 cut off further aid.  Denies US Amb to UN William W Scranton
'attacked' Israel but reiterated US policy going back to '67, further noting he
vetoed Security Council resolution critical of Israel.  Holds US has not reduced
forces on Taiwan as result of demands by Peking but because of its own
assessment of its own pol and security interests.  Says US seeks to learn from N
Vietnam more about the missing in action, and that this does not mean seeking
'friendly relations' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 92-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 3

LENGTH: 68 words

Convicted Watergate conspirator G Gordon Liddy tells Judge Jon O Newman that Fed
prison officials have harassed him because he has filed a suit attempting to
broaden mail rights of prisoners.  Contends 1 of his lrs prison officials
illegally opened was confidential statement by State Sec H A Kissinger outlining
US strategy in disarmament talks with USSR and peace negotiations to end Vietnam
war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 93-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY GEORGE SHINE and GEORGE SHINE

SECTION: Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 29 words

George and Helen Shine lr on Presidential responsibility, as Comdr in Chief, to
not abandon 1,300 Amers still counted as prisoners of war or missing in action
in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 93

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 6; Page 9

LENGTH: 49 words

R Baker article on why Vietnam, Watergate, Nixon, CIA, bribes, Agnew, illegal
wiretaps, Lyndon B Johnson, assassinations, imperial Pres, cobra venom, Mafia
murder contracts, conspiracy, perjury and illegal campaign contribution are
words not being heard during '76 Pres campaign.  Drawing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 94-76

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 215 words

Ed assesses 3 major Dem Pres candidates in upcoming NYS primary in areas of
foreign affairs, domestic policy and personal style.  Notes that Jackson and
Carter supported Vietnam war until the end, while Udall was early opponent of
war.  Claims Jackson's outspoken criticism of detente, and belligerent defense
of Israel's interests, arouses uneasiness over policies he might pursue if he
were in White House.  Holds militarism and cold war rhetoric do not advance Amer
interests.  Says 3 differ substantially on policies to achieve full employment,
natl health ins and welfare reform, with Carter taking most qualified, cautious
approach.  Claims activist Fed role called for by Jackson and Udall is more
responsive to current needs of urban areas.  Recalls that Udall has been
consistent on civil rights and civil liberties, as has been Jackson, with
exception of his strident opposition to busing.  Notes Carter attained
reputation of being moderately progressive on racial issues.  Claims all 3 are
sound on environmental questions, but says Jackson's record is marred by his
sponsorship of SST.  Says Udall's transparent honesty and ready candor and
clarity on controversial issues may appeal to NY Dems looking for fresh voice.
Notes Udall has best capacity to smile at himself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 94

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 5

LENGTH: 23 words

Eleanor Clark French, leader of Jimmy Carter delegation in 18th Cong Dist, in
lr, comments on Carter's stand on Vietnam war.  Ed reply.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 95

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 75, Column 7

LENGTH: 20 words

NJ Army Natl Guard enlists 1,336 members in recruiting drive.  Expects to lose
4,000 Vietnam-era recruits in '76 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 96-76

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY LESLIE H GELB

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

Article in series on issues in Pres campaign discusses foreign policy, and its
key element of defense, detailing views of Repub Ronald Reagan and Dems Jimmy
Carter, Sen Henry M Jackson and Repr Morris K Udall.  All appear to agree Sec
Kissinger must go and be replaced with more openness in policy-making process.
Some shades of difference in their stands on detente, natl defense, Middle East
and Vietnam discussed.  Synthesis of statements of each on foreign policy (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 96

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT E TOMASSON

SECTION: Page 30, Column 2

LENGTH: 32 words

Phil Ochs, folk singer, guitarist and lyricist, whose music provided some of
strongest notes of protest against Vietnam War in early '60s, commits suicide on
Apr 9 at age 35.  His por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 10

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

US Sup Ct refusal to rev conviction of former US Army Lt William L Calley Jr for
'68 atrocity at My Lai (S Vietnam) summarized (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 101-2

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 13, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

Ed, contending that Sup Ct's declination to rev former Army Lt William L Calley
Jr's conviction in My Lai massacre 'closes book' on case but does not erase
symbol of My Lai, holds vindictiveness against Calley offers no consolation for
war crimes.  Holds 1 concrete step to redress grievances of past is to grant
amnesty for Amers who resisted Vietnam war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 10

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 14, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY CHRISTOPHER LYDON

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 130 words

Sen George McGovern supports Sen Hubert H Humphrey to lead united Dem party in
'76.  Comes close to offering undeclared Humphrey campaign formal blessing from
antiwar liberals, many of whom share lingering resentment of his defense of
Vietnam war.  Says Humphrey should endorse unconditional amnesty for protesters
who exiled themselves to avoid draft as measure to earn their forgivenesses and
support.  Says he cannot condemn Jimmy Carter for his remark about 'ethnic
purity,' but doubts that he will campaign again for Repr Morris K Udall.  Says
Sen Henry M Jackson's high point in NY was not high enough.  Believes Sen Frank
Church entered race too late to have plausible chance of winning.  Appears to
have dismissed chances of other active contenders for nomination (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 104-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 14, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 99 words

N Vietnamese response to recent US overtures on resumption of relations,
delivered through US Embassy in Paris, Apr 12, and reptdly under study by US
officials in Washington (DC), reptdly is characterized as 'chilly'.  Official
manner in which N Vietnam responded to overture reptdly is hopeful sign.  While
US offered to discuss some issues with Vietnam, N Vietnamese reptdly have
insisted that US honor what it calls pledge of postwar econ aid.  Apr 12 Hanoi
news article reptdly called Amer offer 'ruse' and 'merchandise offered by
Ford-Kissinger Adm to the home mkt' in election yr (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 104-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 15, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 5

LENGTH: 93 words

S Vietnamese refugee Doan Thi Hoang Anh, during phone int from Great Falls
(Mont) home, shouts that she wants her son Doan Van Vinh returned.  2 Iowa Sup
Ct justices recently ruled that 4-yr-old must stay in temporary custory of
Forest City couple who wants to adopt him.  Doan Thi Hoang Ahn surrendered 7
children to Friends of Vietnam Children during '75 Operation Babylift conducted
by US.  She later escaped country in fishing boat and regained 4 of children.  1
child reptdly is in France and 1 other is missing.  Nelson couple's comments
noted (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 105-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT E TOMASSON

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 78 words

Max Palevesky says he and other Calif liberals weigh major financial effort in
Calif Dem Pres primary to help Jimmy Carter defeat Gov Edmund G Brown Jr, whom
they regard as stand-in for Sen Hubert Humphrey.  Says move would require
clarification of recent Sup Ct decision on ind campaign efforts.  Scores
Humphrey's record on Vietnam.  Leo Wyler, William Norris, Harold Willens and
Dorman Commons joined Palevsky on Apr 14 in backing Carter.  Palevsky illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 107-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 96 words

N Vietnam Govt charges that US Sec of State Kissinger 'irresponsibly'
misinterpreted recent exchange of notes between Hanoi and Washington (DC) by
suggesting in Sen testimony that progress is being made toward normalizing
relations.  Says note from Hanoi early in wk of Apr 11 reiterated long-standing
Communist position that relations will improve only when US agrees to provide
aid to Vietnam.  N Vietnamese Govt continues to insist that US has obligation
under '73 Paris peace agreement to provide postwar assistance.  '73 lr from US
Pres Nixon on matter recalled (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 107-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 64 words

US Sec of State Kissinger says US 'cannot accept' N Vietnamese demand that US
has obligation to give aid to country, Apr 14 Sen Foreign Operations Subcom
testimony.  Asserts N Vietnamese takeover of S Vietnam ended '73 Paris peace
agteement.  Says US is prepared to discuss N Vietnamese concerns 'in a
reasonable spirit'.  Ford Adm has ruled out N Vietnamese insistence on aid (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 107-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

A Lewis article on Sec Kissinger's effort, in speeches throughout US, to rally
pol support for his foreign policy.  Notes difficulty of this in light of Ford,
under pol pressure from Ronald Reagan, having abandoned detente policy and basic
theme of calm and confidence in policy.  Holds Kissinger primarily responsible
for what Lewis deplores as stress on 'masculinity' in foreign relations,
discussing his moves in Vietnam as example.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 10

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

Family of Michael Estocin, US Naval pilot shot down in Vietnam during war, has
declared him write-in candidate in Penna Pres primary to focus attention on US
personnel still missing in action (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 109-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY JOHN W FINNEY

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 430 words

Defense Manpower Comm, civilian orgn created by Cong to study mounting costs of
mil manpower, issues rept concluding that no significant reductions are possible
in either size or cost of US armed services over next decade in light of Soviet
mil buildup.  Says US must expect to maintain current 2.1-million-man mil force
and 1-million civilians on Defense Dept payroll.  Says potential manpower
savings that might have followed reduction in forces after Vietnam War are being
largely consumed by increased number of divs, ships and air wings sought by mil.
Says, as result, only relatively small manpower savings are possible without
reducing defense capabilities.  Scores Adm's decision to impose severe budgetary
cutbacks on standby Selective Service System.  Says move has 'emasculated any
semblance' of a viable standby system.  Recommends against any major cutbacks in
mil fringe benefits as was recommended by Adm.  Holds 'essential' need to
continue 'inst benefits' such as med care and commisary and post exch privileges
since they were regarded as extremely important by mil personnel and their
elimination would have adverse effect on morale.  Says retirement benefits
should be granted after 30 yrs, rather than current 20, with earlier retirement
reserved for those serving in combat arms.  Proposes that after 10 yrs of
service personnel be granted vested right in pension system, with retirement pay
deferred until age 60 or 65.  Proposes abandonment of system in which mil pay is
tied to civil service pay, which in turn is supposed to be kept comparable to
pay scales in private sector.  Says mil pay should be based on competitive
principle, set at level necessary to attract and retain desired quantity and
quality of personnel.  Finds prospects of maintaining 2.1-million-man mil force
on volunteer basis over next 10 yrs depends on econ situation.  Says force can
be maintained under current policies if econ grows at slow or moderate pace.
Predicts shortage of recruits in event of rapid econ growth, in which event pay
increases may be necessary to make mil positions competitive.  Finds mental and
educ quality of recruits in all-volunteer force has improved.  Sees little
evidence to suggest that armed forces are increasingly becoming 'poor man's
army'.  Scores readiness of Reserves and Adm's concept of relying on them to
supplement relatively small standing force in time of crisis.  Questions whether
'total force policy' is truly viable concept.  Comm was created by Cong in '73
amid concern over rising costs of mil manpower.  Members noted (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 109-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 20, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 8

LENGTH: 19 words

USSR econ aid delegation, led by Deputy Prime Min Ivan V Arkhipov, attends Hanoi
(N Vietnam) dinner, Apr 18 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 110-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 21, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 138 words

Repr Bella S Abzug, speaking at Overseas Press Club luncheon, NYC, says US
should 'stop acting as the major arms seller to the Persian Gulf nations' and
should 'drop its long-range plans to sell arms to Egypt'.  Denounces Ford Adm
for providing arms to nations 'which seek to upset the stability of the Middle
East'.  Says that if Israel is expected to follow up Sinai pact with further
concessions, it has right to expect that US will stop selling arms to its
present and potential enemies, adding that for '75-76 mil sales to Persian Gulf
countries exceeded $12-billion while such sales to Israel were only $5-billion.
Insists that such reduction in arms sales be part of 'reappraisal of foreign
policy'.  Says US has responsibility to give econ assistance to 'people of
Vietnam for the horrors we inflicted on them' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 111-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY WAYNE KING

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 122 words

Ronald Reagan campaigns in Ga, scoring Ford Adm foreign policy and what he calls
declining US mil posture.  Draws enthusiastic crowds.  Pledges again to return
power to states.  Criticizes reptd US overtures for diplomatic recognition of
Communist Govt of Vietnam.  Again calls detente a 'one way street' and pledges
to replace State Sec Kissinger.  Says he would increase mil appropriations.
Notes that Army Sec told Sen Armed Forces Com that Army is now able to equip
only half of its 16 divs.  Is considered strong contender in Ga's May 4 primary.
Urges Dems in state to cross over and vote for him, but former Ga Gov Jimmy
Carter's appearance on Dem ballot may prevent this.  Reagan illus with SC Gov
James Edwards in Ga (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 112-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 40 words

US Pres Ford says he has no intention of extending diplomatic recognition to N
Vietnam, Apr 22 Indianapolis (Ind) radio int.  Statement is reply to reptd
remarks by opponent Ronald Reagan that US is contemplating recognizing Hanoi
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 113-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 41 words

US Pres Ford says he has no intention of extending diplomatic recognition to N
Vietnam, Apr 22 Indianapolis (Ind) radio int.  Says statement is reply to reptd
remarks by opponent Ronald Reagan that US is contemplating recognizing Hanoi
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 113-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 379 words

US Sec of State Kissinger, commenting before African trip, says that he is
committed to policy of promoting black majority rule in Rhodesia and of
furthering African pol unity and econ development, news conf, Washington, DC.
Says that he will stress to African leaders that US is equally determined to
prevent further USSR or Cuban involvement in African affairs.  Implicit in
Kissinger's remarks is warning that African states cannot count on US pol or
econ support if they allow 'another Angola'.  Kissinger says efforts to have
dialogue with Cuba will be 'suspended' so long as Cuba keeps forces in Africa
and agitates for Puerto Rican independence.  Will leave US on Apr 23 for 2-wk
trip to 7 African nations.  Will stop in London on Apr 23 and will end with
brief visit to Paris on May 6-7.  Conf centers on US policy toward Africa.Other
topics noted.  Kissinger says situation in Lebanon remains precarious because of
inability of various factions to work together and absence of strong central
authority to enforce cease-fire.  Says he will meet in London with special envoy
to Lebanon L Dean Brown, who is winding up mo-long mission seeking to persuade
factions to agree on solution that will preserve autonony of Christian and
Moslem communities within const framework.  Says, but declines to concede, that
it is unlikely that new agreement curbing strategic arms can be reached with
USSR.  Says that N Vietnam is insisting on making 'ultimatums' to US about US
obligation to supply Hanoi with aid.  Holds that Hanoi is under
'missapprehension' if it believes US needs to normalize ties for election
purposes.  Says US is ready to defer talks until '77 and 'absolute precondition'
for normalizing relations is complete disclosure of information about missing in
action and others not fully accounted for.  Kissinger's 1st trip to sub-Saharan
Africa results from concern that in wake of successful Cuban and USSR
involvement in Angolan civil war Russians may feel free to continue to help in
'liberating' Rhodesia from Prime Min Ian D Smith white minority Govt and in
future action against S Africa.  Says he will confer in Zambia with black
nationalist leaders from Rhodesia and will do best to revive negotiations
between black and white Rhodesian leaders (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 113-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY PHILIP SHABECOFF

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 221 words

US Pres Ford, campaigning in Ind and Ga, denies US plans to establish diplomatic
relations with N Vietnam.  Denial comes after opponent Ronald Reagan says Ford
Adm had made overtures to Hanoi.  Ford says repts are unfounded.  Says US
interest in talking to Hanoi primarily is directed at obtaining information
about Amers missing in action, Ind broadcasters meeting.  Says US is willing to
discuss some 'humanitarian aid' to Vietnam.  Reagan has been drawing large
audiences in Ga and Ford campaign staff concedes Ford is running behind Reagan.
Ford's enthusiastic reception in Ind described.  Ford praises former campaign
chmn Howard H Callaway as 'great Amer,' speech to Atlanta (Ga) campaign workers.
Callaway resigned as Ford campaign com chmn after being charged with using pol
influence to win Govt favors for his ski resort.  Ford contends Callaway is
receiving 'unfair treatment' from Sen com investigating charges.  Ford,
contending Reagan pulled 'out of the blue' statement that US intends to
establish relations with N Vietnam, fails to mention previous State Dept rept
that US Embassy in Paris sent note to N Vietnamese Embassy proposing low-level
talks on any subject either side finds of interest.  Recent exchange of notes
between countries recalled.  US Sec of State Kissinger's stand on matter noted
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 114-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MAX AUSTERLITZ

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32

LENGTH: 31 words

Asian affairs observer Max Austerlitz describes soc and econ changes that have
evolved in S Vietnam nearly 1 yr after Communist takeover.  Saigon scene
described.  Illustrations (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 115-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 282 words

S and N Vietnam voters scheduled to elect joint Natl Assembly, part of country's
1st unified Govt in 30 yrs, Apr 25.  S Vietnam has 281 candidates vying for 243
assembly seats, while no figure is available for total number of candidates in N
Vietnam who are competing for 249 seats.  Legislature's powers are expected to
be limited.  Real power reptdly will remain with 11-man Politboro of Lao Dong
Party.  N Vietnamese news agency Apr 24 broadcast says Assembly will approve new
Const and choose new flag and natl anthem.  No dates have been set for 4th party
cong, 1st since '60, or formal unification of S and N Vietnam.  Communists say
all opponents of new Govt have been excluded from running in election and
several categories of people, including former S Vietnamese officers, police
officials, civil servants and members of defunct pol parties are not allowed to
vote.  Campaigning reptdly has been limited to distribution of official posters
bearing candidates' photos and brief outlines of 'revolutionary achievements'.
S Vietnamese candidates include Pham Hung, 4th-ranking Lao Dong Party Politburo
member, who Communists recently admitted for 1st time, headed war effort in
South for yrs.  Pham's role in war traced.  Other candidates include Nguyen Huu
Tho, Provisional Revolutionary Govt pres Huynh Than Phat, Foreign Min Ngueyn Thi
Binh, Saigon People's Revolutionary Com head Vo Van Kiet, former Mil Mgt Com
head Lt Gen Tran Van Tra, Women's Movement for Right to Life head Ngo Ban Thanh
and former Saigon Students' Assn head Huynh Tan Man.  Candidates in N Vietnam
include party 1st Sec Le Duan, current Natl Assembly leader Truong Chinh and
Prime Min Pham Van Dong (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 115-5

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 164 words

Several US oil cos have reptdly been invited by Hanoi to submit proposals for
resuming offshore oil exploration off S Vietnam.  Hanoi, despite continuing
chill in pol relations between it and Washington, is expected to begin signing
deals with foreign cos, including Amer ones if current embargo on trade with
Vietnam is dropped beyond 6-mo no-embargo trial period about to be approved by
Cong over Ford Adm objections.  Cos have recd encouragement from middle-level
State Dept officials but not from Sec Kissinger.  Have determined that Hanoi,
rather than Saigon, holds real power over offshore rights.  Hanoi initially
demanded that exploration be part of multibillion-dollar program that would
include refineries and petrochem plants, but was convinced by Sonatrach,
Algerian state oil co, that extent of reserves must first be determined.
Canadian, French, Brit and Japanese firms also interested in exploration.  US
cos involved in exploration before fall of Saigon listed (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 115-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 6

LENGTH: 32 words

N Vietnamese Gen Van Tien Dung, in quotation of day on cutbacks in Amer mil aid
to S Vietnam during close of Vietnam war, says 'Nguyen Van Thieu was then forced
to fight a poor man's war'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 116-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 34 words

Excerpts, unofficially translated, of N Vietnamese Chief of Staff Gen Van Tien
Dung's account of spring '75 offensive that lead to Communist victory in S
Vietnam.  Maps, Van Tien Dung por.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Text 11

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

S and N Vietnamese citizens vote, Apr 25, to elect joint Natl Assembly for 1st
unified Govt in 30 yrs.  All but few people over 18 yrs old are eligible to vote
for 492 assembly seats.  Hanoi and Saigon radio broadcasts say 100% of voters
turned out.  Saigon broadcast says election results will seal reunification of
both countries.  Former Gen Duong Van Minh, who surrendered S Vietnam to
Communist forces on Apr 30 '75, encourages everyone to vote for unification.  S
Vietnamese Foreign Min Nguyen Thi Binh comments.  Saigon scene described (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 116-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID E ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 363 words

Sen Select Com on Apr 26 discloses that CIA plans to continue to employ as
agents more than 25 journalists or other reprs of Amer news orgns.  Says those
persons are not covered by public pledge made in Feb by CIA Dir George Bush that
agency would stop hiring correspondents 'accredited' by Amer publications and
other news orgns.  Com staff member repts that many of individuals were in exec
positions at Amer news orgns.  Panel recommends enactment of law precluding
agency's 'operational use' of any person regularly involved in writing, editing
or setting policy for US news orgns.  Says it is concerned that use of Amer
journalists and media orgns for clandestine operations is threat to press
integrity.  Rept cites instances in which efforts of CIA agents acting abroad as
journalists were printed in domestic publications.  Says it is aware other
countries made use of 'internatl media' for propaganda and that US public is not
insulated from such efforts.  Cites examples of work by journalist agents
including: book about China written covertly by agent which was revd in NY Times
by another agent.  Agency paid $170,000 a yr for publication of magazine in S
Vietnam in '74 and '75.  2 news services maintained by CIA in Eur were
subscribed to by major Amer newspapers.  Penkovsky Papers, book purported to be
based on repts of executed Soviet spy, was actually written by CIA agents.
Employment of news orgns and publishing houses by CIA appears to have been
reduced in recent yrs.  Com described catagories of journalists who have worked
as agents: staff members of gen circulation Amer news orgns.  Com said it had
found only 2 individuals in this category and that their relationship with
agency was being ended under Bush's Feb directive.  Staff members of
limited-circulation Amer publications.  Com reptd that it had found fewer than
10 persons now in this category.  Freelance writers, part-time stringers for
newspapers, magazines and news agencies, propaganda writers and employes of Amer
publishing houses.  Com says this is largest category.  Journalists with whom
CIA makes occasional, informal contact during which information is exchd or
verified (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 117-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 2

LENGTH: 45 words

Sup Ct declines to rev lower ct ruling upholding constitutionality of Ill
statute that makes it a crime to mutilate Amer flag.  ACLU is representing 3
women who were convicted under statute for burning a flag as protest against
Vietnam war and Kent State shootings (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 117-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 88 words

Vietnamese officials say Natl Assembly elected Apr 25 will meet within 60 days
to adopt new const and ratify N and S Vietnamese reunification.  249 deputies in
N Vietnam and 243 in S Vietnam were chosen by voters during election.  All
candidates were nominated by revolutionary coms.  No reunification date has been
set.  Hanoi and Saigon broadcasts monitored in Thailand indicate 99% of voters
cast ballots in Hanoi.  Similar strong turnout in Saigon reptd.  Broadcasts
describe atmopshere during balloting as festive (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 117-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 28, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 3

LENGTH: 82 words

Canadian Immigration Min Robert Andras says Govt has asked S Vietnamese Govt if
it will accept return of former Gen Dang Van Quang.  Says decision on whether to
return Dang to Vietnam will be made when reply is received.  Dang has been
accused by other Vietnamese refugees of corruption and drug trafficking and was
ordered deported from Canada in July '75.  Since that time Canada has not found
country that would accept Dang.  Dang originally arrived in US from S Vietnam in
May '75 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 118-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 28, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Armed Forces Journal Feb issue says article published recently recalling
incident in which then-Pres Johnson was duped into believing group of soldiers
was bound for Vietnam war during Feb 12 '68 ceremonies at Ft Bragg (NC) had
actually just returned from mission was false.  UPI wrote article based on
journal article written by publisher/author Benjamin F Schemmer.  Journal
printed lr from Col John G Jameson Jr, comdr involved in incident at time,
noting that Johnson boarded plane on which troops were leaving for Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 118-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 2

LENGTH: 29 words

Additional excerpts, in unofficial translation, of N Vietnamese C/S Gen Van Tien
Dung's account of spring '75 offensive that led to Communist victory in S
Vietnam.  Map (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Text 11

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

N Vietnamese C/S Gen Van Tien Dung, in serialized account carried in Hanoi
newspapers and over radio, says S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu's sudden Mar
14 '75 decision to abandon Central Highlands after shocking Communist capture of
Ban Me Thuot 4 days earlier marked 'error in strategy' that led to total
victory.  Communist advance through Central Highlands and eastward into Binh
Dinh Province described (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 119-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY LESLEY OELSNER

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 554 words

Sen Select Intelligence Com rept discloses that FBI spent 25 yrs monitoring
'wholly lawful pol activity' of the NAACP on ground that it was conducting a
search for Communist infiltration.  Com says FBI infiltrated feminist movement
and made targets of such groups as Christian Front and the conservative Amer
Christian Action Council, led by Rev Carl D McIntire.  Says Army domestic
intelligence operations opened files on numerous groups seeking peaceful change,
including John Birch Soc, Young Amers for Freedom, Natl Orgn for Women, Natl
Urban League, Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, Business Execs to End the
War in Vietnam and NAACP.  Rept says com found domestic intelligence activity,
including operations by FBI, CIA, Army and IRS, were 'overbroad' because of
'absence of precise standards for intelligence investigations'.  Traces erosion
of these standards from '24 when Atty Gen Harlan Fiske Stone ltd FBI to criminal
matters, through '76.Rept says Pres, Cong and agencies themselves are guilty of
creating vague standards.  It was under Pres F D Roosevelt that in '41, FBI
opened NAACP probe.  Com says it was begun as 'investigation of protests by 15
black mess attendants about racial discrimination in the Navy'.  Ostensibly,
probe was to determine if there had been Communist infiltration of the black
group.  Rept says that in 1st yr of probe, FBI agents reptd that NAACP had
'strong tendency' to 'steer clear of Communist activities'.  Com says Army
maintained intelligence files on 100,000 Amers including Rev Dr Martin Luther
King Jr, Maj Gen Edwin Walker, Julian S Bond, Joan Baez, Dr Benjamin Spock, Rev
William Sloane Coffin, Sen A E Stevenson 3d and Repr Abner Mikva.  Com says all
those in Army files got there 'simply because of their participation in pol
protests or their association with those who engaged in such pol activity'.
Says FBI maintains some 500,000 domestic intelligence files in its Washington hq
and has others in its field offices.  Says from '55 to '75, FBI investigated
740,000 'subversive matters' and 190,000 'extremist matters'.  CIA, in its
Operation Chaos against domestic dissidents from '67 to '73, amassed 'index'
file on 300,000 Amers and full dossiers on 7,200 Amers and more than 100 orgns.
IRS amassed files based upon pol criteria from '69 to '73 on 11,000 individuals
and groups and later computerized 465,000 names for gen intelligence purposes.
Rept says CIA illegally opened some 250,000 1st-class lrs from '53 to '73
producing 'computerized index of nearly 1 and 1/2 million names'.  Says FBI
opened 130,000 lrs in 8 projects from '40 to '66.  Says Natl Security Agency
conducted wholesale scannings of cable traffic leaving and entering US as well
as certain oveseas telephone calls.  Says women's liberation movement was
infiltrated by FBI in several cities, including Kansas City, NYC and Baltimore.
Says informants who attended meetings collected material about movements'
policies, leaders and individual members.  Rept cites examples of how agencies
were responsive to adms of Pres Roosevelt, Truman and Kennedy.  Discusses
Kennedy Adm wiretap of hotel room of Howard D Cooley, who was then chmn of HR
Agr Com.  Rept says FBI opened investigation and used informants to rept on '69
meeting of Northern Va Citizens Concerned About the ABM.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 119-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Vietnamese Govt reptdly lifts nightly curfew in Saigon to allow people to
celebrate 1st anniv of Communist victory in S Vietnam.  Curfew to be resumed May
2 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 120-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY JOSEPH B TREASTER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 130 words

Ital journalist Tiziano Terzani, who recently visited Vietnam for 3 wks after
covering war for Der Spiegel, says daily life in Vietnam is worse now than
during war in terms of food, commodities and comfort.  Quoting Vietnamese
officials, says there is enormous econ problems in country, with 3- to 4-million
people jobless.  Was 1 of handful of Western journalists allowed into country to
observe recent Natl Assembly elections.  Notes shift toward Communist soc is
being pressed most gradually in Saigon.  Scene described.  Terzani says he found
no evidence to substantiate repts that executions and beatings are being carried
out in re-educ camps.  Noting lack of medicine, says some camp deaths are
resulting from malaria and beriberi.  Describes reconstruction work (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 120-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 65 words

Former S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky says Apr '75 Communist takeover of S
Vietnam was result of weak moral leadership by Pres Nguyen Van Thieu and lack of
US understanding, UPI int on eve of 1st anniv of takeover.  Says Watergate
scandal and US public opinion against war affected Vietnamese morale at time of
collapse.  Contends majority of S Vietnamese are anti-Communists (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY R W APPLE JR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 179 words

Sen Hubert H Humphrey will not run for Dem Pres nomination, Apr 29 news conf.
Shuns primaries in NJ and elsewhere.  Says he has insufficient time, money and
organizational strength for 'hard-hitting campaign'.  Thinks he could have won
in NJ, but claims he would have come under 'tremendous pressure' to campaign in
other primaries as well.  Humphrey confidant Max Kampelman claims Humphrey is
reluctant to answer charges that would have been raised, including his defense
of Vietnam War while serving as Vice Pres, and accusations that he and staff
members mishandled campaign funds and accepted improper gifts.  Humphrey says
again that he would accept draft at Dem natl conv.  Urges other aspirants to
stay in race.  Impact of his announcement on others discussed.  Sen Henry M
Jackson and Repr Morris K Udall view announcement as boon to their candidacies,
but many Dems feel Jimmy Carter will be real beneficiary.  Expect pressure on
uncommitted delegates and others to move to Carter will be great.  Illus of
Humphrey during press conf and with wife Muriel (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 138 words

F Butterfield describes current econ, pol and soc scene in S Vietnam as country
nears 1-yr mark under Communist leadership.  Refugee repts, lrs from Vietnamese
and accounts of few foreigners still in Saigon reptdly describe gradual but
profound transformation in city.  With few exceptions, S Vietnamese Army
officers, policemen and politicians taken into countryside for re-education
courses during summer of '75 have not returned.  Econ, which was artificially
active because of vast US aid during war, has sharply deteriorated.  Large
numbers of N Vietnamese troops reptdly remain in S Vietnam.  Major
land-redistribution program has not taken place.  Continued resistance to
Communists reptdly is minor.  Part of poem, written by popular Saigon poet Vu
Hoang Chuong and recently smuggled out of country, noted.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 1, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY JAMES WOOTEN

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

Arlington Natl Cemetery crypt for unkown soldier of Vietnam War has been
authorized by US Cong and is ready, but no symbolically nameless body has been
found.  Improved med evacuation techniques and nature of Vietnam War linked.
Selection of unknown soldiers of other wars, ritual guard at Arlington by
members of 3d Infantry Div, described.  All 46,367 Amers killed in Vietnam have
been identified.  More than 2,000 are still listed as either POW's, missing or
killed in action.  Pentagon spokesman says that if relations with Vietnam
normalize, and US gets back some people, an unknown will be among them.  Guard
illus at Tomb of the Unknowns, Arlington Natl Cemetery (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 121-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 1, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 8

LENGTH: 78 words

N Vietnamese Defense Min Vo Nguyen Giap says Vietnamese must 'advance in the
flush of victory with a new vigor, new prospectives, new tasks in order to lead
country to socialism,' Hanoi statement on 1st anniv of Communist takeover of S
Vietnam.  Giap was chief planner of '50s victory over French forces and '75
victory over S Vietnamese Govt.  Urges armed forces to strive for 'combat
readiness' and be ready to maintain security and order in unified Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 121-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 1, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7

LENGTH: 70 words

Festive scene in Saigon (S Vietnam) described as 100,000 people parade in main
courtyard of former presidential palace to celebrate 1st anniv of Communist
victory in S Vietnam, Apr 30.  Politburo member Pham Hung addresses crowd.  Is
flanked by Natl Liberation Front pres Nguyen Huu Tho, Provisional Revolutionary
Govt pres Huynh Tan Phat, Foreign Min Nguyen Thi Binh and Freed Women Movement
pres Nguyen Thi Dinh (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 121-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY GEORGE W WEBBER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 5

LENGTH: 32 words

Clergy and Laity Concerned natl steering com chmn George W Webber lr, noting 1st
anniv of end of Vietnam war, holds US Govt has overwhelming obligation to aid
Vietnam and recognize new Govt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 12

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID E ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 90 words

D E Rosenbaum article on Cong's most imporant function: airing concerns of US
and investigating US's insts and disclosing their strengths and weaknesses.
Cites Sen Select Intelligence Com's rept on its investigation of Fed
intelligence services.  Notes Cong provided forum for idssent against Vietnam
war.  Says it prevented apptmt of inferior Sup Ct justices, stopped arms
shipments to Turkey and blocked construction in US of supersonic aircraft.
Quotes Alexander Hamilton.  Discusses expected Cong leadership changes.  Drawing
(L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 122-5

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS BUTSON and BRYANT ROLLINS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

Recent Vietnamese Natl Assembly elections, 1st in 30 yrs, summarized.
Assembly's main purpose reptdly will be to formally reunify country (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 122-5

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS BUTSON and BRYANT ROLLINS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

N Vietnamese C/S Gen Van Tien Dung's recent detailed and candid account of Apr
'75 N Vietnamese victory in S Vietnam, which ran in serialized form in Hanoi
newspapers and over radio, summarized (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 122-5

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

Article on current life-styles of some Vietnam war leaders notes former S
Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu is living in exile in GB, former S Vietnamese
Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky is touring US promoting book he has written and
occasionally lecturing, former US Amb to S Vietnam Graham A Martin currently is
serving as special asst to US Sec of State Kissinger, Army C/S Gen Frederick C
Weyand continues in his position and former S Vietnamese natl police chief
Nguyen Ngoc Loan is involved in running Washington (DC) restaurant.  Ky illus
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 122-4

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 2

LENGTH: 96 words

S Vietnamese Govt reptdly has asked foreign consulates, news bureaus and most
internatl agencies to close S Vietnamese operations and move to Hanoi.  Saigon
authorities say Hanoi will become only point of origin for foreign news repts on
Vietnam beginning May 8. UN, Red Cross and other internatl agencies to end
Saigon activities shortly.  4 foreign newsmen in Saigon, including Amer Frances
Starner of Pacific News Service to leave Vietnam shortly.  UPI, NBC, Time
magazine and other foreign news outlets reptdly have been ordered to end Saigon
operations on May 8 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 123-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 2

LENGTH: 19 words

Revolutionary Com in Saigon, Vietnam, orders 2 Japanese newsmen and a French
reporter to leave S Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 123-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 2

LENGTH: 23 words

Japan Broadcasting Corp says Saigon Revolutionary Com has told 2 Japanese
correspondents and 1 French reporter to leave S Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 123-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 5, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 4

LENGTH: 26 words

Memorial boycott of classes is held at Kent State Univ on 6th anniv of its
Vietnam War protest, in which 4 students were killed and 9 others wounded (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 125-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 5, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 375 words

Former Defense Sec James R Schlesinger says on May 4 that Ford Adm is
undermining US 'moral support' for Israel by putting undue pressure on it to
make concessions to Arabs, speech to annual meeting of Amer Israel Public
Affairs Com, Washington.  Says Israel is being treated as S Vietnam was treated
during '72-73 peace negotiations, being blamed for failure to make progress
toward settlement.  Deplores what he calls 'condition that I view as the
Vietnamization of Israel in recent yrs'.  Says it is 'improper, even pernicious
to blame the failure to achieve a settlement on the one nation prepared to
accept a settlement'.  Does not mention Sec Kissinger by name, but his remarks
seem to be criticism of Kissinger's negotiating tactics.  Says that US policy
for 1st 6 days of '73 war was limited to assisting Israel on 'cash-and-carry'
basis.  Asserts that he was under orders from former Pres Nixon and Kissinger
not to undertake major airlift.  Says that not until Oct 13, 7th day of war, was
decision made to start airlift using US Air Force planes.  Says that until then
Nixon Adm 'had been hesitating because it did not want to show its hand'.
Schlesinger's comments follow bitter attack on Ford Adm's policies toward Israel
by Sen Hubert H Humphrey in speech to same group on May 3. Humphrey, who until
now has supported Kissinger's policies, says Ford Adm has taken steps 'which
have the effect of eroding the historical bonds of trust and confidence' between
US and Israel.  Is particularly angered by Ford's intention to veto
appropriations bill containing provisions for $550-million in additional aid to
Israel above $2.2-billion already approved.  Says Ford and his budget advisers
overruled Kissinger who had given his support.  On another aid bill, authorizing
$4.4-billion for current fiscal yr including Israeli aid, White House says Ford
will definitely veto it because of provisions putting limits on his foreign
policy flexibility.  Says veto message outlining Ford's views will be sent to
Cong by May 5. Schlesinger declines to endorse Pres candidate.  Says he has been
'in communication intimately' with staffs of Ronald Reagan, Sen Henry M Jackson
and another candidate.  Says he has had no contact with Ford Adm (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 125-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Pres Ford delays planned veto of $4.4-billion foreign aid bill that would impose
Cong controls on foreign sales of mil equipment, while opening trade with
Vietnam for trial period (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 126-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 7, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 2

LENGTH: 94 words

2-part ed opposing Ford's threat to veto foreign aid bill because it contains
provision for Cong oversight on arms sales abroad.  Holds arms restrictions
moderate and notes Sec Kissinger has reptdly said Adm could 'live with' them.
Notes White House now opposes provision lifting trade embargo against Vietnam
for 6 mos because it could be ammunition for Ronald Reagan Pres election
campaign, but doubts Reagan would make pol capital out of bill since it was
drafted to provide Hanoi with incentive to supply information on persons missing
in action from war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 12

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 8, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

S Vietnamese Foreign Min Nguyen Thi Binh, in int with Le Monde, says such
foreign oil cos as Shell and Gulf can resume work in Vietnam.  Says code for
foreign investment will be drawn up.  Says US must stop hostile policy if it
wishes to establish normal relations with Vietnam.  Says statements by Sec
Kissinger advocating normalization of relations are part of Pres election
campaign.  Says Vietnam sets no pre-conditions on normalization (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 128-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 9, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT SHERRILL

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1

LENGTH: 31 words

C D B Bryan book, Friendly Fire, about reaction of Michael Mullen's family to
his death by artillery fire from his own (US) troops in Vietnam war, revd by
Robert Sherrill.  Mullen por.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 12

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 9, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY TRACY JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14

LENGTH: 74 words

Tracy Johnson article describes plight of hundreds of Vietnamese non-orphans who
were brought to US unwittingly by adoption agency officials under AID program
Operation Babylift in closing days of Vietnam war.  Adoptive parents, agency and
Govt officials and 1 natural mother who has been attempting unsuccessfully to
regain custody of 2 sons for 1 yr comment.  Vietnamese view of situation reptdly
has been noncommital.  Illustrations (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 129-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 9, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

Washington (DC) rept, confirmed by aides to Sen Hubert H Humphrey, says he
warned then-US Pres Lyndon B Johnson, in Feb 17 '65 memo, of fears that
escalating US involvement in Vietnam would be detrimental to US.  Memo is to be
included in volume of Humphrey memoirs scheduled for June '76 publication.
Washington Post account says Johnson received memo day before scheduled start of
bombing of N Vietnam.  Excerpts.  Humphrey reptdly said ' best possible outcome
a yr from now ('65) would be a Vietnam settlement' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 129-5

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 9, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY SELWYN RAAB

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 427 words

NYS Assembly's Office of Legis Oversight and Analysis uncovers evidence that NYS
police used secret 'right-wing intelligence newsletter,' Information Digest, to
help compile dossiers on supposedly liberal and leftist persons.  Says
newsletter supplied police with names of thousands of politicians, pol
activists, lawyers, writers and show business personalities for inclusion in
noncriminal intelligence files.  Among those whose names were passed along to
NYS police hq because of their pol activities are ex-NYC Mayor John V Lindsay,
Reprs H Badillo, S Chisholm, C B Rangel and B S Rosenthal, Bronx Borough pres
Robert Abrams, Bishop Paul Moore Jr and actor Dustin Hoffman.  Confidential
preliminary rept says Lindsay became entry in records because of his opposition
to deportation of John Lennon, 1 of original Beatles, Moore, the Reprs and
Abrams were included because of their stands against Vietnam war and Hoffman was
cited as entertainer 'sympathetic' to radical causes.  Rept on Information
Digest follows disclosures last yr by state legis unit that state police had
amassed pol information on as many as a million people.  None of these files
apparently related to criminal matters.  Assemblyman Mark A Siegel and state
police supt William Connelie comment.  Rept on Information Digest was made by
William F Haddad, head of Oversight Office, and Thomas M Burton, staff
investigator.  Rept says newsletter, begun in '69, was prepared by S Louise
Rees, who is on Cong staff of Repr L P McDonald, and Mrs Rees's husband John.
Among those cited by newsletter and who are known to have had some kind of
dossiers made because of their positions against Vietnam war are: producer
Kermit Bloomgarden, playwright and cartoonist Jules Feiffer, actor Jack Gilford,
Councilwoman Carol Greitzer, Assemblyman Franz S Leichter, Hospital Workers
Union pres Leon Davis, David Livingston, pres of Dist 65 of Natl Council of
Distributive Workers of Amer, anthropologist Ashley Montagu, scientist Linus
Pauling, actor Tony Randall, women's rights writer Gloria Steinem, ACLU legal
dir Melvin Wulf, women's rights leader Betty Friedan, writer Murray Kempton,
entertainer Shirley MacLaine and writer Norman Mailer.  Some of those who were
cited because of their opposition to deportation of Lennon include: civil-rights
activist Rev Ralph G Abernathy, composer Leonard Bernstein, singer Bob Dylan and
TV personality Dick Cavett.  NY Times reporter Seymour M Hersh was included
because of articles he wrote about massacre of villagers by Amer troops in
Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 129-5

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS P RONAN

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 161 words

3 pol scientists conclude after study of voting patterns that Amer public is
more detached from pol parties than at any time in past 40 yrs, and is deeply
dissatisfied with pol process.  Study, conducted for Twentieth Century Fund by
Norman H Nie (Univ of Chicago), Sidney Verba (Harvard Univ) and John R Petrocik
(UCLA), is published in book, The Changing American Voter, based on rev of
voting from '56-73.  Finds increasing tendency to vote on basis of issues rather
than party loyalty, in reversal of earlier study, published in '60, which found
voters casting ballots on basis of personality and party.  Authors see
anti-Washington feelings of many voters as evidence of voter dissatisfaction
with pol process.  See crossover voting in Pres primaries in Tex and Ind as
evidence of erosion of party fealty.  Cite race, Vietnam, urban crisis,
Watergate and econ recession of mid-70's as important issues that were not
addressed responsively by major parties (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 130-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 8

LENGTH: 61 words

French Pres Valery Giscard d'Estaing says in int in US News & World Rept that
apparent difficulties of US in carrying out its foreign policy have created
anxiety in world.  Says there is little doubt that US is most powerful nation in
world, but adds that some pol debates, such as those over Vietnam war and
Watergate scandal, give impression of disunity (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 130-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 11, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 8

LENGTH: 64 words

Arrest warrant reptdly has been issued for Phila (Penna) resident Sara Coner,
foster mother of 2 Vietnamese girls, on kidnapping charges.  Coner reptdly took
custody of children in '75 at request of natural mother Duong Thi Yen Nga just
before fall of S Vietnam to Communist forces.  Duong reptdly left Vietnam in Jan
'76 and settled in Phoenixville to be reunited with children (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 131-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 12, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Page 39

LENGTH: 30 words

C D B Bryan book, Friendly Fire, about reaction of Michael Mullen's parents to
rept of his death in Vietnam from artillery fire of US troops, revd by C
Lehmann-Haupt.  Bryan por.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 13

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 12, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 245 words

Sen Foreign Relations Com and HR Internatl Relations Com approve new 27-mo
$9.3-billion foreign aid bill that drops some of policy restrictions that
prompted Pres Ford to veto similar bill.  Sen com removes $9-billion ceiling on
all foreign mil sales that had been included in vetoed bill.  Both coms drop
provision that would have lifted embargo on trade with N and S Vietnam for 6-mo
period.  Sen com modifies several provisions that would have allowed Cong by
concurrent resolutions in both houses to block Adm actions.  Decides that aid
for countries that violate human rights or discriminate against Amers could be
blocked only through 'joint resolutions,' subject to Pres veto.  Both coms
retain provisions that would allow Cong, by concurrent resolutions, to block
sale of mil equipment to foreign countries.  Sen com accepts amendment offered
by Sen Stuart Symington that would halt all aid except food assistance to any
nation that receives nuclear processing equipment without internatl controls.
Approves amendment offered by Sen Dick Clark authorizing $85-million in econ aid
to Zaire, Zambia and other southern African states to back up pledges made by
Sec Kissinger on his recent trip to Africa.  $4.5-billion of $9.3-billion
allocation will go to Israel.  Sen Hubert H Humphrey says he believes Ford will
accept bill.  Holds he and Sen Clifford P Case want to avoid another veto and
agreed privately on certain steps to meet some of Ford's concern (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 132-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 13, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HOWARD TRIVERS

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 52 words

Lr from Howard Trivers, retired Foreign Service Officer, on J Reston's Apr 23
article on whether Amers are withdrawing into isolationism, says that as result
of mistaken Vietnam policy Middle America has profound mistrust of Govt foreign
policy.  Says it is mistake to interpret this mistrust as loss of will.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 13

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD EDER

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 54 words

Francis Ford Coppola is filming Apocalypse Now in Philippines.  Film is about
Vietnam war.  Story was written by John Milius and film will feature Marlon
Brando and Martin Sheen.Sidney Glazier to produce film The Great Victorian
Collection based on Brian Moore novel.  Ralph Bakshi is working on animated film
War Wizards.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 134-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY JOHN M CREWDSON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 126 words

Former US CIA Dir William E Colby, in Apr 4 '75 message to agencies Saigon (S
Vietnam) station, reptdly reptdly took steps to head off possible assassination
of then-S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu by officials of S Vietnamese Govt who
were displeased by worsening mil situation.  Colby message reptdly cautioned
Saigon station chief that should attempt be made against Thieu's life it would
be 'institutional and natl disaster' if CIA were connected to action.  Message
reptdly strongly recommended that effort to give Thieu and family safe passage
and haven be made.  Colby, reached by phone, said he believed message was
written as precaution in light of Cong investigations of CIA assassination plots
and deteriorating pol situation in Saigon (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 134-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KEVIN BUCKLEY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 2

LENGTH: 13 words

John Pilger book, The Last Day, about the Vietnam war, revd by Kevin Buckley.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 13

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KEVIN BUCKLEY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 2

LENGTH: 17 words

Tiziano Tersani book, Giai Phong!  The Fall and Liberation of Saigon, revd by
Kevin Buckley.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 13

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 152 words

Thailand, in wake of US mil withdrawal, reptdly is becoming 1 of largest
purchasers of arms in Asia.  Munitions mfrs, including Northrop,
Fairchild-Repub, Ling-Tempco-Vought, Lockheed and French Dassault are competing
for attentions of Thai Supreme Command and Royal Thai Air Force comdrs.  Thai
Govt reptdly recently authorized purchase of squadron of 16 Northrop F-5E
Freedom Fighter jets, including spare parts, at cost of $75-million over next 4
yrs.  Cost of co's know-how in maintaining craft is not included in purchase
price.  Govt recently ordered from Singapore supplier 3 Sea Wolf-class offshore
patrol boats equipped with sophisticated radar-guided, Amer-made
surface-to-surface missiles.  Other possible purchases noted.  Mil observers
reptdly feel it would be impossible for Thailand to match Vietnam's mil
capacity.  Recent comment by N Vietnamese Defense Min Gen Vo Nguyen Giap
recalled (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 136-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JON NORDHEIMER

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Changing life-styles of young hs and coll students in Azusa (Calif) 1 yr after
end of US involvement in Vietnam assessed.  Local youngster Joe Luna was killed
in action during war.  Some of Luna's peers and teachers comment.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 136-3

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Julie Nixon Eisenhower scores portrayal of her mother, Pat Nixon, in book The
Final Days as a withdrawn and self-centered woman and a secret drinker, article
in Newsweek (pub).  Says description is 'distortion'.  Describes Mrs Nixon as
strong woman of great self control whose support enabled Pres Nixon to cope with
drawn-out adversities created by Watergate and Vietnam war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 137-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 8

LENGTH: 29 words

US Sen Kennedy reptdly urges Pres Ford to name special envoy to seek normalized
relations with Vietnam and repair US ties with Laos, Sen Subcom on Refugees
staff rept (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 137-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY JOHN M CREWDSON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 292 words

Sen Select Intelligence Com staff says mil intelligence agents have violated
rights of US citizens in agents' investigations of domestic pol and protest
groups and in process have threatened to 'violate the traditional and legal
restraints which govern the use of mil forces in the civilian community'.  Says
during middle and late '60s, Defense Dept agents, principally those of Army
intelligence, penetrated and reptd on numerous civil rights and anti-Vietnam war
orgns, intercepted those groups' radio communications and cooperated with
civilian law-enforcement agencies in monitoring the activities of private
citizens.  Com staff terms these activities as 'improper'.  Confirms repts that
Army conducted active surveillance of of US citizens living in W Ger and W
Berlin whom it considered to be 'threats' to its operations.  Says that until
'68 Army commanders in W Ger had unilateral authority to open mail to and from
such individuals and to subject them to wiretaps.  Affidavits from Army Sec
Martin R Hoffmann, recently filed in 2 civil ct cases, show Army intelligence
officers opened mail in W Berlin as late as '72 and affidavits carry strong
implication that such practices are continuing there.  Com staff estimates
100,000 individuals and 'similarly large' number of domestic orgns were
subjected to surveillance by Army intelligence agents.  Mil officers and
enlisted men also set out to harass and disrupt attempts of some anti-war groups
to organize public demonstrations.  Some individuals on whom army maintained
intelligence files are: Rev Dr Martin Luther King Jr, late Whitney M Young (head
of Natl Urban League), Sen Julian Bond, folksingers Arlo Guthrie and Joan Baez,
Dr Benjamin Spock and Sen Adlai E Stevenson 3d (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 137-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 179 words

State Sec H A Kissinger says that even if Pres Ford wins Nov election, he would
prefer to leave office, int with Barbara Walters for viewing May 17 on NBC-TV
program Today.  Says he does not want to tie conduct of foreign policy to
himself personally.  Has been criticized by some of Ford's pol advisers as
liability to Ford's efforts to win Repub nomination.  Repub Pres aspirant Ronald
Reagan has made Kissinger and his policies a prime target in primary campaigns.
Kissinger, in int, defends his trip to Africa as having given African nations a
'moderate alternative' to further wars in Africa.Says if negotiations between
whites and blacks could begin in Rhodesia, 'perhaps all of the parties will
conclude that negotiation is preferable to bloodshed'.  On Panama Canal,
Kissinger rebuts criticism of current negotiations by asserting that if
necessary US 'will defend' Panama Canal.  On Middle East, Kissinger sees no
progress toward peace now but says he still believes progress is possible.  Says
there is no progress in direction toward recognition of Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 137-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 18, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 3

LENGTH: 48 words

US Appeals Ct reverses Fed Ct decision granting $24.8-million to Eastern Air
Lines in connection with late delivery of 99 jetliners by McDonnell Douglas
Corp.  Rules McDonnell Douglas was excused from delivery delays, resulting from
Govt's priority policy arising from Vietnam War (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 138-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 20, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

11 S Vietnamese refugees, guided by school atlas and ancient compass, land on
Brunei after making 800-mi, 1-wk S China Sea crossing.  22-yr-old Chiew Huynh
describes reasons for escape, preparations and trip.  Says group chose Brunei
because it is closest non-Communist area to Vietnam.  Group says they hope to go
to France, Australia or US (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 140-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 20, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ISABEL CARY LUNDBERG

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

Isabel Cary Lundberg lr deploring stress in Pres campaign on US as 'Number One'
mil power in light of US inability to 'win' its mil ventures in Korea, Cuba and
Vietnam despite superior force.  Drawing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 14

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 20, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DAVID E ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Page 30, Column 3

LENGTH: 65 words

Dem Platform Com holds hearing, Washington, on foreign policy plank.  All
witnesses denounce policies of Sec Kissinger, including Eugene V Rostow, George
W Ball, Prof Zbigniew Brzezinski and Adm Elmo R Zumwalt.  Rostow, in reply to
query by Richard W Bailey on what he had learned from Vietnam experience, says
'If you use force, you had better win'.  Remark gets mixed reception (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 140-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 21, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 119 words

Dem Pres aspirant Jimmy Carter's credibility is being questioned because of his
apparently changing position on Vietnam war.  Carter was strong supporter of US
involvement in Vietnam war but earlier in mo he characterized war as
'racist'.Question arose about his position on the actions of Lt William L Calley
Jr during My Lai massacre when Las Vegas Sun editor Hank Greenspun published
signed front-page editorial asserting that Carter had organized day in hon of
Calley.  In '71, Carter proclaimed Amer Fighting Men's Day in Ga and described
Calley as 'scapegoat'.  Carter holds he never supported Calley or condoned his
actions but felt Calley's superiors should have received same punishment as
Calley (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 141-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DOUGLAS E KNEELAND

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 80 words

Ronald Reagan, campaigning in Tennessee for Repub Pres nomination, says on May
21 that he opposes concept of ltd war.  Sidesteps question about whether he
would use nuclear weapons to end war quickly.  Sees Amers disillusioned with
Vietnam war because troops were not allowed to go all out and win.Repeats his
opposition to TVA, though he says he has no plan to turn it over to private
enterprise.  Reagan and Repr Morris K Udall attending dinner at Nashville
Tennessean (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 142-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY PAUL LEWIS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 204 words

Article discussing outlook for US defense contractors notes future is 'more
cheerful today than in yrs'.  Says concern about Russia's strength, disillusion
with detente, memory of defeat in Vietnam and powerlessness in Angola all seem
to be stifling opponents to rearmament, and that Cong is likely to give Pres
Ford close to requested record mil budget for fiscal '77.  Notes Defense Dept is
concerned that profits of weapons makers are not high enough and is seeking ways
to increase them.  Notes Sen and HR recently have accepted idea of a decisive
reversal in downward trend of mil spending that has been in effect since '68.
Notes Ford Adm has made it clear that fiscal '77 proposals for spending
$101-billion is only 1st step in prolonged arms buildup.  Notes prices of shares
of defense contractors are at or near highs for yr, have outpaced stock mkt
climb and that shares continue to be recommended by mkt analysts.  Defense
contracts pending with 7 major cos discussed.  Table lists cos and lists some of
their major contracts.  Lists some of major mil contracts of '75.  Illus of
launching of nuclear-powered submarine Omaha at Gen Dynamics boatyard, Groton,
Conn.  Some other major weapons systems illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 143-3

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY LES LEDBETTER

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 203 words

Sen Frank Church campaigns with determined effort to win Oregon's Dem Pres
primary.  Is cautiously optimistic on chances for victory.  Uses
question-and-answer sessions in campaigning to prove that his candidacy is one
of 'substance over style'.  States position on each issue fully, refusing to
tailor answers to his audience of moment.  Session at Temple Beth Israel,
Portland, detailed.  Supports US arms sales to Israel and Sec Kissinger's
Mideast peace efforts.  Would enforce Sup Ct ruling on abortion, but protect
right of hosp personnel to refuse to assist at abortions.  Says clear-cutting of
trees must be permitted within strict guidelines.  Holds gun control and
restrictions on nuclear plants are issues to be decided on state level.
Supports amnesty for draft evaders, but would withhold recognition of Vietnam
until there is full disclosure of MIA's.  Says FBI and other law-enforcement
agencies should focus on crime, rather than pol probes.Says inflation and
unemployment can be ended by having competitive and fully producing econ with
multinatl cos being forced to invest and pay taxes in US.  Says natl health plan
should be tried out with retired first.  Says Panama Canal is false issue (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 143-5

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY PETER GROSE

SECTION: Page 35, Column 2

LENGTH: 62 words

Peter Grose article on indications US has right to be optimistic about its
future role in East-West relations and world in gen.  Cites assessments by
Internatl Inst for Strategic Studies and Research Inst for Internatl Change at
Columbia Univ.  Suggests recent decline in Amer's self-confidence is traceable
to Vietnam experience, Watergate and econ recession.  Drawing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 14

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY CRAIG R WHITNEY

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 124 words

Sec Kissinger, commenting on Vietnam war, says, 'We may have made mistakes, and
in retrospect, grave mistakes were made,' May 25 news conf, Stockholm.  Says US
will not pay compensation to Vietnamese as provided in '73 peace treaty,
asserting that all other provision of treaty have been broken.  Says US does not
object to Swedish neutrality policy, although it may disagree with specific
applications of it.  Prime Min Olof Palme welcomes Kissinger's pledge of support
for black majority rule in such countries as Rhodesia.  Kissinger lunches with
King Carl XVI Gustaf, lectures at Swedish Inst of Internatl Affairs and holds
dinner attended by his father's bro, Arno Kissinger, who fled to Sweden from Ger
after Hitler came to power (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 145-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ALVIN SHUSTER

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 164 words

Pope Paul VI installs 20 new cardinals, including Abp of Hanoi, whose selection
had been kept secret until ceremony.  Gives special welcome to Vietnamese,
Joseph Marie Cardinal Trin Nhu Khue, whose apptmt was 1 of 2 kept secret by
Pope.  Vatican sources refuse to disclose name of 2d secret cardinal.  Vatican
has no diplomatic relations with Hanoi.  Some close to Vatican suggest it is
hoped that selection of Cardinal Trin Nhu Khue will serve as signal to Hanoi of
ch's continuing interest in plight of Roman Caths in N and S Vietnam.  Among
those installed are Cardinal William Wakefield Baum, who has headed Washington
archdiocese since '73, and Cardinal Laszlo Lekai, who has been Abp of Esztergom.
Pope delivers unusually direct attack on those who have challenged ch,
particularly mentioning Rev Marcel Lefebvre, French bishop who leads those who
do not recognize validity of 2d Vatican Council.  Illus of Pope with Abp of
Hanoi, Cardinal Joseph Marie Trin Nhu Khue (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 145-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 9 words

French Embassy in N Vietnam is robbed on May 22 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 145-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 26, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY PHILIP SHABECOFF

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 91 words

Stuart Spencer, Pres Ford's campaign mgr, says Ford's victories over Ronald
Reagan in Tenn and Ky establish him as natl candidate.  Spokesman Peter Kaye
says momentum is now on Ford's side.  Ford, answering questions at Los Angeles
Press Club, says he will try to dissuade Sec Kissinger from resigning if he wins
Nov election.  Compares himself with Harry Truman.  Asked, in TV int, about
Kissinger's statement that US made 'grave mistakes in Vietnam,' Ford says
mistakes were of mil nature.  Says US need not apologize for role in Vietnam
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 146-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 29, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 100 words

Pres Ford adds name to 11,000 names on petition collected by Fraser (Mich) VFW
post asking N Vietnamese for all available information about Amers missing in
Vietnam war action.  Petition originally named only US Air Force Capt Robert
Tucci of Fraser, who disappeared on flight over Laos in '69.  Ford, fulfilling
promise made May 15 on campaign swing across Mich, signed petition after
suggesting it be broadened to include information on estimated 816 missing
Amers.  Ford special asst Dr Theodore Marrs says Ford changed wording from VFW's
'respectfully request' to 'something a bit stronger' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 149-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 30, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Nigeria announces it is establishing diplomatic relations with N Korea at
ambassadorial level.  Also establishing relations with N and S Vietnam and will
also open resident missions in Cuba and Yugoslavia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 150-2

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 282 words

N Vietnamese C/S Gen Van Tien Dung, in detailed and candid rept of Vietnam war's
final battles carried in serialized form by Hanoi newspapers over last 7 wks,
says N Vietnamese leaders had no intention of accepting last-minute pol
settlement despite Communists' repeated public hints that they were interested
in such negotiations if Pres Nguyen Van Thieu resigned.  Some Western analysts
say account constitutes clearest evidence yet that Communist offers were ploy to
unseat Thieu and unsettle S Vietnamese regime and Amer backers.  Pressure
created by proposal and others did contribute to Thieu's eventual decision to
step down on Apr 21 '75, little over 1 wk before end of war.  US Amb Graham A
Martin is believed to have been among those who urged Thieu to resign.  Martin
reptdly directed aides to begin contacts with Vietcong officers stationed at Tan
Son Nhut air base under Paris peace agreement.  Secret talks, which also
involved French diplomats and Polish and Hungariam ICCS members reptdly led some
US officials to believe 'deal' had been arranged.  Dung makes no mention of
talks in account of war.  Some French diplomats reptdly believed at time that
Foreign Min Nguyen Duy Trinh wanted to negotiate because they feared being shut
out of power if N Vietnamese Army won outright mil victory.  Dung's account
reptdly leaves that as possible interpretation.  Rept mentions existence of
Provisional Revolutionary Govt or Natl Liberation Front at only 1 point.
Account reptdly appears to be attempt to reverse Communists' long-standing
effort to publicize Natl Liberation Front as separate S Vietnamese movement and
instead give full credit to N Vietnamese for victory (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 151-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 74, Column 2

LENGTH: 18 words

United Methodist Gen Conf issues call for 'broad and unconditional amnesty' for
Vietnam war resisters (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 153-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 2

LENGTH: 93 words

Australian Prime Min Malcolm Fraser, in his 1st major foreign policy speech to
Parliament, calls on USSR to show it is serious about reaching accommodation
with West by restraint in mil expansion.  Blames USSR for increasing tensions
during '73 Middle East war.  Says it aided N Vietnam to take over S Vietnam and
intervened in Angola by introducing 12,000 Cuban troops and supplying them.
Holding Australian foreign policy hinges on US, expresses concern about clashes
between White House and Cong which he says weakens US capacity to act
effectively (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 153-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 3, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 112 words

UN mission to Vietnam, headed by Swiss diplomat/industrialist Dr Victor
Umbricht, reptdly has concluded that $432-million in foreign assistance urgently
is needed for agr resettlement and rr improvement in N and S Vietnam.  Mission
members recently concluded 3 1/2-wk trip to Vietnam.  Umbricht reptdly already
has begun talks with prospective donor govts.  Members reptdly left country with
impression that Vietnamese Govt is seeking expanded help, to be given directly
by govts, possibly with UN coordinating aid.  Most aid to country recently has
come from USSR, China, 3d world and few W Eur countries.  US Cong has prohibited
assistance to Indochinese Govts (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 154-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 5, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM E FARRELL

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 160 words

Article detailing dormancy of Amer pol left in '76 election campaigns.  Recalls
how visible and vocal left was in support of civil rights, and in opposition to
Vietnam, in past.  Quotes former Sen Eugene J McCarthy as saying how difficult
it is to get people excited without major issue like Vietnam.  Quotes civil
rights leader John Lewis as saying left lacks unifying force.  Notes Vietnam war
is over, and civil rights movement has lost its momentum.  Lists other factors
contributing to silence and languor of left: disaffection with major party pol.
Growing cynicism about effectiveness of any elected official.  Tendency to shun
centralized activity and to focus on small community efforts.  Absence of
leaders of natl stature.  Impact of econ on coll students.  End of draft.  Low
voter turnout.  Notes that Charles Morgan Jr, formerly of ACLU, feels there is
no pol left any more, only 'murky, pragmatic, upper-middle-class elite
liberalism' (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 156-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section 11; Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

Article on student involvement in NJ Dem Pres primary and '76 Pres race in gen.
Reduced student activity linked to Watergate and absence of central issue, such
as Vietnam.  Students also appear to be working more closely with party orgns.
Students Vince Fabrizio, David Rosskam, Michael McCurry, Julie Masser, Jerry W
Cox and James P Kelley Jr comment (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 157-5

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Mass Correction Dept records show that 11% of male inmates in Mass prisons are
Vietnam war-era veterans and majority make model inmates.  Statistics noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 15

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 8, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

N Vietnamese Embassy, Paris, issuing 'clarification' of June 4 meeting with 3
Amers who reptd that N Vietnamese had indicated some Amers still are being held
captive in country, says no Amer prisoners of war are still alive in Vietnam.
Says all Amers captured in Vietnam have been returned to US Govt.  Refuses to
discuss tracing 2,500 Amers still missing in Indochina or repatriating remains
unless US resumes talks on war reparations.  Fraser (Mich) VFW post comdr Nelson
Amsdill comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 159-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 9, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 65, Column 8

LENGTH: 42 words

15 protestors, demonstrating against cutoffs of educ benefits under GI Bill,
barricade themselves inside Statue of Liberty.  Are identified as members of
Vietnam Veterans Against the War.  Similar occupation by members of orgn in '71
recalled (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 160-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY TOM WICKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

Tom Wicker finds Pres Ford ill-advised for running TV ad campaign in Calif
primary that asserted Reagan might get country into war because of his views on
Rhodesia, Panama, Angola and fall of South Vietnam.  Sees Ford's charge as
likely correct but pol foolish in that it bars chance of uniting Repub vote with
Ford-Reagan ticket.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 16

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 7

LENGTH: 23 words

More than 3,000 Laotian students sent to China and N Vietnam to continue their
studies during fighting in Laos are returning home (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 162-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 7

LENGTH: 27 words

Official Laotian Govt spokesman says more than 3,000 students sent to China and
N Vietnam to continue studies during fighting in Laos are returning home (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 162-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 218 words

Lengthy document broadcast over Saigon radio and monitored by Amer officials
reptdly seems to tighten controls over former members of old anti-Communist S
Vietnamese Govt and armed forces.  Decree reptdly says virtually all former
members of armed forces, security, intelligence and police orgns of Thieu regime
must attend 'collective re-educ courses' for 3 yrs.  Says anyone in hiding to
avoid camps will be 'severely punished by law'.  Amer officials say latest
decree appears to set stage for some 'war crimes trials' although this is not
certain from decree itself.  Say that despite forthcoming union of N and S
Vietnam Govts, there is no move to ease up on gradually-tightening controls.
Camps reptdly are believed to be similar to moderately strict penal colonies in
other Communist countries.  Skilled technicians, drs, educators and other
professionals who are currently needed by new Govt reptdly will be released from
camps but must be subject to 'on the spot surveillance' for 6 mos to 1 yr before
being allowed to enjoy full rights.  S Vietnamese Govt, which was founded in '69
during war, reptdly now seems about to become defunct.  Joint Natl Assembly of
Hanoi and Saigon reptdly is to meet later in June to elect new unified
Vietnamese Govt that will be under virtual control of Hanoi (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 163-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID LATTIMORE and KAU YING-MAO

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35

LENGTH: 45 words

Ying-Mao Kau and David Lattimore comment on and interpretation of 2 fragments of
verse by Chmn Mao Tse-tung, 1 of which was presented to Nixon during his '72
visit to China and other written after US withdrawal from Vietnam but before
Communist seizure of Phnom Penh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 164-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Section 21; Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 30 words

USAF presents student nurse Susan Derge with ctf of appreciation for helping
those injured in crash of C-5A mil craft near Saigon, S Vietnam, in '75 despite
her own injuries (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 164-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY DAVID E ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 282 words

Completed draft of Dem Party Platform takes middle ground on most issues and
contains nothing varying to any large extent from views of Jimmy Carter.  Says
US must cooperate with USSR, yet maintain strong mil deterrent.  Advocates
reduction of $5- to 7-billion in defense budget and gen pardon for Vietnam-era
draft evaders.  Advocates legal prohibition against oil cos' owning industries
in other areas of energy production and effective restrictions on right of oil
cos to control all phases of petroleum indus if 'inadequate' competition can be
shown.  Opposes deregulation of crude oil or natural gas prices and urges
stronger safeguards against accidents at nuclear power facilities.  Proposes
limiting covert intelligence activity to operations essential to natl welfare.
Opposes mil and econ aid to oppressive totalitarian govts and calls for
internatl negotiations to limit abuses by multinatl corps.  Takes no stand on
B-1 bomber.  Calls for legis guaranteeing right of all Amers to job and leading
to unemployment rate of 3% within 4 yrs.  Encourages coordination of monetary
and fiscal policy and supports extensive tax reform.  Proposes comprehensive
natl health ins system but does not specify whether it should be operated by Fed
Govt or private cos.  Endorses minimum income for all Amers with requirement
that those able to work do so.  Urges help for cities.  Supports busing to
achieve school desegregation as judicial tool of last resort.  Opposes const
amendment prohibiting abortion.  Calls for unspecified restriction on
availability of pistols.  Daniel P Moynihan, most vocal member of drafting
subcom, and anti-war activist Sam Browne approve foreign policy sec.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 165-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 51, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

Former US Pres Richard M Nixon asks 3-judge Fed ct to temporarily release from
Govt custody flag given to him by former Vietnam POW Lt Col John Dramesi.
Dramesi reptdly fashioned flag from bits of clothing, towels and other items
during 6-yr imprisonment.  Dramesi reptdly wants to fly flag in Phila (Penna)
July 4 Bicentennial parade.  Judges reptdly are expected to act quickly on
petition (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 167-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Page 40, Column 4

LENGTH: 84 words

3-judge Fed panel, at request of former US Pres Richard Nixon, orders hand-made
flag fashioned from tatters by Vietnam war POW Lt Col John Dramesi be returned
to Dramesi so that he may fly it during Phila (Penna) July 4 parade.  Flag was
presented to Nixon while he was Pres and was in collection of documents and
memorabilia impounded by US Govt for inspection to discern whether there was any
Watergate-related material in it.  Dramesi will be required to return flag to
natl archives by Sept 15 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 168-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS LASK

SECTION: Section 3; Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

Easter River Anthology will publish Demilitarized Zones, new book of war poems
written by Vietnam veterans (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 169-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 34 words

Tex Dist Ct (Houston) Judge George Walker sentences convicted burglar James L
Marshall to 10-yr probationary sentence.Says lenient sentence is because
Marshall was decorated veteran of Vietnam War (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 169-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 23 words

Saigon radio repts Vietnam News Agency of N Vietnam and Giai Phong agency of S
Vietnam have merged under name of Vietnam News Agency (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 171-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 100 words

H R Haldeman, in 2d of 5-part series of newspaper articles, denies that ex-Pres
Nixon had problem handling liquor, or that he drank heavily, as alleged in book,
The Final Days, by Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein.  Says there were times when
Nixon appeared to be drunk, but says this was caused by exhaustion, and perhaps
by his metabolism, but not by overdrinking.  Holds Nixon made 'tragic mistake'
by not granting blanket pardons for everyone connected with Watergate scandal
and all Vietnam draft evaders.  Recalls how he urged Nixon to grant pardons on
eve of his (Nixon's) resignation (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 172-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 5

LENGTH: 44 words

US Supreme Ct refuses to hear appeal of court martial conviction of former Air
Force Col Gerald Kehrli on several counts involving use and possesion of
marijuana while in Vietnam.  Kehrli served 16 months in confinement and paid
$15,000 fine for offenses (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 173-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 184 words

Vietnamese Natl Assembly holds 1st session after 30 yrs of war and separation.
249 of Assembly's 492 seats are filled by N Vietnamese while 243 are filled by S
Vietnamese.  Present for ceremony are practically all members of Vietnamese
Workers Party steering com and main pol and mil leaders of North and South.
Assembly conv is 1st main legal step to cementing reunification.  Ceremony,
attended by S Vietnamese legis chmn Nguyen Huu Tho and N Vietnamese official
Truong Chinh and others, described.  Assembly is to designate com to rev const,
seek new name for country, pick new flag and new natl anthem.  Assembly consists
of 1.6% workers, 20.33% peasants, 1% artisans, 8.66% pol officials, 10.97%
revolutionary soldiers, 18.5% intellectuals, .06% religious figures and Dems,
1.8% legislators and 26.21% women.  N Vietnamese Party 1st sec Le Duan, in
speech scheduled for June 25, is to make pol rept on situation, immediate tasks
of country, socialism, domestic and foreign policy and drafting of const.  Illus
of Hanoi residents studying poster showing constituencies of reunified Vietnam
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 176-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 3

LENGTH: 29 words

Former US Marine Lt Don Shanley, who experienced Vietnam war at Khe Sanh,
comments, through poem to be published in forthcoming anthology, on his
recollections of Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 17

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 159 words

36-member Vietnamese Natl Assembly presidium officially proposes that Hanoi be
designated pol, econ and cultural capital of 'Socialist Repub of Vietnam'.  Full
assembly is expected to endorse proposal when it reconvenes on June 29.
Presidium also suggests that assembly adopt N Vietnamese flag and emblem,
formally proposes that Saigon be renamed Ho Chi Minh City and that it have no
specially designated status as either econ or cultural center and that natl
anthem be Hymn of the Marching Army, which was composed in '45 in N Vietnam and
originally was marching song of Vietminh in war against French.  Vietnamese
Workers Party 1st sec Le Duan, castigates those people in South who 'have a
standard of living far higher than the country's econ conditions allow,' speech.
Says foreign policy objectives will include opposing all forms of imperialism,
starting with 'Amer imperialism'.  Illus of Vietnamese leaders paying tribute to
Ho Chi Minh (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 177-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY STEVEN RATTNER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 111 words

Steven Rattner attributes high cost of educating students at US service
academies to high attrition rate from academies before graduation and from armed
forces as soon as 5-year required service is done.  Reports attrition problem
stems from change in social attitudes during '60s-'70s and post-Vietnam
bitterness.  Comments that many drop-outs have successful business careers.
Believes academies unlikely to be abolished even though not cost-effective since
they continue to provide good education, are held in high esteem throughout much
of US and provide legislators with considerable patronage opportunities.  Graph
of attrition rate.  Photo of cadet (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 178-3

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS BUTSON and BRYANT ROLLINS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2

LENGTH: 47 words

Recent steps taken by Vietnamese Govt in reunifying N and S Vietnam summarized.
Natl Assembly began 1st meeting during wk of June 20 in Hanoi.  New const is to
be completed, country is to be renamed, new cabinet is to be apptd and new flag
and natl anthem are to be chosen (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 178-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 6

LENGTH: 36 words

SC Gov James B Edwards says majority of Southerners would not vote for former Ga
Gov Jimmy Carter, whom he describes as man who wants to grant amnesty to
'yellow-bellies who were afraid to fight in Vietnam' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 179-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

Former Sen George D Aiken publishes book Aiken: Senate Diary, in which he
discusses former colleagues and other notables.  Says Sec Kissinger 'oozed
conceit from every pore' and that 'thirst for publicity appears to be the
overwhelming characteristic of Mr Kissinger'.  Says after Vietnam ceasefire
agreements, work done by Pres and Kissinger appears to be 'masterpiece of
diplomacy'.  Gives unflattering picture of a Sen stalled by absenteeism and
overloaded com staffs.  Says he has never seen so many 'imcompetent persons in
high office'.  Por (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 180-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
