
                               1 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 1, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

Repr Reuss to offer legis to continue 5% surtax on corps until Vietnam-Cambodia
war ends

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 1, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

Prof Paul Samuelson calls Indochina war 'single greatest specter hanging over
econ'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 1, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Militant Buddhist group begins hunger strike to dramatize demands for peace and
protest against Govt repression; strike is supported by students and other
anti-Govt elements; several sources of discontent in country noted; S Vietnamese
soldiers and civil servants complain bitterly of inflation; econ continues to
boom, maily because of US aid; gap between rich and poor said to be painfully
visible in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 1, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 71 words

About 75 enemy soldiers, who seized part of Dalat, slip past S Vietnamese troops
and escape; meet no resistance from S Vietnamese troops surrounding their
position; US spokesman says explanation is sought; mil officials rept 47 enemy
killed in attack in and around city; Lt Gen A S Collins Jr comments on attack;
details; illus; map; S Vietnamese troops open offensive aimed at trapping N
Vietnamese regiment SE of Pnompenh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 2, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 2

LENGTH: 37 words

Ed noting Pres Nixon plans 2 more ss on Vietnam this mo, says FCC cannot avoid
ruling on application brought by citizen's broadcasting com asking if 'fairness
doctrine' applies to responsible opponents of Nixon Adm policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 2, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 4

LENGTH: 90 words

Donald Irwin announces candidacy for Dem nomination for Sen from Conn, news
conf; takes 'hawkish' position on Vietnam war; Dem orgn reptd lining up behind
Alphonsus Donahue, recent gainer; Sen Thomas Dodd released from hosp; said to be
in excellent condition; wife and sons to continue to make pub appearances on his
behalf; Duffey now seen trailing Rev Joseph Donahue; Emilio Daddario silence on
preference noted; C Bowles backs Duffey; Duffey endorsed also by Natl Com for an
Effective Congress and by Congressional Action Front; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 2, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Lenore Romney, candidate for Repub nomination for US Sen from Mich and wife of
Sec Romney, calls for withdrawal of all Amer troops from Vietnam next yr, news
conf; scores Nixon Adm's dealing with coll students; indicates she is unhappy
with US move in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 2, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

Repr Rogers Morton says US involvement in Vietnam war no longer serves natl
interest, talk with newsmen; predicts Cambodian foray will help make US
disengagement possible; predicts it will prove pol boon for Repubs; calls for
better system than rifles, bayonets and Natl Guard to control campus violence,
news conf; holds campaign activity by 'hippie-style' students could backfire
against some candidates they support; says Pres Nixon should have liaison
offices in Capitol with expanded staff on top pol experts to handle relations
with Cong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 2, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 29 words

White House press sec hints that US may not provide tactical air support to S
Vietnamese forces in Cambodia after June 30, does not rule out bombing activity
after that date

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 2, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 110 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu reptdly moves to prevent Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky
from exploiting his role in mil operations in Cambodia; Nguyen Cao Ky reptdly
seeks powers that will make him something akin to viceroy of Eastern Cambodia;
said to be asking for authority to conduct swift and sizable mil operations
against Communist forces; Nguyen Van Thieu reptdly names Maj Gen Nguyen Van
Manh, of proved loyalty to him, to be chief coordinator for mil operations,
sends Min Tran Van Lam to Pnompenh, 1 day ahead of Nguyen Cao Ky, to make 1st
official visit; reptdly is concerned over Gen Do Cao Tri's imperious attitude
toward Cambodian officers and officials

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 2, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Article describes role of med-evacuation helicopter and casualties of a single
day's operations; wounded N Vietnamese soldiers illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 2, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 157 words

Premier Thanom Kittikachorn says Thailand will send volunteer soldiers to defend
Pnompenh from attack and free Cambodian troops to fight Vietnamese Communists;
says volunteers will be chosen from army reservists and Thai citizens of
Cambodian origin; says they will be trained in bn-size groups over 8-wk period
and are to be equipped, armed and paid by Cambodian Govt; repts Thailand has
also agreed to train noncommissioned officers for Cambodian armed forces;
Thailand had announced earlier that it would send 20 gunboats to take part in
anti-Communist patrols along Mekong River, provide uniforms and other equipment
for 50,000 Cambodians and conduct joint air reconnaissance along border with
Cambodia; Cambodia puts martial law into efffect; stages 1st gen alert; Vietcong
spokesman in Paris says rept on entry of Thai troops confirms Vietcong suspicion
that US tries to form puppet axis of Asian mercenary forces; US supports Thai
plan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 3, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 7

LENGTH: 134 words

Theodore Sorensen, Richard Ottinger, Richard McCarthy and Paul O'Dwyer,
candidates for Dem nomination for NY Sen, voice opposition to US movement into
Cambodia; express support for sale of jets to Israel; Sorensen urges sale, news
conf; says USSR has increased its activities in Arab world in mistaken belief
that US is preoccupied with Vietnam and Cambodia; says US anti-war movement does
not extend to 'indifference' to what happens to Israel; P O'Dwyer holds his
opponents should stop talking about aid to Israel as means of developing power
play; says they should talk in terms of aiding democracies and denying aid to
dictatorships; urges sale of jets, other mil equipment; Repr Ottinger says poll
of his Westchester County dist shows 51% of residents favor immediate sale of
jets, 38% are opposed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 3, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 7

LENGTH: 41 words

About 35,000 fresh US troops are 'processed' each mo at Oakland Army Base for
Vietnam despite reduction in force levels; about 9,000 of them end up going to
Vietnam; many of them said to express angry skepticism about repts of troop
withdrawals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 3, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 61, Column 5

LENGTH: 96 words

John R Bunting, former Fed Reserve economist and now head of 1st Penna Banking
and Trust Co, chides economists for 'notoriously bad' analysis in last couple of
yrs, s, Natl Assn of Business Economists seminar, NYC; cites among factors in
misleading predictions domination of business scene by nonecon factors such as
Vietnam war; also cites 'astonishingly' strong personality of Friedman, whose
theories on importance of money supply 'diverted attention from important
structural changes' that make solutions Friedman proposes unrealistic; also
criticizes Fed Reserve; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 3, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 2

LENGTH: 106 words

NYS gov candidate Howard Samuels outlines program for Dem party pol reform,
including direct election of county leaders and nationwide Pres primary, s in
front of Dem state hq, NYC; s at Comm for Black-Jewish Concern; Goldberg does
also but they do not meet; at news conf in front of state com hq Samuels says
Arthur Goldberg should share responsibility for Vietnam disaster as major
spokesman for Johnson Adm during time war was expanded; during night tour he
urges campaign for humanitarianism in domestic and foreign policy; urges
nationwide primary for Pres candidates; s to mental health and soc welfare
personnel for peace meeting

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 3, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 142 words

NYS Dem Gov candidate Arthur Goldberg in Binghamton on 3-day Upstate swing; at
news conf and in statement, scores Gov Rockefeller on budget, taxes, quantity of
state agencies and patronage; campaigns with wife, Burns, Crangle; day started
with meeting with Comm on Black-Jewish Concerns, accompanied by Paterson; takes
part in outdoor news conf, 57th St and 5th Av, and signs petition challeging
Vietnam war's const; says he is not surprised that Teamsters did not endorse
him, saying he was largely responsible for expelling Teamsters from AFL-CIO;
backs Brit system of short campaigns; pledges to press for substantial tax
reforms to eliminate loopholes, news conf; holds Rockefeller has imposed 48 new
tax measures in his 12 yrs in office, most of them felt hardest by middle and
low-income families calls Howard Samuels moves on debate gimmickry

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 3, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 13 words

US has cut off aid to Somalia because Somalian ships have traded with N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 3, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 37 words

N Vietnamese sappers overrun part of S Vietnamese fire base 21 mi S of buffer
zone but are beaten back after inflicting heavy casualties on S Vietnamese; 81
enemy killed in attack, 46 S Vietnamese killed, 84 wounded; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 3, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 61 words

Small group of about 25 officers in Washington, mostly naval, form Concerned
Officers Movement as forum for what they say is growing disillusionment among
officers with Indochina war; orgn says its purpose is to 'serve notice to mil
and nation that officer corps is not part of silent majority, that it is not
going to let its thought be fashioned by Pentagon'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 3, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 80 words

Calif primaries; early returns indicate Jesse Unruh defeats Samuel Yorty, George
Murphy easily defeats Norton Simon, John Tunney defeats George Brown and Kenneth
Hahn, Max Rafferty renominated; Yorty concession s stresses Vietnam war issue;
Murphy int; scores Simon campaign spending; John Rousselot and State Sen
Schmitz, Reprs Alphonzo Bell, Paul McCloskey and Cohelan lead in Cong races; Bob
Hope, John Wayne aided Murphy's campaign, Jack Webb aided Younger's campaign;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 3, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 114 words

Terence Smith, who has just completed 15-mo assignment as NY Times Saigon bureau
chief, assesses situation in Indochina; says there is widespread doubt among
most experienced Amer observers that US policy will bring lasting peace; says US
faces vast problems of extricating itself; says at root of pessimistic outlook
are doubts about efficacy of Vietnamization program, wisdom of Cambodian
venture, effectiveness of Saigon Govt to deal with econ and pol problems and
nature of progress achieved in pacification program; says there is conviction
that US policies fail to come to grips with main problem: need for negotiated
pol settlement that reflects true balance of power; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 4

LENGTH: 118 words

Sen Harrison Williams seen unifying Dems in NJ for 1st time since '65; Repub
officials in state say antiwar sentiments voiced by Nelson Gross contributed to
his opponents large vote; Williams attends Dem fund-raising dinner, Gloucester
County; Gross leaves on fact-finding trip to Vietnam; Williams vote was 190,102
to 100,175 for Sen Frank Guarini; Gross vote was 142,476 to 42,576 for James
Quaremba and 32,165 for Joseph Gavin; Hudson Dem orgn pledges enthusiastic
support for Williams; liberal Dem elements in state ready to back Williams
despite his previous support of war; Gavin says he spent $15 on campaign, made
no ss, did not appear on TV; Gross says he did not spend 'dime' on winning
nomination

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 7

LENGTH: 128 words

Analysis of June 2 primary results as indicating that Pres Nixon's handling of
student unrest and Indochina has not moved country to left, as some politicians
believed; says over-all tone was conservative and results might give pause to
those who believe Nixon has misread pol mood of nation; only 1 student-backed,
antiwar candidate won; article notes only 51% of electorate supported Ala Gov
George Wallace and that his racist appeal was vigorously supported only by
blue-collar workers; primary elections turn out not to be good for doves; Repr
George Brown loses to Repr John Tunney, Lewis Kaden loses to Repr Edward Patten;
comment on Kaden defeat in NJ and student support; comment on NM results; Sen
Joseph Montoya candidacy seen helped by Anderson Carter deat

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 47 words

Further NM returns; Gov David Cargo attributes defeat to student unrest;
observers see close race in Nov between Sen Joseph Montoya and Anderson Carter,
both seeing Vietnam war major issue; Reprs Ed Foreman and Manuel Lujan
renominated without opposition; illus of Pete Domenici

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

43 Amer winners of Nobel Prizes in science subscribe to lr calling on Pres Nixon
to end US participation in Vietnam war; lr is made pub at news conf attended by
Drs Edward L Tatum, H Keffer Hartline, Andre Cournard and Dickerson Richards

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

Comment on reactions of alumni of Princeton, Harvard, Yale and NYU to student
protesting extending Vietnam war into Cambodia, survey of NYC univ clubs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

ACLU, in resolution pledging to work for immediate end of Vietnam war, calls on
Cong to repeal draft; charges draft system violates civil liberties 'with its
severe deprivation of personal liberty and its adm inequities'; charges civil
liberties also violated by threat of prosecution for draft-card burning

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 14 words

Transcript of Pres Nixon's s on Indochina situation; list of captured supplies;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 7

LENGTH: 26 words

USN turns 2 patrol escort ships over to S Vietnamese crews in move described as
example of Vietnamization of war in SE Asia, ceremonies, Bklyn Naval Shipyd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 52 words

Max Frankel comments on Pres Nixon s; says Nixon's calculations of success in
Cambodian venture deal not with what has happened but with what will happen in
future; says Nixon tries to prove to Hanoi that time is on his side; notes his
critics hold opposite is true; notes questions raised by critics recently

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 10 words

Buddhist nun burns herself to death in protest of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 45 words

Special White House mission leaves on inspection tour of Cambodia-Vietnam; most
11 members of group say they are going without preconceived views; Sen Thomas
McIntyre, NH Dem, dissents from Pres Nixon policy, says he decided to go at last
minute 'to prevent a snow job'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 76 words

US command repts upsurge in fighting along Cambodian border with 3 Amers killed
and 10 wounded in 2 clashes; Cambodian mil spokesman repts relative calm is
being maintained on most fronts; fresh S Vietnamese forces reach base and
relieve troops hard hit by 2 days of heavy fighting; 50 S Vietnamese have been
killed, 119 wounded; 83 enemy killed; B-52s pound area; other action and
terrorist incident reptd; 9 Amers killed in recent helicopter crash; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

Dr David H Bates, med adviser to Selective Service Bd 23, Putnam, Conn, resigns
to protest Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

Columbia U group Citizens Concerned About the Draft has written lrs to most of
NYC bd members urging them to resign to protest Vietnam war and Selective
Service process; chmn Geoffrey Greene comments; NYC acting Selective Service dir
Lt Col Louis Soscia has sent counter lr; comments; no members have resigned; 2
comment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 208 words

Pres Nixon says allied drive into Cambodia is 'most successful operation of this
long and difficult war' and that he is now able to resume withdrawal of US
troops from S Vietnam, TV s; reaffirms earlier pledges to bring Cambodian
venture to end by June 30 with 'major mil objectives' achieved; says 17,000 of
31,000 Amers have returned to S Vietnam from Cambodia; says only remaining Amer
activity after June 30 will be air attacks on enemy troop movements and
supplies; says 'all Amer air support' will end, thereby virtually promising US
will not fly tactical missions in support of S Vietnamese troops remaining in
Cambodia; shows films of captured enemy supplies; justifies incursion in both
mil and diplomatic terms; promises to end war but yields little to critics who
would have him disengage either at once or more rapidly; says failure to have
responded to Communist threats in Cambodia would have damaged US 'credibility'
in eyes of world; warns he will take 'strong and effective measures' if enemy
jeopardizes US troops remaining in S Vietnam; says he can provide no evidence of
success at bargaining table; appeals for pub support; acknowledges complaints of
his critics, asserts he disagrees with them only in method of ending war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 76 words

Soviet Min Andrei Gromyko meets with French Mins Valery Giscard d'Estaing and
Maurice Schumann to discuss French-Soviet trade relations, Paris; French
informants rept detailed negotiations will soon begin; says USSR would agree to
eventual establishment of neutralized zone in Indochina; Gromyko reptdly tells
French Min Schumann that recent USSR-W Ger contacts indicate progress with W Ger
toward willingness to formally accept Ger's postwar frontiers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 84 words

Bipartisan Sen coalition, 54-36, defeats Dole amendment to bar legis curbs on
Pres authority from becoming effective as long as there are Amer POWs in
Cambodia; vote seen key test of strength on war issue, indicates White House
will be unable to block Cooper-Church amendment; Byrd amendment providing that
prohibition against 'retaining' Amer forces in Cambodia will not prevent Pres
from taking necessary actions to protect Amers in S Vietnam or hasten their
withdrawal will be next Sen test; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 1

LENGTH: 93 words

Ed, noting Sen's rejection of Dole amendment, says nothing Pres Nixon says in
his s lessens need for passage of Cooper-Church amendment; says Nixon presents
no convincing evidence that Cambodian venture will shorten war or save Amer
lives; says, after Amer troops are withdrawn from Cambodia, situation is likely
to return to that which has existed for last 5 yrs; notes Nixon's failure to
promise Amer troops will not return to Cambodia and failure to discuss S
Vietnamese presence there; urges diplomacy as best way for extricating Amers
with hon and safety

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 21 words

Lr lauding success of Cambodian venture suggests Paris peace talks on Vietnam be
widened to include Cambodia, Laos and Thailand

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 47 words

J Reston comments on Pres Nixon s; compares it to lawyer's argument or TV
commercial but says its pol impact should not be underestimated; guesses that
Nixon is determined to pull out of Vietnam; suggests Nixon may be following
policy of Sen Aiken: to claim victory and come home

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 5

LENGTH: 76 words

New TV commercials for Ottinger set, described; comment on aides Garth, Vlasto,
Berger, Schosberg; illus; T C Sorensen, candidate for Dem nomination for NYS
Sen, calls Metropolitan Museum of Art expansion plan into pk blunder, news conf
at museum; Repr McCarthy says if elected Sen from NYS he will offer legis for
$190-million to provide better VA hosp care, s, Syracuse; Paul O'Dwyer urges
Pres Nixon to withdraw US troops from Vietnam, statement; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 7

LENGTH: 177 words

Selective Service System has demanded resignation of Ronald C Eisele from Local
Draft Bd 34, Morristown, NJ, for allegedly trying to use his job to promote his
pol views; Eisele, who openly opposes Vietnam war, is Dem nominee for Cong seat
now held by Repub Repr Peter Freylinghuysen; refuses to quit; charges state
Selective Service dir Col Joseph Avella is involved in pol plot against him;
Freylinghuysen has denied any intrusion in case; Avella, who asked for
resignation, says one complaint came from Morris County Repub chmn Willis R
Walling; Selective Service Dir Tarr spokesman says Eisele will be suspended for
30 days, during which he could request rev of case, after which he could be
removed by Tarr, acting for Pres Nixon; Eisele says Fairleigh Dickinson U
students recently asked him to quit as gesture of opposition to Vietnam war but
says he wanted to remain to press for reform in draft procedures; fellow bd
members think he should resign; Morris County draft bd member Miss J E Merrit
resigned recently to protest extension of war into Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 28 words

Parents of US serviceman J L Kotora, who died after 4 mos in Vietnam hosp, say
he never recd 114 lrs sent to him; Army Mil Mail Terminal, San Francisco, orders
probe

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Com to Save Our Const opens hq, NYC, to press for Charter amendment to test
legality of Vietnam war; com hon chmn ex-Atty Gen Ramsey Clark says amendment
would require City Corp Counsel to defend all NYC residents who refuse to serve
in a war not authorized by Cong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 19 words

Dalat's (S Vietnam) mayor will be replaced and lose his post as prov chief
following recent enemy attack on city

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

Group of Amer officials arrives in Saigon; Repr Melvin Price comments; group is
met by Gen Creighton Abrams and Amb Ellsworth Bunker

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

VFW comdr Raymond A Gallagher, charging NYC Mayor Lindsay encourages draft
resistance, says he will urge VFW natl council to rescind its selection of NYC
as site of '72 conv; Lindsay spokesman denies he advocates resistance; notes he
has said that those who peacefully protest Vietnam war through this means
instead of through violence and are willing to accept legal consequences are
worthy of respect even by those who disagree with them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 50 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky arrives, Pnompenh; gets imposing welcome
from Premier Lon Nol, Deputy Premier Sisowath Sirik Matak, members of foreign
diplomatic corps and hundreds of ethnic Vietnamese bused to airport for
occasion; his party includes his wife, Tran Van Lam and others; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 6

LENGTH: 12 words

Vietnamese Communist delegates at Paris peace talks score Pres Nixon's s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 23 words

Vietnamese woman, who works as maid for some US soldiers at Tayninh, int; says
soldiers are 'kids', 'crazy' and 'sexually hungry'; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 94 words

Premier Olof Palme (Sweden) arrives, Washington; meets with Sec of State Rogers;
cites demonstrations against Holland, recognition of and aid to N Vietnam,
acceptance of Amer deserters as issues causing US-Swedish tension, int,
Washington; begins US visit aimed at persuading US that Sweden's opposition to
war does not mean it is hostile to US; lists issues that account for US-Swedish
tension, int; says he may be in difficult situation because of his expressed
opposition to war; says he feels compelled to speak now because of US invasion
of Cambodia; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 238 words

11 Minn U profs tell Vice Pres Agnew that his rhetoric is driving 'moderates
into arms of extremists,' meeting with him; are hopeful he will tone down his
ss; Prof Walter Heller says Agnew conceded that profs have some valid arguments;
Prof Paul E Meehl says his suspicion that Agnew opposes all dissent is
unfounded; Agnew aide says Agnew says meeting was of value to him; profs give
Agnew lr signed by all 13 of univ's Regents' Profs; lr expresses 'grave concern'
that large numbers of sober young Amers are being radicalized by Indochina war
and domestic frictions linked with it; says profs have found widespread distrust
of Govt, growing despair about pol process and fear and resentment against US
leadership; profs at meeting urge Agnew to be more even-handed in his approach
and to criticize violence among Pres Nixon's more outspoken backers at same time
he protests violence among young radicals; Prof Maurice B Visscher says he now
thinks Agnew is more aware of danger to US of alienation that is growing among
young people; profs say Agnew complained that many of his more provocative
comments were taken out of context by news media; signers of lr listed; White
House jr staff members who have been traveling across country to evaluate depth
of alienation reptdly have been stunned by depth of anti-Adm sentiment; are said
to be hopeful that Nixon will be more receptive to their findings than some of
his top aides

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 115 words

Defense Sec Laird discloses Pres Nixon's senior mil advisers will meet at
Pacific site to discuss timetable for US troop withdrawals after last Amer
troops return from Cambodia, TV int; officers in Saigon and at Pentagon say no
major units will be removed from S Vietnam until end of Cambodian operation;
Laird repeats Nixon's assessment of Cambodian venture as tactical exercise whose
results are already plain; other senior mil advisers say true test of operation
will be enemy's capacity to resupply sanctuaries; Laird and Wheeler defend US
policy during 1st 1/2 hr of int; Goodell and Church appear during 2d 1/2; score
Cambodian venture; Nixon writes lr of support for Byrd amendment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 6, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 3

LENGTH: 49 words

A Lewis says Cambodian venture should be rated a disaster by logical standards,
but says it will inadvertantly achieve more certain Amer withdrawal from Vietnam
because domestic reaction to Cambodian move has made it almost impossible for
Pres Nixon to back away from his withdrawal program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 6, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 4

LENGTH: 78 words

Washington journalist I F Stone, attacking Pres Nixon on Indochina war, says he
takes hope from present student generation which he says is 'revolting against
other people's oppression,' s, Amherst Coll commencement; finds fault with
students approach and urges them not to polarize nation; Nixon's son-in-law, D
Eisenhower, does not attend his graduation because he is unhappy with choice of
Stone as speaker and feared demonstrations that would embarrass his guests

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 6, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 13 words

US White House delegation spend day in closed mil and econ briefings, Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 6, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 83 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky and aides conf with Cambodian officials;
Min Phan Quang Dan says fate of 400,000 Vietnamese in Cambodia is most difficult
problem on agenda; says S Vietnam demands halt in flow of refugees into S
Vietnam which can no longer handle them, will propose that they be resettled in
Cambodian border provs of Svayriend, Takeo and Kampot; S Vietnamese entourage
optimistic on accord on permitting S Vietnamese troops to remain in Cambodia as
long as they deem necessary

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 6, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 188 words

USSR warns Indochinese Communists that they will be courting 'defeat and
destruction' if they let Communist China dictate their actions, article in New
Times signed by M Ukraintsev; holds Chinese responsible for overthrow of Norodom
Sihanouk and for improved relations between Cambodia and US; USSR charges
Communist China with playing on Indian-Pakistani differences and with trying to
prevent a rapprochement, article in foreign affairs wkly New Times; Western
diplomats attach high significance to statement; view it as reflection of USSR
concern over successes of US-S Vietnam joint operation which may result in heavy
pressure from N Vietnam for additional mil aid; note to date USSR has only
expressed opposition to Amer intervention, not broken ties with new Cambodian
Govt; Chau Seng, member of insurgent group under Norodom Sihanouk, repts Chinese
Communist volunteers may intervene in Cambodian war, int, Paris; Western
diplomats in Moscow, commenting on USSR warning Indochina Communists against
Chinese influence, see USSR leaders concerned about Peking's outward-looking
foreign policy after several yrs of isolation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 6, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 31 words

Premier Palme says Sweden will continue to try to aid Amer war prisoners in SE
Asia, s to Natl Press Club; holds Swedish condemnation of Vietnam war does not
imply hostility toward US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 6, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 77 words

2 poorly equipped Cambodian bns try to dislodge Vietnamese Communists from
Sethbo, mistakenly reptd to have been retaken; bn comdr Maj Hoeung Nou discusses
shortage of munitions and communications facilities; Govt closes down Angkor Wat
airport; has all tourists flown out of country; Lomphat, Tatanakiri Prov
capital, falls to enemy; fighting continues in Kompong Thom; enemy shells 49
targets; 53 civilians killed, 10 wounded; scattered fighting reptd; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 63, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

N G Gross, Repub candidate for US Sen from NJ, in Saigon; lauds Asian nations
initiatives in having called Jakarta conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 75, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Ints with West Coast grads finds many plan to continue activist role in support
of their soc, econ and pol beliefs; illus; notes they are affected by key
issues, affluence and Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 84, Column 1

LENGTH: 55 words

Assoc Justice White signs order preventing Berk from being shipped out of US to
Vietnam until US Solicitor Gen can take action in case; Berk bases suit on
obscure 1789 NYS law providing that no person must leave state to engage in
combat unless state Legis consents or unless such activity is 'specially
provided for' by Fed Const

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 21 words

Vietnam & Cambodia mil situation revd; weather map shows heavy rains anticipated
in July when monsoons hit some fighting zones

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 0

LENGTH: 11 words

New Mobilization Com ad urges support for antiwar and other actions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 2

LENGTH: 15 words

Lr suggests June 30, when Amer troops will be withdrawn from Vietnam, be made
natl holiday

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 5

LENGTH: 14 words

Cartoon on Repubs awakening to unpopularity of Vietnam-Cambodian war; election
issue

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 88 words

US known to favor long-range pacification program and urgent training of
Cambodian troops by S Vietnamese and Thai advisers to prevent Communist
take-over after US withdrawal; Nixon Adm officials, in private comments, say
next major step will be to strengthen Cambodian soc, stimulate nationalism
through econ and pol projects along with accelerated program of mil aid; Adm
believes Vietnamese Communists strategy is to set up permanent base in northern
Cambodian provs along Mekong River, recognizes threat to Lon Nol regime

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

Defense Dept spokesmen, commenting on Laird statement, says dept is moving
cautiously to reduce forces but doubts cut to 2.5-million in immediate future;
strength in various areas and factors in cuts discussed; withdrawal of troops
from Vietnam is said to be most critical factor in reducing size of US mil
forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

Over 100 mothers join Mrs B Backer in ceremony for peace at natl cemetery,
Pinelawn, LI, at grave of her son, J B Woods Jr, killed in Vietnam; are reprs of
Amer Mothers Unlimited and Women's Internatl League for Peace and Freedom

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

Neak Luong, Cambodia shopkeepers and free agents do brisk business in items for
S Vietnamese soldiers delivered by US landing craft Showboat; S Vietnamese role
in defending Preyveng hailed; described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 112 words

Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky assures Cambodians that S Vietnam has no territorial
ambitions in Cambodia and that it will send mil forces to their aid whenever and
wherever requested, s before extraordinary Parliament session; hails joint US-S
Vietnam drive into Cambodia as 'great victory'; at later news conf says he
believes that after 'centuries of hate' good relations can be forged between S
Vietnam and Cambodia; repts talks have resolved Vietnamese refugee question in
principle; returns to Saigon; visit and talks seen especially designed to allay
friction stemming from repts of Cambodian resentment against allegedly
domineering behavior of S Vietnamese mil forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 78 words

US fact-finding group hears urgent appeal for arms from Cambodian field comdr in
Cambodian town near S Vietnamese border; Sen Murphy says US should provide aid;
McIntyre is present; group is not told of mil successes by comdr; its visit to
Cambodian site said to contrast sharply with efficient and positive briefings
received in S Vietnam; group gets positive assessments of Vietnamization,
pacification program and Cambodian operation; Murphy and Gov Shafer illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 160 words

Sen Foreign Relations Com issues staff rept challenging mil reason given by Pres
Nixon for ordering Cambodian move and suggesting mil gains claimed by Nixon Adm
are outweighed by risks of broadened war; rept was prepared by James G
Lowenstein and Richard M Moose, who were ordered, late in April, by Sen
Fulbright to make inspection trip to S Vietnam and Cambodia; says assessment by
Nixon that Communist forces were concentrating in Cambodian sanctuaries for
attacks on S Vietnam is not supported by US mil authorities in Saigon and
Washington; says, in advance of Amer intervention, commonly expressed
intelligence estimate was that Communists moved into defensive position and were
dispersing westward away from S Vietnamese border; rept said to in some ways
represent com rebuttal to Nixon's April 30 s and his most recent s; takes no
stand in direct opposition to Adm; indirectly takes issue with Pres Nixon's
assumptions and conclusions; details on rept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 8, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 29 words

S Vietnam's Foreign Min announces it will refer in all diplomatic notes and in
diplomatic conversations to Cambodia as Kampuchea, phonetic name for nation in
Khmer language

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 8, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 41 words

Sp/5 W Fischer says stupidity of Amer officer in not issuing weapons to new
troops led to death of 28 Amers after Vietcong attack, s, London antiwar rally;
Sp/4 M Carroll says he saw Vietcong soldier pushed from US helicopter flying at
600 ft

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 8, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 136 words

Sen testimony discloses that under secret agreement entered into in '67, US has
been paying Thai Govt $50-million yrly for sending combat div to S Vietnam and
agreed to increase its mil aid by $30-million for 2 yrs and supply battery of
Hawk AA missiles; testimony, taken in Nov 69, has been made pub by Symington
subcom on US security arrangements and commitments abroad ; traces deepening
Amer mil involvement in Thailand in past 20 yrs and increasing commitments and
aid demanded by Govt; testimony raises question on what Amer aid will be
provided to 'volunteers' from Thailand now being sent to aid Cambodia; Sen
Symington asks State Dept to provide subcom with full information on what US
will give Thai Govt for sending volunteers, lr to Sec Rogers; statements by Amb
Unger and others in '69 testimony cited

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 8, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 85 words

NY Times survey finds there are no scholars specializing in Vietnamese studies
with tenured professorship in any Amer univ; finds fewer than 30 students in
country are studying Vietnamese, compared to 3 times that number studying Thai
and over 600 studying Chinese; Harvard U Prof J K Fairbank calls situation
scandal, links acad community's distaste for war; survey cites decreasing Govt
assistance for area studies and uncertain state of econ as other reasons; notes
6 univs are offering courses in Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 8, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 168 words

Sec of State Rogers says decision on jet sale to Israel will be announced
'fairly soon', strongly hints that decision will be only partly favorable, TV
int; says US support for Israel will be 'balanced' to avoid giving Arabs
impression that support has no limits; says US has advised USSR of its concern
over deployment of SAM-3 missiles and role of USSR pilots; expresses hope that
USSR will desist from operational flights and not inject any further personnel
into area; does not know how USSR will respond; says US plans to begin new peace
initiatives in next 2 or 3 wks; remarks seen indicating that Pres Nixon will
authorize sale of only some of planes sought or will agree to replace planes
lost in combat; llus; concedes US will have to bear 'substantial part' of cost
of defense of Cambodia by S Vietnamese and Thai forces, repeats several times no
Amer forces will be used to protect Lon Nol Govt; announces he will meet with
Pres Nguyen Van Thieu and other S Vietnamese officials in Saigon in July

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 8, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 68 words

Fighting in Cambodia continues around Siemreap; Govt claims airport serving
Angkor Wat has been retaken; enemy's strategy seen designed to cut rd between
Siemreap and border with Thailand; firing within Pnompenh which brought on alert
earlier found to have been caused by personal fight between 2 units of armed
Cambodian forces; map; illus of S Vietnam column passing Cambodian checkpoint
near Tonle Bet

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 9, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Ed on USSR warning against Indochina following China's dictate; links Moscow
concern with China's pol gains since Cambodian leader Norodom Sihanouk's fall
from power

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 9, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 5

LENGTH: 39 words

Bayonne, NJ, Mayor Fitzpatrick, protesting fatality rate of city's draftees in
Vietnam, sends lr to Pres Nixon asking moratorium on draft 'until the city can
recover from loss of our youth'; local reaction favorable; Fitzpatrick illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 9, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

NBC says Cambodian Army spokesman has reptd that 1 TV correspondent and 4
cameramen have been taken to 'safe mountain hide-out' by Vietcong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 9, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 7

LENGTH: 56 words

Army psychiatrist Capt D A Switkes obtains order from Fed judge for hearing to
seek blocking of his assignment to Vietnam; cites same law as that in Berk case;
his atty P Weiss says suit challenges legality of US mil presence in Indochina;
Sorensen scores Repr Richard McCarthy charge that Berk suit is campaign
'gimmick', news conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 9, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 177 words

Communist China scores US 'aggressive acts' against N Korea, Jenminh Jih Pao
article signed Commentator; charges US seeks to aggravate tension, prepare for
new war; Amer mil officials, Seoul, deny N Korean charge that 'US imperialist'
planes strafed N Korean patrol boats that captured S Korean Navy ship; S Korean
Min confirms that its planes were sent into area to try to rescue its ship;
China's prompt backing for N Korea in attacking US contrasted with its aloof
behavior when USS Pueblo was captured by N Koreans in '68; Hanoi radio describes
warm reception to Norodom Sihanouk during his visit and at his departure; repts
he signed joint communique but does not reveal contents; Norodom Sihanouk is
host at banquet attended by Phoumi Vongvichit, Laotian Patriotic Front leader,
and other Communist leaders; pledges Cambodians will help Vietnamese Communists
defeat 'US imperialism'; issues statement to Amer people scoring US role in
Indochina and lauding those Amers who oppose it; appeals to Amers to compel Pres
Nixon to withdraw US troops from Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 9, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

Illus of montagnard tribesman, suspected of working for Vietcong, being led on
rope by US ranger

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 9, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 13 words

Size of US forces in Vietnam drops to 425,450, lowest level in more than 3 yrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 9, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 36 words

N Vietnamese Premier Pham Van Dong repts slow econ progress and calls for
efforts to meet increasing demands arising from war, statement to Natl Assembly;
says N Vietnam is trying to overcome ravages of US bombing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 9, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

Min Tran Nguon Phieu repts that S Vietnam, after 2 wks of controversy, has
reversed its decision to halt evacuation of ethnic Vietnamese from Cambodia;
credits support from Nguyen Cao Ky during his recent visit to Pnompenh and to
refugee camps; says Govt will, however, continue to try to persuade as many
Vietnamese as possible to remain in Cambodia; repts S Vietnamese authorities
have taken over most internal control of refugee camps in Pnompenh; Japan offers
$2-million in emergency aid to refugees in reponse to IRC appeal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 9, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 80 words

Amer comdrs say enemy documents discovered in Fishhook region double their
estimate of enemy strength in Cambodia and in sector of S Vietnam immediately N
of Saigon; say documents provide some little-known details on orgn of Vietcong
army; estimate 91,000 enemy are in III Corps tactical zone, which includes
Saigon and adjacent territory in Cambodia; say documents put strength of
Vietcong hq at 7,100; hq is now believed to have been withdrawn deeper into
Cambodia; other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 9, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 62 words

US mil comdrs and intelligence analysts estimate that allied forces have found
only 30% to 40% of enemy arms and supply stockpiles and doubt more than 60% will
be found when Cambodian operation ends; Amer mil comdrs hold seizures are
serious setback to N Vietnamese forces; decline speculation on any long-term
effect; factors hindering discovery of stockpiles discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 9, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 117 words

Cambodian spokesman repts sporadic fighting continues at Siemreap and that
Vietnamese Communist troops have been driven from center of Kompong Thom; says
Siemreap airport is not yet secure enough for planes to land; repts no enemy
troops are known to have entered Angkor Wat; Thai Govt reptdly considers
withdrawing part of its 12,000-man Black Panther Div from S Vietnam to reinforce
Cambodians at Siemreap; Norodom Sihanouk says he has enough supporters in
Cambodia to regain power but does need weapons, int, Hanoi; indicates he expects
such aid from Communist China; expects USSR to recognize his govt in exile; over
1/2 of 31,000 US soldiers sent into Cambodia have been withdrawn to S Vietnam;
map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 1

LENGTH: 26 words

Ed urges defeat of Byrd proposal; says it is similar in scope to '64 Tonkin Gulf
resolution which gave former Pres Johnson arbitrary authority in Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 50, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Gov Rockefeller replies to Goldberg's charge that major issue in current
gubernatorial campaign is his (Rockefeller's) alleged support of war; says
Goldberg has lagged on war issue, that he, Rockefeller, offered plan to end
Vietnam war in '68

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 53, Column 4

LENGTH: 56 words

Army psychiatrist D A Switkes, seeking ct order to bar assignment to Vietnam,
charges in his petition that psychiatry as practiced in Army is contrary to
Hippocratic oath and that were he to follow Army med precepts result would be
'emotional maiming of patients, sometimes for life'; Fed judge temporarily bars
assignment to Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 7

LENGTH: 36 words

3 Amer women, Mrs N Rubin, Miss J Gumbo and Mrs G Plamondon, protest US mil
action in front of US Embassy in Moscow; say they are returning to US with more
than 100 lrs written by US prisoners; spent 2 wks in Hanoi

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

Thai C/S, Air Marshal Dawee Chullasapya, in Saigon, amid rumors that part of
Thai Black Panther Div will be withdrawn from S Vietnam to fight in NW Cambodia;
Thai police patrols increase along border on NW Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 31 words

100-yr-old tamarind trees planted by French on Tu Do St, Saigon, cut down so st
could be widened to accommodate heavy traffic; harmful effects to trees from
auto pollution noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2; (AFP)

LENGTH: 67 words

Premier Souvanna Phouma announces fall of Saravane, rept to Natl Assembly; says
Govt bn which had defended town has withdrawn and is no longer in communication
with mil command; new occupiers reptdly have set fire to many pub bldgs;
Saravane's importance to N Vietnam as route along which it can send supplies to
S Vietnam discussed; Laos complains to Internatl Control Comm on Communist
aggression

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 125 words

Nixon Adm plans revision of S Vietnam and Laos aid program dealing with civilian
vs mil control of policy through possible shift in responsibility for Sen rev
from Foreign Relations Com, which is critical of Amer operations in SE Asia, to
sympathetic Armed Services Com; major argument among Adm officials favoring
increase in mil role in support-assistance programs is that Defense Dept is
expected to have easier time getting funds from Cong; top AID officials reptdly
are resigned to change, partly because agency as entity would disappear under
projected reorgn of aid program; other officials see tug-of-war between Pentagon
and civilian agencies over aid responsibility; also foresee that CIA will seek
to increase its role in support programs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 4

LENGTH: 20 words

Lr urges US put pressure on S Vietnam to enter into good faith negotiations by
using size of residual force as lever

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 48, Column 6

LENGTH: 110 words

NYS candidate for Lt Gov Ambro int by eds and reporters of NY Times; says it is
difficult for him to campaign because everything he says is interpreted as
racism or bigotry; says media have made race major issue in campaign; says there
is not much difference between self and Paterson on issues but stresses own exec
experience and examples of courageous action; backs Goldberg, but says he will
lose unless campaign improves; says he is moving too far to left; sees immediate
withdrawal from Vietnam important issue but sees voters making decision on small
issues; says he has adequate funds, has no preference for Sen candidate, backs
Meehan for Atty Gen; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 76, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 23 words

Amb Holland cheered, Sundsvall, Sweden, on completion of 4-day visit; meets with
group of students supporting S Vietnamese Liberation Front

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 2

LENGTH: 18 words

HR passes bill to give Pueblo crewmen and Vietnam POWs $5 a day extra
compensation for period of imprisonment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 5

LENGTH: 51 words

Pilot repts seeing many bodies on airfield after fall of Saravane; capture of
town detailed; Laotian mil command reptdly is uncertain on whether to try to
recapture it; rightists pressure on Souvanna Phouma to break with N Vietnam and
outlaw Pathet Lao and possibility that he may now do so discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

Buddhist monk burns himself to death to protest alleged Vietnam Govt persecution
and to appeal for peace

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu signs decree establishing permanent S Vietnamese Embassy
in Pnompenh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 45 words

Enemy activity against US troops decreases, Vietnam; light and scattered actions
reptd; 4 more enemy supply caches found; B-52s raid; enemy shells US div in
north; US mil spokesmen rept enemy overruns village of Baren near Danang; USAF
plane crashes in southern Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 2

LENGTH: 38 words

Senior mil planners in Washington, surprised and elated by performance of S
Vietnamese troops in Cambodia, say it may bring about strategy shift for
conducting war once most Amer soldiers leave Vietnam; their views discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 101 words

Cambodian Govt repts Laotians have joined N Vietnamese and Vietcong mil forces
fighting in Siemreap area; is uncertain just what faction they represent; mil
sources view new infusion of men as further evidence that Vietnamese Communists
have turned their campaign in Indochina into 1 single theater of war instead of
3 separate fronts; links new 'fanning out' strategy to US-S Vietnamese move into
Cambodia; knowledgeable sources, Pnompenh, dispute mil view that Communists have
been badly hurt by allied invasion; enemy activity against Amer troops lessens;
4 more caches of enemy stocks captured; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Dr Pham Van Huyen, prominent S Vietnamese neutralist, offers in Paris to form
govt 'of the silent majority', with no ties to either side, to lead Vietnam out
of war, news conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1; (GP)

LENGTH: 48 words

Gallup Poll finds 48% of Amers in favor of freezing prices and wages at present
level as long as Vietnam war lasts, 41% opposed, 11% undecided; older people
generally in favor of freeze, younger opposed; pub generally in favor of
controls in periods of war and severe inflation; table

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHS & CHARTS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 135 words

USSR Premier Kosygin repts there has been no appreciable progress in border
talks with Chinese, campaign s, Moscow; blames 'gen anti-Soviet course' of
Chinese officials; says USSR will continue talks despite complexities; holds US
'main source of internatl tension' and responsible for lack of progress in
Soviet-Amer relations in recent yrs, holds USSR not opposed in principle to
improving ties with US but that US must not think that Moscow is more interested
in better relations than Washington; scores US policies, demands immediate
withdrawal of all US troops from Indochina; says USSR firmly pursues policy of
all-round support for Arabs, blames Israel's confidence of support from US for
failure to reach pol settlement; revs many of problems facing Soviet econ,
particularly those affecting consumer

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 181 words

Pres comm that toured Cambodia, with Sen McIntyre dissenting, gives Pres Nixon
rept that it found US mil operation a mil success; McIntyre expresses concern
that Cambodian 'adventure' broadened war in Indochina; says White House
counselor B N Harlow drafted majority rept; presents his opinion at news conf
after White House failure to distribute it; group meets with Nixon before making
rept pub; later holds news conf; favorable rept made pub by Nixon Adm a day
before Sen will vote on Adm-backed Byrd proposal; as result of Pres intervention
in Sen debate on proposal, coming vote is seen as vote of confidence in Adm
policy; vote on Byrd proposal said to be shaping up in effect as vote of
confidence on Adm policy; group's rept said to appear unlikely to effect vote;
rept is made pub by White House; was drafted by White House aide; White House
does not distribute McIntyre's opinions; McIntyre presents them at news conf;
details on groups' rept and McIntyre's opinions; Fulbright says US mil staged
combat operation during inspection trip made by Defense Sec Laird in March, '69

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 91 words

Allied mil planners are expected to give S Vietnamese Army greatly expanded role
in fighting N Vietnamese main force in next few mos; partly as result of S
Vietnamese Army's generally favorable performance in Cambodia, planners believe
S Vietnamese troops are ready to replace Amer units that have been fighting N
Vietnamese troops along southern half of S Vietnam's sparsely populated
frontiers; deployment of S Vietnamese troops has already begun; reasons for
optimism of planners noted; comments of Lt Gen M S Davison and Col A Gatsis
noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 12, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 60, Column 3

LENGTH: 82 words

Sec Romney says nation has come long way in last decade in field of race
relations and that achievement of goal of harmonious living will be major
contribution of US to world, s to Internatl Ad Assn; tells members that most
explosive problem today is confrontation between inner-city poor and middle
income and wealthy families in suburbia; says Nixon Adm is mounting programs to
do something about it; says Vietnam is place where US should never have been,
but Nixon policy will get US out

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 12, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 7; (AFP)

LENGTH: 31 words

Hanoi publishes casualty figures claiming total of 132,000 allied soldiers were
put out of action in April and May in S Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia; repts 30,000
of casualties were Amers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 12, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

E Eur diplomatic sources rept that USSR extended feelers to Lon Nol Govt and N
Vietnam to see whether there is basis for agreement to end fighting in Cambodia;
neither side said to have responded favorably

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 12, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 2

LENGTH: 36 words

Prominent New Yorkers, including Met Museum dir T P F Hoving, send telegrams to
Pres Nixon, Defense Sec Laird and N Vietnamese delegation to Paris peace talks
urging Cambodian temple complex be spared from damage

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 12, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

Allied intervention in Cambodia results in new wave of protests by S Vietnamese
against Saigon Govt; Buddhist monk burns himself to death; Buddhist leader Thich
Thien Hoa does not condemn act and presents it as sign of Vietnamese people's
growing hope for peace; says anti-Govt Buddhists have consistently advocated
that war be limited rather than extended; coll students take major role in
demonstrations against Nguyen Van Thieu policies; Reprs Ngo Cong Duc and Duong
Van Ba comment on action in Cambodia and reaction to it; unconfirmed repts
circulate in Saigon suggesting Nguyen Cao Ky supports protest movement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 12, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Saigon Govt announces it will release 62 disabled POWs and 24 fisherman captured
at sea off N Vietnam; Hanoi spokesman indicates his Govt will make no objection

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 12, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 54 words

Swedish Premier Palme ends visit; discusses div in US stemming from Vietnam war,
Sweden's efforts on behalf of Amer war prisoners and role of C Sandburg and J
Hill, 2 late Amers of Swedish origin, as manifesting spirit of Amer, int;
departure from US is briefly delayed when police search baggage of passengers on
his flight

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 12, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 28 words

UN Sec Gen Thant expresses hope for early end to 'Cambodian adventure', proposes
new Geneva-type conf he hopes may bring peace to Indochina, s, UN Correspondents
Assn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 12, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 101 words

Sen, 52 to 47, votes to reject Byrd proposal to Cooper-Church amendment; Byrd
proposal declares that Pres can retain troops in Cambodia if he deems it
necessary to protect Amer forces in Vietnam; effect of vote reinforces
expectations that Sen will approve amendment; Cooper-Church forces add provision
specifying nothing in amendment 'shall be deemed to impugn constitutional
powers' of Pres; provision is offered by Mansfield and is adopted unanimously;
Church comments; White House press sec says Pres Nixon has not endorsed any
amendments; Sens Jackson and Jordan vote against Byrd proposal; roll-call

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 12, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 28 words

Vietcong guerrillas shoot their way through Baren, killing 70 civilians in their
homes; 31 civilians wounded; other details; 3 civilians wounded in shelling in
Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 12, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 42 words

USSR announces it increases mil and econ aid to N Vietnam because of intensified
fighting in Indochina; Podgorny says USSR-US relations are frozen because of
US's aggression, TV s; says USSR firmly supports people of Vietnam; scores
Communist China

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 13, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 25 words

Sen Hart from Mich announces candidacy for re-election; repeats appeal for
nation to 'get out' of Indochina and concentrate on solving problems at home

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 13, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

Ed on anti-US ss by USSR officials Brezhnev, Kosygin and Podgorny and on their
terms for improved ties including US exit from Vietnam and abandonment of
Israel; holds amity to advantage of both nations, that USSR must share blame for
present freeze, and that situation is not helped by cold war tones of ss; notes
increased USSR aid

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 13, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 4

LENGTH: 38 words

R J Rasmussen questions views of Sens Goodell and Javits, other prominent doves
on Vietnam in light of their militaristic stand on Mideast, lr scores those who
are doves on Vietnam and express militaristic views on Middle East

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 13, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

Ex-US Vice Pres Humphrey criticizes US position in Indochina, hopes mil
participation there will end soon, s, Monmouth Coll, NJ; urges negotiated peace;
hints he will announce candidacy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 13, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 86 words

HEW Dept employes concerned about increasing antiwar activity in dept; dept
activists are aware that Under Sec of State Richardson, who will be new HEW Sec,
backed Adm policies in Indochina; feel his commitment conflicts with goals of
dept; plan to press Richardson for kind of meeting that Finch missed because of
illness; ints with employes disclose apprehension about Richardson, continuing
hostility and increasing antiwar and anti-Adm activity; also disclose mixture of
cynicism, anger and frustration; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 13, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 213 words

Soviet leader L Brezhnev, virtually accusing Pres Nixon of hypocrisy, holds his
Adm talks about peace while carrying out 'aggressive actions that aggravate
internatl tensions, refers to US intevening in Cambodia; TV s from Kremlin;
calls differences between US and USSR 'really deep'; speaks calmly but his words
bristle with anger; seems to try to align himself with anti-Adm demonstrations
in US; accusing US of aiding aggressors in SE Asia and Mideast, warns USSR will
give 'resolute rebuffs' to efforts of aggressive circles and will support
peoples subjected to aggression; says USSR will give 'all necessary help' to
anti-Amer forces in Indochina; says USSR follows policy of peaceful coexistence
but that this must not be confused with 'pacifism and nonresistance to evil';
shows irritation at US efforts to press USSR to cease support of Arabs and work
for negotiated settlement; charges US aids aggressor; stresses USSR aid for
Arabs; discusses improvement in adm of econ; says work is not completed on
'71-75 natl econ plan; says plan will stress heavy indus and agr; Brezhnev and
other USSR leaders, in recent major ss, have denounced US but have not referred
to Vienna talks; move leads to speculation in Moscow that talks may be on path
to some kind of accord; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 13, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Allied officials point to slaying of civilians in Baren as clear evidence of
increasing enemy terrorism aimed at thwarting S Vietnamese gains in countryside;
survivors of attack say Vietcong soldiers shot at anything they saw; 74
civilians were killed, 54 wounded; some details on terrorism; D Pike book saying
enemy will increase terrorism noted; US marine says enemy, in attack on hamlet,
intended to eradicate hamlet and its entire population; describes attack; S
Vietnamese officers comment on attack; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Dems display unusual unity in Wis Gov campaign; D Carley, deciding not to run,
throws support to P J Lucey and becomes his finance dir; D O Peterson, another
contender long identified with peace movement, actively begins campaign; he has
said he will support Lucey if Lucey wins primary; campaign strategists see
Vietnam war and state sales tax key issues; Repub nominee, Lt Gov Olson, seen
having slight lead over Dems

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 26 words

Justice Dept, in memo to Sup Ct, asks Ct not to block Army from sending Berk to
Vietnam but pledges not to send him until case is argued before Appeals Ct

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

N Vietnamese spokesman at Paris peace talks, Nguyen Thanh Le, denounces as
'sheer hypocrisy' Thant proposal for internatl conf on war, int; says N Vietnam
will not back any Thant proposal; charges Thant is prejudiced in favor of new
Cambodian Govt and proposes conf at behest of US; details on Thant proposal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 9 words

Article on how monsoon season affects Indochina war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 90 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu predicts S Vietnamese forces will be engaged in long war
in Cambodia and that Amer troops will remain in S Vietnam for 'several more
yrs', int, Paris pub; estimates it will take 4 or 5 yrs for his Govt to
stabilize econ and mil situation; says US must support S Vietnamese war effort
in Cambodia; says US must take primary responsibility for blocking Ho Chi Minh
Trail in Laos; says return to power by Norodom Sihanouk or 'another Communist
chief' will be disastrous; says 'above all, burden falls upon the Americans'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 170 words

Nixon Adm officials, describing as perhaps impossible task preventing Communist
takeover of Cambodia, cite inability of Cambodian Army to deal with Communists
and Pres Nixon pledge to withdraw all Amers from Cambodia by June 30; further
curb on Nixon action said to be Sen's unwillingness to finance Cambodian
operations by other Asian nations; charge White House disregarded civilian
intelligence estimates of State Dept and CIA officials on consequences of
Norodom Sihanouk ouster, accepted mil leaders judgments refuting their view that
Communists would concentrate on bldg new bases and increasing harassment of Lon
Nol regime in support of Cambodian guerrillas; Thai Govt appears to have 2d
thoughts on sending troops to aid Cambodia; indicates it wants SEATO to take up
matter of possible aid to Cambodia at council meeting on July 2 and 3; US is
concerned that security of S Vietnam and success of Vietnamization program may
be imperiled by S Vietnamese forces that will remain in Cambodia after US troops
leave;

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 230 words

Defense Sec Laird reptdly has decided to tighten rein on Joint Cs/S following
White House-Joint Chiefs action in Cambodian crisis, during which formalized
machinery of Natl Security Council was largely bypassed and direct contacts
between White House and Joint Chiefs left Laird feeling at times inadequately
informed and involved; reptdly has talked with chiefs and Pres Nixon natl
security aide Dr Kissinger; said to hold no grudges and to have good working
relationship with them; instructs chiefs that no mil proposals on matters such
as incursion into Cambodia be forwarded either to Laird or to other depts
without getting opinion from Pentagon's Internatl Security Affairs office;
expands membership of Washington Special Action Group, headed by Kissinger, to
include civilian specialists on Vietnam from Pentagon and State Dept, as well as
ranking Joint Chiefs officer; one official explains recent events; some
officials say events may make Laird receptive to proposed reorgn of Joint
Chiefs; Defense Dept official says Laird's decision came just after US air
strikes in May; proposal, expected to be recommended by blue-ribbon study panel,
reptdly involves cutting chiefs staff so they will depend more heavily on
planners in Defense Sec's office and services or divorcing chiefs entirely from
their 2d function of running Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 89 words

Enemy troops reptdly enter Kompong Speu, again attack Kompong Thom; reptdly set
up supply depots and hosps in Angkor temple complex; Cambodian officials say
Angkor will be declared 'open city' to save its temples; 2 US soldiers killed, 3
wounded in clashes near Memor; 4,000 more S Vietnamese troops reptd withdrawn
from Cambodia, leaving reptd 30,000-man S Vietnamese force there; US command
repts 287 Amers killed, 1,251 wounded since May 1; repts 3,938 enemy killed;
map; illus; US troops kill 43 enemy in 2 clashes near Danang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 132 words

Humphrey announces candidacy for Minn Sen nomination; says he will serve full
term if elected, but leaves door open for '72 Pres race; issues statement
criticizing Nixon Adm policies on Vietnam and natl econ; comments on student
unrest; MacGregor comments on Humphrey role in Johnson Adm; Humphrey illus;
ex-Vice Pres Humphrey says majority of students are seeking actively to work
through pol and soc system; says it is wrong to judge all by few violent
revolutionaries who dominate news media; Minn Repub Sen candidate MacGregor,
commenting on Humphrey's announcement of Sen candidacy, attacks his record as
Vice Pres; Humphrey, scores Pres Nixon judgment on war; says he again wants to
make clear his opposition to continued US involvement; urges immediate
cease-fire; makes other comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 76, Column 1

LENGTH: 129 words

NYS candidates for Sen hold TV debate, Buffalo; 3 charge inordinate spending to
Ottinger; Ottinger defends spending to win and to get message across; debate
taped, to be shown at various times in Upstate cities; Ottinger stresses
candidates effectiveness and ability to win; O'Dwyer stresses own broad-based
support and that Vietnam is top issue; McCarthy stresses need for Upstater to
balance ticket; cites own fight against biological warfare; Sorensen stresses
role in Kennedy and Johnson Adms; all agree on jets for Israel; Ottinger,
earlier in day, issued white paper on aid to aging; O'Dwyer issued statement
denying that Ottinger was always dove on Vietnam war; McCarthy helps open
Olympic games for retarded children; Sorensen is endorsed by Utica
Observer-Dispatch

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Comment on gains Communist China seeks in Indochina conflict; illus of
Vietnamese civilians herded by Cambodian soldiers into a Communist-occupied town
to draw fire

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 7

LENGTH: 12 words

Comment on dropping of Vietnam atrocity charges against Capt Willingham

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 32 words

H G Perret, criticizing Nixon Adm policy planning, deplores coincidence of
growing Chinese hostility toward US from US moves in Vietnam and Chinese
development of nuclear weapons capability, lr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 5

LENGTH: 5 words

Cartoon on US aid to Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 1

LENGTH: 130 words

NYS Dem candidates for Sen hold TV debate; Ottinger stockholdings scored by
Sorensen; charges Ottinger owns stock in oil cos that favor Arab position;
Ottinger, after program ends, tells press that he will put securities in trust
if elected; McCarthy criticizes Sorensen for role in Kennedy Adm decision to
escalate Vietnam war and for role as atty to GM Corp when attacked by R Nader;
format called for comments on foreign affairs, econ, environment and personal
qualifications for Sen; Sorensen again s on role as adviser to 2 Pres; Repr
McCarthy characterizes Sorensen as man who speaks for peace now but who took
part in Kennedy Adm decisions to escalate war; McCarthy on need for Upstater to
win, Ottinger on HR record, O'Dwyer on opposition to Sen seniority system; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 11 words

Lr on Vice Pres Agnew s at West Point; scores S Vietnamese Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 1

LENGTH: 128 words

Hubert Humphrey meets with press, Waverly; says Nixon Adm econ record, not war
in Vietnam, will be central issue in election; urges bipartisan effort to aid
Pres Nixon in ending US role in war; says he would accept '72 Pres nomination if
offered; sees crisis in balance-of-payments ahead; sees Dem party more united
than in '68; holds econ controls may have to be imposed because of severe econ
problems; says he prefers guidelines; holds US at beginning of 'substantial
recession'; says that if wage and price controls become necessity it will be
because of Nixon policies, news conf on announcement he will run for Sen; says
he has never believed compulsory controls would work but has urged Nixon to set
guidelines and try to persuade indus and labor to accept them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

Cambodian Prince Norodom Sihanouk leaves Peking for N Korea on an official visit

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 19 words

About 100 Buddhists carrying protest signs join funeral procession for monk who
immolated himself in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

USN repts destroyer Richard B Anderson was put out of commission when it left
San Diego, Calif, on May 27 bound for Vietnam and has been sidelined since then;
suspects sabotage; holds 3 sailors

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 58 words

Ceylon's Prime Min Bandaranaike, in sharp swing away from West, announces plans
by Govt to recognize N Vietnam, N Korea, E Ger and Vietcong's provisional
revolutionary govt of S Vietnam, throne s read by Gov Gen Gopallawa; also
announces plans to suspend relations with Israel, nationalize all foreign banks
and take steps to declare Ceylon repub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 128 words

Cambodian and S Vietnamese troops battle to regain control of Kompong Speu to
keep open vital Route 4 which runs from Pnompenh to water port of Kompong Som;
Cambodian petroleum arrives through Kompong Som; Pnompenh has only 2 wks' supply
of oil and gasoline on hand; Cambodian fighter-bombers and S Vietnamese arty
join in counterattack on Kompong Speu; toll among civilians believed to be high;
between 2,000 and 3,000 US soldiers reptd to be have been withdrawn from
Fishhook salient; about 10,000 US troops still remain in Cambodia; US troops
clash with N Vietnamese forces at Fire Base David in 1 of sharpest battles of
6-wk operation; US troops kill 21 enemy in battle NE of Fishhook sec; enemy unit
attacks allied troops near Anhoa, S V; US troops illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 16, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 4

LENGTH: 17 words

Lr on rept that US pays Thailand $50-million yrly to send combat division to S
Vietnam scores policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 16, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 142 words

S Vietnamese sources reptdly have expressed impatience with what they consider
Thai stalling in sending mil aid to Cambodia; sources say S Vietnam will
continue to defend Cambodian regions vital to S Vietnam defense but that
Thailand must move into western areas for sake of its own security; are
especially eager to have well-equipped Thai Air Force join in war; stress
urgency of matter in view of scheduled withdrawal of US forces; are hopeful of
getting continued US aerial support in Cambodian operations; Thai Deputy Premier
Praphas Charusathien says Govt may intervene; Saigon sources express sense of
urgency in regard to Thai mil intervention in Cambodia because of scheduled
withdrawal of US troops from Cambodia; express hope that Pres Nixon will
interpret as liberally as possible authority he reserves to continue aerial
operations; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 16, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 101 words

Cambodian and S Vietnamese troops fail in 3 attempts to drive Vietnamese
Communists from Kompong Speu; relatively light casualties indicate no major
effort has been made to dislodge enemy; Cambodian comdr says unconfirmed repts
say 30 cars carrying civilians attempted to pass through city from Kompong Som,
had been stopped by enemy soldiers and that occupants of 1 car were slain; S
Vietnamese troops claim to have killed 110 Communist Vietnamese soldiers in 3
battles around Preyveng; 4 persons killed when enemy troops ambush Cambodian
convoy; enemy troops attack USMC unit near Danang; other clashes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 16, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

UN Sec Gen Thant addresses Royal Commonwealth Soc, London; says attempts he has
made to find solution to Vietnam war have come to nothing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 16, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 246 words

Vice Pres Agnew says he will continue to speak out 'forcefully, factually and
fearlessly' and will not eliminate emotion from his pub appeals, s, Repub
dinner, Detroit; adopts less caustic tone; explains his philosophy on dissent;
200 antiwar demonstrators march outside banquet hall as he speaks; he says
dissent should be rational rather than illogical, that it should focus on issue
instead of consisting wholly of emotional outburst, and that it should seek to
persuade rather than demand; rejects demands from critics that he de-escalate
his rhetoric; remarks seen concession to what he calls 'some of rational
dissenters' he has been listening to recently; says he has taken suggestion of
11 Minn U profs that he explain his views on dissent; says 'we cannot govern
with consent of governed unless we respect right of dissent of governed'; lists
rules of dissent laid down by Aristotle he says he will be guided by; in earlier
s to Internatl Fed of Newspaper Publishers, Washington, he again attacks news
media but omits personal attacks; Vice Pres Agnew holds telling both sides of
story, especially when it concerns Vietnam, 'has gone out of vogue' in some
major news orgns; warns price of one-sidedness is loss of credibility as public
inst, says it is heavy price to pay for 'fleeting exercise in power or
influence'; notes former Pres Johnson warned him after '68 election against
'taking on' press but that he decided to break pattern and return media
criticism

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 16, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 177 words

M Frankel comment on US and USSR roles in conflict; indications that US may have
used elements of its 6th Fleet to register concern about use of USSR pilots to
defend UAR and that pilots have drawn back to near their bases since mid-May
noted; comment on Nixon Adm's slim chance of getting Cong to impose tax on
leaded gasoline; fact that skeptics have already challenged idea and that
proposal affects home-town interests of key Cong members noted; L E Panetta and
P Gall to pub book on how pol has shaped Pres Nixon's major civil rights
policies; White House takes steps to keep to itself names and addresses of
citizens who write messages of support for Pres; several lr writers complain of
finding themselves on Tell It to Hanoi Com of NY mailing list which urges them
to keep sending messages favoring sending troops into Cambodia; memo by SCOPE
(Student Council of Pollution and Environment) to HR and Sen Appropriations
subcom urges immediate suspension of supersonic liner project on ecological
grounds; memo on official stationery of Interior Sec Hickel

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 16, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

India's Cong party approves resolution demanding banning of Hindu and Moslem
extremist orgns accused of fomenting communal riots; cites Rashtriya Swayam
Sevak Sangh (Hindu) and Jamat-e-Islami (Moslem) orgns as examples of such
groups; also passes resolution against vested interests, right reaction,
communalism and left adventurism; Gandhi urges party fight people who seek to
take country backward; Gandhi's party demands withdrawal of all foreign forces
from Indochina beginning with Amers as prelude for negotiated peace

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 16, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 42 words

Pentagon makes pub Rand Corp study speculating reprisal killings by Vietcong
could number at least 100,000 if Vietcong is successful in taking over S
Vietnam; study's author S T Hosmer says he believes Vietcong regime would go
through with killings

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 16, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 58 words

Saigon students stage protests against Nguyen Van Thieu Govt; protests said to
have anti-Amer flavor; clashes between students and police reptd; students seek
to show solidarity with unions striking in sympathy with 283 Vietnamese employes
of Govt warehouse who were dismissed recently for lack of work; US mil policeman
is beaten by youths; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 142 words

NYS gov candidate Samuels charges Goldberg suggests he is injecting racism into
campaign; holds news conf in front of Goldberg hq, on st; at issue is UPI rept
of comment on Paterson; Goldberg, at news conf, says UPI story is incorrect,
that no other news rept made statement; says he does not use that kind of
language; Goldberg denies change in strategy; W A Harriman and C R Vance back
Goldberg and Paterson; W A Harriman says war is overriding issue in US and no
one knows more than Goldberg 'about how to get this war finished', news conf;
says that when Goldberg was US repr at UN he urged Pres Johnson to stop all
bombing of N Vietnam, that if Johnson had done so instead of waiting until later
US may have been on the way out of Vietnam before Johnson Adm was over; says
Goldberg will take leading role on 'primary' issue of ending war; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

W A Harriman says war is overriding issue in US and no one knows more than
Goldberg 'about how to get this war finished', news conf; says that when
Goldberg was US repr at UN he urged Pres Johnson to stop all bombing of N
Vietnam, that if Johnson had done so instead of waiting until later US may have
been on the way out of Vietnam before Johnson Adm was over; says Goldberg will
take leading role on 'primary' issue of ending war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

Comment on USSR policy in SE Asia; USSR line said to be that there is no chance
of negotiations because N Vietnam agrees to Communist Chinese directive for
protracted war; peace missions by Min Malik and UN Sec Gen Thant noted; Malik
and colleagues arrive, Moscow, to begin talks designed to end fighting but mood
among Govt leaders is not encouraging; USSR position analyzed; USSR seen trying
to appear major supporter of N Vietnam and natl liberation movement in gen and
at same time seeking to establish positive pub image in non-Communist countries

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 15 words

N Vietnamese troops reptdly repulse 2 bns of Laotian soldiers trying to reache
Saravane

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 18 words

Pvt Michael Schwarz pleads innocent to charge of premeditated murder of group of
civilians Feb 19 near Danang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 6

LENGTH: 78 words

N Vietnam Gen Vo Nguyen Giap announces N Vietnam will fight 'shoulder to
shoulder with the fraternal peoples of Laos and Cambodia', articles pub in Hanoi
newspaper; says Hanoi will lead 'all natl liberation' movements of Indochina to
complete victory over US and its allies; statements viewed as N Vietnamese
commitment to merge hostilities in S Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia into single
integrated mil theater, confirms view held by many in US intelligence community

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 170 words

Captured correspondents R B Dudman (St Louis Post-Dispatch), E Pond (Christian
Science Monitor) and M D Morrow (Dispatch News Service) released in good
condition by Communist troops; arrive in Saigon, S Vietnam; ordeal detailed;
Dudman holds they were well treated once they proved they were correspondents;
Miss Pond says she does not know why they were released or if release had been
arranged; their statement avoids mention of presence of N Vietnamese or Vietcong
troops in Cambodia, apparently to improve chances of release of other captive
newsmen; deposed Cambodian Prince Sihanouk reptdly pledges to continue effort to
find missing newsmen, statement released by Cowles Communications Inc; Cowles
ed-in-chief W Attwood had cabled Sihanouk on behalf of com to help free newsmen;
spokesman for Sec Rogers hopes release of 3 will speed release of other
journalists; Defense Dept says it is gratified but Asst Sec Henkin says
mistreatment of 3 heightens concern for other prisoners; illus of Dudman, Pond
and Morrow

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 18, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

J L Buckley, NYS Conservative candidate for Sen, in Saigon, describes US thrust
into Cambodia as 'a hell of a successful operation'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 18, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 60 words

US Ct of Mil Rev overturns 2 desertion convictions of Sp/4 E C Arnett, 1st Amer
soldier to return to US after leaving Vietnam unit and seeking asylum in Sweden;
rules legal counsel had not been provided before he faced newsmen upon return,
Sept '68; also holds case prejudiced by newsreel coverage of return; finds
Arnett guilty of being AWOL while in Sweden

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 18, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

D Luce (World Council of Chs) lr deplores conditions for N Vietnamese prisoners
in Saigon jails

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 18, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 50, Column 5

LENGTH: 39 words

Sorensen, arguying Berk case in US Appeals Ct, NYC, holds Vietnam war unconst;
ct continues stay that would keep Berk in US during further legal action;
Fayette, Miss, Mayor Evers campaigns for Sorensen; ex-Sec Trowbridge endorses
him

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 18, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 54, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

Several thousand members of book publishing and film industries observe day of
'positive action' to mobilize support for pol candidates opposed to war;
distribute handbills, collect signatures for Cong action to curb war, hold panel
discussions; hold outdoor rally, NYC; speakers denounce Pres Nixon, demand
immediate withdrawal from Indochina; some theaters show peace films; many
employes donate day's wages to peace movement; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 18, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 17 words

Vietnam court-martial adjourned because 2 witnesses are missing and 3d, Cpl M S
Krichten, is missing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 18, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 115 words

Communist troops cut NW rail line, Cambodia's last working railway, capture 200
tons of rice and other food supplies, Krang Lovea; Govt's surface transportation
now reduced to a few passable rds none of which are considered safe; Govt
sources rept Pnompenh has 6-mo reserve supply of rice but only 2-wk reserve of
fuel; Communist troops make new attacks on Kompong Chhnang and Kompong Thom;
Kompong Speu reptdly is entirely in Govt hands; Cambodian troops ring Pnompenh
airport and natl bank to guard against Communist attacks; barricades block all
rds leading into city; allied commands rept scattered ground fighting; rept 118
enemy, 5 S Vietnamese killed, 8 S Vietnamese wounded; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 18, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 123 words

Premier Palme of Sweden hon at luncheon, Moscow; Premier Kosygin attends;
Kosygin scores 'Amer aggression' and calls for strict 'respect for rights of
Indochinese peoples to decide their own affairs', s, Moscow; statement
interpreted as affirmation of USSR opposition to convening internatl conf to end
fighting in Indochina; Min Gromyko confs with Indonesia, Japanese and Malaysian
delegation led by Min Malik which presents recommendations of Jakarta conf
members; Malik repts Gromyko replied 'negatively' to idea of Geneva conf at this
time; Soviet press makes no mention of delegation's visit; USSR continued
refusal to do anything that might run counter to N Vietnamese interests noted;
Thant in Moscow; met by Deputy Min Vinogradov

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 19, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

Gross and Williams hold debate sponsored by NJ C of C, Newark, NJ; Williams
attacks, Gross defends Nixon Adm policies; Gross urges Williams fight Southern
Sens who control Sen coms; Williams scores dismissal of US Educ Comr Allen;
Gross blames Williams for helping 'lead us into Vietnam'; rejects
McGovern-Hatfield amendment on troops withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 19, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Amb Pham Dang Lam charges Communist forces with massacre in village of Thanmy, s
of Danang, on June 10, Paris peace talks session; Nguyen Van Tien denies
charges, say they cannot mask US atrocities; Communist spokesman charges 6 mos
of US bombing of Khanhlam hamlet in Camau prov leave 510 dead and wounded and
2,400 suffering chem poisoning

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 19, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 20 words

US command repts 130 Amers killed in Indochina last wk, 93 in Vietnam, 37 in
Cambodia; figures for S Vietnamese and enemy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 19, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 151 words

Sen Mansfield, in attempt to move Cambodian debate to conclusion, refuses to lay
aside foreign mil sales bill with its Cooper-Church amendment; Senate concerned
to break legis logjam created by debate; agrees to hold evening sessions to
consider Adm bills; Byrd offers new amendment to Cooper-Church measure which
allows Pres exercise of 'that const power which may be necessary to protect the
lives of US armed forces wherever deployed'; Sen Griffin, cosponsor of Byrd
amendment, says it authorizes Pres to order another mil operation against enemy
sanctuaries in Cambodia, if he thought such action necessary to protect lives of
US forces in Vietnam; Griffin interpretation challenged by Church, who calls
Byrd amendment 'innocuous specification' of already recognized powers of Pres as
Comdr in Chief; McG Bundy warns Cong against 'hasty adoption' of Cong
limitations on Pres warmaking powers, HR subcom

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 19, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 103 words

Nixon Adm reptdly is gravely concerned over Cambodian situation, particularly
over fate of Pnompenh and holds series of urgent meetings to weigh course of
action; div of opinion on whether enemy plans to seize Pnompenh or merely to
isolate it to bring about fall of regime reptd; concern rises over possibility
of jeopardizing Vietnamese program if too many S Vietnamese troops remain in
Cambodia when Amers withdraw; State Dept press aide Bartch says US opposes any
steps that threaten Vietnamization; says State Dept cannot confirm repts that
Thai Black Panther div is being transferred from S Vietnam to Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 19, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 101 words

Vietnamese Communist troops cut hwy linking Pnompneh with Saigon, key route for
bringing men and supplies into country and last major surface route in Cambodia;
nearly all embassies in Pnompenh have prepared evacuation plans but there is no
sense of hysteria or panic within city; Communists continue attacks on Kompong
Thom; enemy reinforcements are reptd to be moving into Angkor area; Koki Thom,
village 30 mi from Pnompenh, attacked by Communists; Communists cut rd link, Hwy
4, halt work on dam-power complex, major development project, peril nearby
hydroelectric plant and ammunition factory; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 20, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 17 words

S Vietnamese Air Force cadet drowns during horseplay with classmates celebrating
solo flights, Tex

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 20, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 4

LENGTH: 30 words

Lr likens Allen's ouster as HEW Sec and Interior Sec Hickel's apparent decline
in Adm to pol tactics of S Vietnam Pres Thieu; are indications that
Vietnamization is working in US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 20, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5

LENGTH: 45 words

Outlook for changes in Brit policy under new Conservative Govt discussed;
regarding comprehensive versus traditional grammar school under new Conservative
Govt; for Brit admission to EEC; changes in Brit policy towards S Africa; for
changes in Brit East of Suez policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 20, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 71 words

US Appeals Ct permits Berk challenge on legality of Vietnam war to be heard in
FEd Dist Ct but declines request for preliminary injunction abainst shipping
orders and rules that stay of orders will expire in wk; atty L Friedman, of ACLU
NY chap, hails ruling as 1st recognition that such challenges are suitable for
ct action; will seek prompt trial in Eastern Dist Ct, Bklyn, will ask US Sup Ct
for continuation of stay

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 20, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 94 words

Thai Premier Thanom Kittikachorn confs with Gen Abrams and Saigon's C/S Gen Cao
Van Vien in unexpected brief visit to Saigon; inspects Thai's Black Panther Div
and reptdly hints that some of its troops may be going to Cambodia; Vice Pres
Nguyen Cao Ky says S Vietnamese troops will help defend Pnompenh if it is
attacked by enemy troops; says S Vietnam will not interfere with Cambodian
internal affairs, reply to query on establishing control over still contested
areas; State Dept says US provides Cambodia with arms aid up to limit of
$7.9-million for fiscal '70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 20, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 90 words

Malaysian, Japanese and Indonesian delegation reptdly fails in its efforts to
persuade Indian Govt to back its peace plan for Indochina, New Delhi talks with
Sec Kaul and other officials; Soviet press agency Tass repts Sec Gen Thant says
his talks with Soviet leaders in Moscow reveals that their ideas coincide almost
completely with his own; Thant, 2 days earlier, had urged 15-party conf on
Indochina; Sweden and USSR call for withdrawal of all foreign troops from
Indochina, communique on talks; Sweden Premier Palme ends visit to USSR

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 20, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 100 words

Communist forces reptdly have stepped up troop movements in southern Laos, are
believed to be building heavily jungled regions into supply and staging areas
for war in Vietnam to replace those lost in Cambodia; Laotian mil sources fear
loss of provs of Champassak, Sedone and Sithandone, which control access to
Mekong River, to enemy; details on failure of Govt forces to recapture Saravane
made available; Prince Souphanouvong, in new message to his half-brother
Souvanna Phouma, repeats demand that all US bombing in Laos must end before
Pathet Lao reprs will talks peace with Vientiane officials

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 20, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

Prosecution rests; judge denies motion for acquittal of US Marine charged with
murder of Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 69, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

Penn Central says it is clearing weeds and shrubs along New Haven div
right-of-way with spray containing chem herbicide 2,4,5-T, which is almost
entirely banned by Pentagon in Vietnam because it reptdly poses 'imminent
danger' to women of childbearing yrs who eat food grown in areas using spray; co
official notes Govt allows use of spray for control of weeds and brush on range,
pasture, rights-of-way and other non-agricultural land; says spray poses 'no
danger' because it is mixed with 2,4-D (herbicide that has also come under fire
recently) and sprayed only on heavily overgrown areas on windless days

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 32 words

Ed deplores lack of scholarly interest in SE Asia, particularly Vietnam; links
it to difficulty of language and acad opposition to war-related studies; says
such opposition should not bar study

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 3

LENGTH: 19 words

Prof W W Pese lr questions wisdom of 73 Sens who urge withdrawal from Indochina
but confrontation in Middle East

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 0

LENGTH: 20 words

Meyerson, Harvey: Vinh Long; R W Komer lr on citation of 'Komer's Kanal' in book
and by reviewer T Buckley; Buckley reply

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 20 words

Malaysian, Japanese and Indonesian delegation arrives, Paris, to talk with Min
Schumann on bringing peace to Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

Revs J Sheerin and W F Nerin announce mail campaign to recruit 40,000 RC
clergymen in antiwar movement; says lrs opposing war in Vietnam and Cambodia are
being sent to every RC bishop and priest in the US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

12-man HR com, headed by Repr Montgomery, leaves Washington to investigate US
involvement in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Survey of 5,000 students at 39 colls and univs by 2 Swarthmore Coll
psychologists finds Vietnam war has greatly changed students' attitudes toward
careers, parents, religion, pol and US in gen; finds 'overwhelming majority' of
students still place high value on traditional Amer ideals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

N Vietnamese Govt, deploring sharp decline in area devoted to rice growing,
begins new campaign to increase output

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 61 words

Schwarz testifies; says he did not intentionally shoot any civilians; says he
and 4 others believed there were Vietcong in village; charges Herrod gave orders
to shoot and kill; details; defense rests; 2 marines, testifying for
prosecution, say they served with Schwarz and would not believe him even under
oath; Schwarz and fellow marines illus during break in trial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 33 words

Vietnam Assembly debates bill to give Pres Nguyen Van Thieu emergency powers to
cope with econ problems; fistfights between pro-Govt and ind legislators break
out; police break up clash with tear gas

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Amer mil analysts and diplomats, Saigon, expect S Vietnamese forces to be
withdrawn within few days after US withdrawal; sr officials suggest S Vietnam
will maintain some few thousand armored troops in Cambodia indefinitely in an
attempt to keep open Route 1 linking Saigon and Pnompenh and station strong
forces along border to be in position to strike quickly at sanctuary areas if
enemy attempts to resume operations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 23 words

Hanoi radio charges firing on N Vietnam villages by US arty and planes; charges
shells are filled with toxic chems; US Defense Dept denial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Article on recent demonstrations and renewed protests against S Vietnam Govt by
An Quang Buddhists; militant leader H Dien comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 89 words

NY Times survey by D E Kneeland finds Army plagued by dissident movement led by
hard-core group aimed at ending war in Indochina, bringing troops back from
overseas, democratizing Army, and creating radical force in mil that will carry
its commitment back to civilian life; specific examples of malaise cited;
leaders, such as M MacGregor of US Servicemen's Fund and Dr H Levy, quoted; Ft
Jackson post comdr Maj Gen Hollingsworth comments; Pentagon spokesman estimates
hard-core dissidents are no more than 1/10 of 1% of total strength

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 93 words

Vietnamese Communist troops strike north of Pnompenh in an apparent effort to
seize upper reaches of Mekong River and speed flow of supplies and troops into
Cambodia; battle reptdly rages at Tonle Bet, Kompong Thom and at Peam Chiang; 8
Amers killed and 22 wounded in clashes along eastern border; US casualties are
308 killed and 1,340 wounded since Apr 29; 4,000-man S Vietnamese force moves
into Cambodia into Se Bang Valley, 1 of few areas not previously swept in allied
offensive; move brings to 34,000 number of S Vietnamese soldiers in Cambodia;
map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 5

LENGTH: 175 words

Natl Council of Chs gen bd decides to call Natl Ecumenical Consultation, that
will include Roman Caths, Southern Baptists and other evangelical chs, in Nov or
Dec; decision reflects recognition of need for change in council's 'mode and
manner' and of need to broaden its membership base; consultation will not be
directly involved in search for Christian unity; bd wieghs 4 options for changes
in council structure drafted by study group headed by Rev A R Brouwer, that
would allow for RC participation; resolution urges no more US mil planes be sent
to Israel; urges end to exclusion of minorities from any area of employment,
particularly bldg trades, meeting, NYC; urges neighborhood campaigns for school
lunch programs for needy children; backs lowering voting age to 18; approves
resolution urging purchase of grapes with union labels; approves resolution
urging end to exclusion of minorities from any area of employment; approves
resolution opposing sale of more US jets to Israel; urges replacing
Vietnamization with 'policy of ending the war'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 45 words

Saigon newspaper ed says that after initial mil success 'things seem to have
turned sour in Cambodia'; says situation is under control wherever S Vietnamese
forces are present, but that Cambodian forces are incapable of matching enemy
forces on central and NW fronts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

Minn Repub Conv adopts compromise plank expressing hope that US forces be
withdrawn from Vietnam in yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 41 words

Pvt Schwarz convicted of premeditated murder in killings of Vietnamese
civilians; sentenced to life imprisonment at hard labor; sentence to be
automatically appealed; Boyd, who will go on trial June 22, bursts into tears on
hearing sentence; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 112 words

Indochina fighting intensifies; enemy losses reptd up; N Vietnamese troops reptd
to have gained control of at least half of Kompong Thom despite 2 days of
resistance by Cambodian forces and S Vietnamese air assaults; fighting continues
in wide arc around Kompong Cham and in Tonle Bet; S Vietnam repts forces that
launched drive into Se Bang valley encountered only light resistance; clashes in
other areas described; US command issues statistics showing that 60% of weapons
and 80% of ammunition found in enemy storage areas in Cambodia originated in
Communist China; US command repts OV-10 observation plane crashes because of
operational failure; pilot rescued; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 10 words

HR com arrives, Saigon; US Sec Chafee arrives for 4-day visit

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 0

LENGTH: 24 words

Ad sponsored by producer, authors, dir and cast of Broadway musical play '1776'
urges support for McGovern-Hatfield amendment to end Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 131 words

US fighter-bombers and gunships, restricted to flying maximum of 21.7 mi into
Cambodia to support ground operations, found to have been ranging much deeper
into NE Cambodia since allied incursion on Apr 30; attacks geared to destroying
new enemy infiltration routes; Amer officials, Saigon, unclear on whether raids,
never before discussed publicly, will cease on June 30; Adm has made it clear
that US would not provide air combat support for S Vietnamese forces beyond
established limit but has never excluded possibility that Amer planes would bomb
enemy supply lines and bases beyond that limit; such air activities would be
permissible under Cooper-Church amendment; N Vietnamese ingenious techniques to
move certain necessities by water and US countermoves to block them described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 23, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 71 words

Natl Urban Coalition chmn Gardner says Amers are uninformed, ineffective critics
of their pol insts and complainers about govt who take no steps to make it
better, s, Jaycees conv; urges withdrawal from Vietnam of all US forces during
'71; calls for US-USSR negotiations to end nuclear arms race; calls for
continued US involvement in world 'without exploitation or imperialism'; calls
for marked reduction in defense spending

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 23, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Fed ct, LI, 2-1, rules Nassau County cannot prosecute opponents of war in
Indochina who display buttons showing peace symbol superimposed on
representation of US flag, suit brought by LI Vietnam Moratorium Com, Nassau
Council of Women Strike for Peace and aided by ACLU NY chap; says Dist Atty
Cahn, who sought to prosecute such cases under '05 NYS law, interpreted law too
broadly

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 23, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 67, Column 7; (UPI)

LENGTH: 39 words

Sen Thurmond asks Pres Nixon to exempt Amer forces in Cambodia and air crews
flying missions over Laos from payment of income taxes; urges tax relief for
personnel serving in Cambodia; servicemen in Vietnam already enjoy exemption

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 23, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 86 words

Final day of campaigning; Sorensen confident; campaigns on Lexington Av; aide
predicts victory with 35% of vote; Ottinger makes motorcade tour through
Westchester; optimistic; O'Dwyer campaigns, mid-Manhattan; confident; gets phone
call from Irish MP B Devlin; McCarthy campaigns in Rochester area; calls self
certified underdog; flies to NYC for 2 debates; S Brown, one of Vietnam
Moratorium Com founders, backs Ottinger; Sorensen cancels radio and TV
appearances because of death of mother; candidates debate, WNDT

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 23, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Units of 2 US bns reptdly withdrawn from Cambodia leaving 9,700 combat troops
and small number of Amer advisers; enemy forces reptdly are pulling out of
Kompong Thom; 2 N Vietnamese rgts take up positions around Preyveng, 31 mi E of
Pnompenh; illus of US troops preparing to pull out; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 23, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 79 words

Maj Soeung Kimsea, Cambodian Army Capt, says population is now more in fear of S
Vietnamese than of Vietcong; accuses S Vietnamese troops who helped retake city
of Kompong Speu of extensive robbing and looting; says S Vietnamese soldiers
opened locked doors with gunshots, looted homes of Cambodian officers and even
robbed monks; his charges supported by Cambodian soldiers; Cambodian defenders
of city reptdly used illegally purchased Amer grenade-launchers and pistols

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 23, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 15 words

US command repts there are now 419,600 Amer troops in S Vietnam, lowest total
since Mar '67

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 23, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 52 words

US mil sources in Saigon disclose suspension of 9-yr-old program of chem
defoliation in enemy-controlled areas; rept 12 planes used in spraying diverted
to Cambodian action; assume spraying will resume when Cambodian operation ends,
but on ltd scale; comment on US scientists views on effects of chem defoliants

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Venice biennial beset by organizational and pol problems on 2d day of official
critics opening; 24 artists opposing wars in Vietnam and Cambodia boycott US
pavilion; include R Lichtenstein, R Rauschenberg, J Dine, R B Kitaj, C
Oldenburg, R Morris, R Motherwell, F Stella, E Trova and A Warhol

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 96 words

A Z Carr, in lr on US policy in Indochina and Mideast, sees US having been led
into Indochina by central policy flaw of viewing Communism as monolithic enemy
to be resisted equally at all points; says US should have regarded Russia and
China as rivals rather than single adverse power and used balance-of-powe r
strategy, playing off one against other; reply to June 13 lr defends Javits and
Goodell advocacy of stronger US stand against USSR intervention in Mideast and
of speedy US withdrawal from Vietnam; scoring those who are doves on Vietnam and
hawks on Middle East

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 136 words

Govt troops repulse enemy attack on Prek Tameak; rept capture of Soviet-made
122-mm rocket, 1st found so near to Pnompenh; enemy continues harassing fire
against Kompong Cham and Siemreap; Maj Am Rong appeals to 'internatl opinion'
against what he terms increasing concentration of Vietnamese Communists in
Angkor area; witnesses rept US planes fly support for Cambodian troops in Prek
Tameak and Kompong Thom areas; Pentagon silent on operation; little fighting
reptd in border sanctuary areas; Thai planes fly reconnaissance missions over
Cambodia and help its Air Force with repairs and training; details on mil
action; little action reptd in eastern border sanctuary areas; US casualties
since Apr 29 reptd at 323 killed, 1,446 wounded; 790 S Vietnamese reptd killed,
3,451 wounded; 13,114 enemy reptd killed; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 81 words

Militant Japanese radicals continue to hold protest rallies, brief wildcat
strikes and carry out scattered acts of violence throughout nation; Tokyo
incidents detailed; poll taken by newspaper Asahi finds most Japanese people
consider security treaty useful but 42% believe it should be gradually dissolved
over coming yrs; Communist China, N Korea and N Vietnam scores extenton of
treaty as 'act of collaboration between Japanese militarism and US imperialism';
Tokyo rally illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 62 words

Defense Sec Laird says S Vietnam will be free to operate anywhere in Cambodia
after June 30, London news conf; does not want to put any limit on S Vietnamese
actions against Communist sanctuaries; Laird statement is consistent with
modified Pres Nixon view to let S Vietnamese attack enemy anywhere in Cambodia;
stresses US ground troops will be out of Cambodia on June 30

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 25, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 49, Column 3

LENGTH: 79 words

NYS Assemblyman Stevenson defeated for renomination by L Nine, 78th AD Dem
primary; P A Fino Jr wins in Repub and Conservatives primaries; Hausbeck
defeated by R Lewandowski in Dem 4-way contest; incumbent Murphy defeated for
renomination by B Sharoff, 42d AD Dem primary; Assemblyman Cerosky defeated for
renomination by J E Leenan, 92d AD Repub primary; Lt R E Kidder nominated to
Assembly, Dem primary; is on Vietnam duty; Harry Kramer nominated to Assembly,
Dem primary

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 25, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 14 words

HR com continues visits to allied mil units and villages in S Vietnam and
Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 25, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 63 words

Profs C A Moser, F Michael and Z M Szaz say Nixon has 'significant support'
among coll educators for sending troops into Cambodia, news conf, Washington;
300 members of Natl Acad of Sciences including former Pres science advisers Drs
D F Hornig and J B Wiesner ask Pres Nixon to withdraw all US forces from
Cambodia immediately and remove all US troops from Indochina within 1 yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 25, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

S Vietnamese Assembly, 64-1, approves economy bill; 25 opposed to bill boycott
session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 25, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 111 words

N Korea marks 20th anniv of start of Korean war by offering to sign
non-aggression pact with S Korea, work out reduction of up to 100,000 troops in
both their armed forces and take other steps leading to reunification on
condition that all Amer forces be withdrawn first; requests meeting of Mil
Armistice Comm; leaders of Asian Communist nations and groups prepare for big
display of solidarity to mark 20th anniv; reprs of Pathet Lao, Vietcong, N
Vietnam and Cambodian Govt in exile converge on Pyongyang after being feted en
route in Peking; joint ed in 3 major Peking newspapers claims N Korean and
Chinese troops have defeated 'US imperialism' in Korean war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 25, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 66 words

Marine Lt C R Saxbe lr to his father, Sen W B Saxbe, opposes war, sees domestic
peril for US if it doesn't end soon; he foresees underground development that
will disrupt nation with arson, sabotage and assassination; father replies he is
'distressed' that Pres Nixon believes 'we can both get out of Vietnam and win
the war'; excerpts from lrs; Sen Cranston inserts lrs into Cong Record; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 25, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 10 words

Marine Pfc Boyd acquitted of Vietnamese murder charges; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 25, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 31 words

A Ducat, retired US Govt teacher, tells N Vietnamese delegates to Paris peace
talks that he would do vocational educ in N Vietnam on condition his captured
pilot son Bruce be sent home

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 25, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 11 words

US 25th Inf Div tanks crossing Cambodian-S Vietnamese border illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 25, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 124 words

Pres Nixon invites reprs of 40 newspapers and broadcasting networks to attend 5
1/2-hr private briefing June 26 on Indochina operations at his San Clemente,
Calif, home; NY Times and Washington Post, both outspoken war critics, are not
invited but Nixon's communications dir H G Klein says some war critics,
including Boston Globe, had been asked to attend; says participants had been
selected to represent 'broad cross section' of US and that White House had tried
to choose only 1 paper per city; 2 papers each from Chicago and Dallas included;
NY News, which has been favorable to Adm policy, chosen to represent NYC; other
participants listed; briefing will be conducted by officials from State and
Defense Depts and Natl Security Council

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 25, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 194 words

Sen, 81-10, approves amendment to mil sales bill repealing '64 Tonkin Gulf
Resolution; amendment, offered by Repub Sen Dole, represents seizure of
initiative on issue by Repubs; Dems protest procedure; margin of approval
attributed to convergence of views of 'hawks,' who hold resolution now
meaningless, and 'doves,' who are acting against grant of war-making power to
Pres; doves accuse Repubs of indulging in crude and cynical partisanship; Sen,
52-36, rejects Sen Miller move to eliminate from bill Foreign Relations Com
provision requiring countries receiving arms to put up 50% of value in local
currencies, money to be used to finance educ and cultural exch programs; legal
effect of action seen minimal since Nixon Adm has stated it does not rely on
resolution as authority for current policies in Indochina; HR may reject mil
sales bill, thus rejecting the repeal, particularly if bill contains
Cooper-Church amendment; Sen Stennis scores attaching a major foreign-policy
issue to a relatively minor bill; Fulbright opposes repeal 'to preserve
integrity of procedures of the Sen'; Sen McGovern comment; other Sens who voted
against amendment identified

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

Gov Rockefeller charges Goldberg supported Vietnam war policies of Pres Johnson,
news conf before state PBA meeting at which endorsement is announced; replies to
Goldberg criticism of his allegiance to Pres Nixon; Goldberg charges Rockefeller
supports Nixon's enlargement of SE Asia war, reply to Rockefeller charge he
supported Pres Johnson's war policies; scores Rockefeller adm record

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 4

LENGTH: 26 words

Lr says shortage of scholarly expertise on Vietnam may be due to acad
community's distaste for war and to decreased Govt support for foreign area
research

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Rev J McLaughlin wins Repub Sen nomination in RI, 1st priest to run for Sen;
will oppose Sen Pastore; stresses issue of Indochina war, to which he is
opposed; says he is increasingly distressed over Pastore's 'pro-Pentagon,
pro-ABM' position; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

In what some civil and mil lawyers believe to be 1st instance of civilian
judiciary intervening in pretrial stages of ct martial case, a Fed dist judge in
Atlanta orders temporary halt to Army's prosecution of Sgt E Torres for alleged
murder of Vietnamese civilians at Songymy; Torres petition also challenges
constitutionality of Uniform Code of Mil Justice; maintains that procedures of
ct-martial, in which prosecution selects panel by which defendant is judged and
in which depositions in place of witnesses are acceptable, violate due process
provisions of 5th Amendment; Torres says he is innocent, news conf;

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

N Vietnamese repr at Paris peace talks Nguyen Minh Vy charges Nixon Adm aim is
for Cambodian and Laotian peoples to accept neocolonialist yoke of US and permit
it to transform their territory into Amer mil bases

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 9 words

334 prisoners Hanoi admits holding are listed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 69 words

US command repts combat deaths last wk at lowest since end of Mar, but wounded
nearly double that of previous wk; repts 80 Amers killed, 643 wounded, wk ended
June 20; repts 20 Amers dead, 255 wounded, wk ended June 20; repts total of 331
Amers dead, 1,477 wounded in Cambodian operation; repts 42,754 Amer dead,
281,701 wounded since Jan '61; enemy deaths total 652,296, S Vietnamese deaths
deaths total 103,874

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 124 words

Cambodia issues gen mobilization decree requiring every citizen between ages of
18 and 60 to perform either mil duty or 'some service of natl interest'; decree
makes all property and financial resources subject to requisition for natl
defense purposes; move viewed as another step in Govt campaign to bring nation
to state of psychological and mil readiness rather than to any special urgency
beyond continuing deteriorating war situation; Cambodian troops opposite Prek
Tameak along Mekong River ready for enemy attack; repulse 10-hr enemy attack on
supply depot at Longvek, 1 of Govt's largest; 5,000 S Vietnamese troops begin
operation in NE Cambodia; illus of stack of rifles recovered by S Vietnamese
troops after recapture of Kompong Speu

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 8

LENGTH: 32 words

June 25 issues of 10 Saigon papers seized by Govt; 8 accused of erroneously
reptg alleged bombing incident in Rachgia Prov which they said involved strafing
of fishing vessels by Govt aircraft

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 120 words

N Vietnam reptdly has for 1st time declared list of 334 Amer prisoners, compiled
by Com of Liaison With Families of Servicemen Detained in N Vietnam, is complete
and that it holds no others not on list; rept made by 3 Amers (K Kirkpatrick and
Profs Patshne and Pfeiffer), who visited N Vietnam as private individuals; repr
for 3 says prisoners are safe and will be returned after war; says N Vietnam
discourages families of other men to seek information about them; says N Vietnam
would not accept 476 of 769 lrs carried by Pfeiffer; Defense and State Depts
dispute figure; Defense Dept lists 376 prisoners but has never pub list; Liaison
Com was formed in Dec after agreement between N Vietnam and com leader Mrs C
Weiss

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 11 words

Maj Gen Noble assumes command of Army Engineers in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 27, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 7 words

Lr backs Pres Nixon Vietnam war policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 27, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6

LENGTH: 54 words

Conf of Major Superiors of Men, RC Ch religious order, members clash over
resolution to 'encourage' Nixon Adm to take even greater steps to achieve
withdrawal of US forces from Indochina; table it; Rev P M Boyle re-elected pres;
encounters controversy over resolution to spend more for domestic programs and
less on defense

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 27, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 39 words

Minn State Dem-Farmer-Labor party approves plan calling for immediate withdrawal
of all Amer troops and advisers from Indochina; Humphrey, McCarthy attend;
Humphrey endorsed, 958-245, over E Craig Jr, supported mainly by McCarthy group

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 27, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 87 words

Asst Sec Henkin rejects peace group's list of war prisoners as incomplete and
unacceptable; says list does not include names of at least 40 men carried as
being captured; links official concern for mil prisoners with concern for about
20 civilian newsmen who have disappeared in combat; says US wants full list of
prisoners, including newsmen and civilians; names of 2 prisoners who do not
appear on peace group's list but who are described as prisoners by Defense Dept
noted; Mrs Weiss supplies 335th name to list; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 27, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

US command announces USN escort plane attacks gun positions deep inside N
Vietnam after guns fire on reconnaissance aircraft plane escorts; US discloses
loss of 2 more planes on missions to Laos; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              260 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 27, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 207 words

Pres Nixon tells closed-door meeting of eds and execs from major news orgns that
he chose course of orderly withdrawal from S Vietnam to reinforce Amer's role in
world affairs and thus secure 'lasting peace'; says it would have been easier to
end war when he took office, but US credibility would have been severely
damaged; insists Cambodian venture has been essential to withdrawal process and
will neither expand nor prolong war in Indochina; his remarks reinforced by
Kissinger; White House press sec says transcript of contents of meeting will be
released later; NY Times and several other papers not invited to meeting do not
feel bound by embargo imposed by White House and obtain rept of briefing from
several sources; White House sources deny purpose of briefing is to assure
favorable press receptin for Nixon's final rept on Cambodian operation; morning
session of briefing is conducted by Lt Gen J W Vogt and Deputy Asst Sec
Sullivan; Vogt says US troops were sent into Cambodian sanctuaries because of
Communist threat to S Vietnamese border following closure of port of
Sihanoukville to Communists by Lon Nol; makes other statements; Nixon to discuss
foreign policy problems with commentators from ABC, NBC and CBS on July 1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              261 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Ed, noting remarks by Pres Nixon, Defense Sec Laird and Sec of State Rogers,
says there is possibility US plans to escalate air war and continue B-52 raids
in N Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              262 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 10, Column 0

LENGTH: 37 words

G W Ball article on US foreign policy in Middle East and Indochina urges US not
allow USSR to gain control in Middle East, thereby upsetting world balance of
power; prescribes specific actions US should take, illus; cartoon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              263 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 62 words

Mass Repub conv nominates Spaulding for Sen; endorses Sargent for re-election by
acclamation; approves Spaulding choice of Comr Dwight for Lt Gov; Spaulding to
face opponent J J McCarthy in Sept primary; backs Nixon Adm Vietnam policy but
questions policy on Cambodia; will seek direct White House support against
Kennedy; conv plank stresses support for Adm on Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              264 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

7 Amers killed, 12 wounded in Vietnam ground clashes; 23 wounded in helicopters
by enemy ground fire; 2 helicopters downed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              265 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 114 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu pledges S Vietnam will help Cambodia defend itself from
Communist but fails to clarify extent of help, TV and radio s; says S Vietnam
does not plan to set up permanent mil presence in Cambodia but that minimum
number of troops will remain to insure security of program to repatriate
Vietnamese seeking to return; says his Govt's armed forces will respond to
Cambodian requests for aid on an individual basis and that immediately after
overthrow of Norodom Sihanouk he has authorized comdr of S Vietnamese forces in
Mekong delta to give such aid to Cambodians in defending border outposts; repts
both govts have agreed to permit their armies to cooperate closely

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              266 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (GP)

LENGTH: 33 words

Gallup Poll repts number of Amers who think US was wrong to have become involved
in Vietnam is increasing; says 56% of Amers believe US made mistake; figures
from latest and many earlier polls listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              267 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 96 words

Cambodian Govt troops withdraw from their last garrisons in Ratanakiri and 3
other northeastern Provs; move leaves virtually entire NE quadrant without Govt
troops; confirms view that abandonment of area was inevitable and that Govt
plans to concentrate most of its trained 50,000 trained troops in area around
Pnompenh and east to S Vietnamese border; scattered actions in other areas
continue; US troops and advisers prepare to withdraw from Cambodia in advance of
June 30 deadline; US Reprs studying situation leave for Saigon after day in
Cambodia; Amer soldiers illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              268 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 138 words

US Govt Operations Com rept to HR, prepared by subcom chmn Repr Moss, recommends
Saigon Govt devalue piaster from present exch rate of 118 piasters to dollar to
dampen inflation, curb corruption and protect morale and morals of Amers in
country; calls rate unrealistic in face of readily available illegal or black
mkt rates as high as 423; recommends Govt and IMF set new rate; links Saigon
Govt policies and business corruption to failure to devalue piaster; says US
taxpayer's cost of war continues to increase because US pays 2 to 3 times number
of dollars it would have to pay if rates were realistic; notes Repr Moss wrote
Sec Rogers last Dec urging him to press Saigon Govt to devalue piaster; says
reply from Acting Sec Abshire noted S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu strongly
opposed devaluation; recommendations detailed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              269 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

N Vietnam contends US has achieved none of its objectives in mil incursion into
Cambodia and conducts 'campaign of deception'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              270 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 5

LENGTH: 12 words

Big turnout seen in S Vietnam vote for city and provincial councilmen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              271 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 53 words

6 soldiers who have been denied conscientious objector status arrested, Ft
Lewis, for refusing shipment to Vietnam; atty C H W Talbot says he will go
before US Dist judge in Tacoma, Fla, to seek restraining order; soldiers include
Pfc M Perez, P A Forest, L Galgano, J C Griffith, Sp/4 C M Dix Jr and Pvt J B
Allen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              272 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Allied officials say 2 fresh enemy inf regiments are heading south from N
Vietnam through Laos toward Quangtri Prov; mil analysts watch advance closely;
Maj Gen Ngo Quang Truong says his units continue to harass enemy troops backing
away from coastal plain toward Laotian border; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              273 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Min Pham Kim Ngoc says S Vietnamese Govt plans sweeping econ reforms, but needs
at least $200-million in emergency aid from US to tide it over severe
inflationary crisis, int; makes clear devaluation is likely, but wage and price
control is not; says Govt has submitted comprehensive program of econ reforms to
legis; makes other comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              274 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

US Sec of State Rogers in San Francisco enroute to visit some Asian nations;
Rogers and Rumanian Min Manescu discuss Mideast crisis, San Francisco; Manescu
outlines for Rogers views of Arab diplomats he has met with during observations
of 25th anniv of signing of UN Charter; talks are in context of US peace plan;
Rogers is 'encouraged' by discussion and what he terms continuing improvement in
US-Rumanian relations; Rogers says 'it is obvious' that S Vietnamese troops will
not withdraw from Cambodia 'before the N Vietnamese do'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              275 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 78 words

Sen Mathias proposes US initiate graduated cease-fire in attempt to improve
climate for negotiated peace, int; will make Sen s; offers proposal as 'useful
complement' to various cong amendments; Repr Ford says Cambodian operation has
been so successful he believes Pres Nixon may see fit to announce further
withdrawals from SE Asia, TV int; Sen Pell, in s planned for delivery tomorrow,
argues US must accept alternative of withdrawing from Vietnam; Mathias illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              276 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 15 words

Roman Caths in Okla are read lr from Bishop V J Reed condemning US involvement
in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              277 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 131 words

US troops continue withdrawal from Cambodia; allies estimate enemy troops killed
since Apr 30 at 11,000; give details on captured equipment; 339 Amers reptd
killed, 1,051 wounded; 860 S Vietnamese reptd killed, 3,603 wounded; S
Vietnamese troops fight scattered battles with N Vietnamese S of Neak Luong; S
Vietnamese marines sail up Mekong, land 15 mi N of Pnompenh to secure strategic
approach to the capital; increase in enemy activity reptd in last 48 hrs; enemy
shells 34 targets; 9 civilians killed, 25 wounded near Kontum; Lon Nol says if
Govt's mil situation deteriorates further he hopes Pres Nixon will send US
ground troops back to Cambodia, news conf; makes clear US has been aiding
Cambodian troops with tactical air support and that he has been assured this
will continue

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              278 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 99 words

NY Times survey says course of war in SE Asia appears vastly more complicated
and uncertain than before Cambodian incursion began; allied analysts say N
Vietnam prepares no major mil moves; conflict in northern part of S Vietnam said
to be no different from previous yrs, level of conflict's violence in southern
part said to be lower now than 3 mos ago; Thailand seen expected to play role in
fighting sooner or later; notes that Communists appear to be on offensive in S
Laos to extend Ho Chi Minh Trail; chart of pro-Govt, N Vietnamese and Pathet Lao
troop strength; other details; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              279 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 30, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 134 words

Natl Foreign Policy Conf for Editors and Broadcasters held, San Francisco; Sec
of State Rogers s; warns N Vietnam that it cannot again count on safe haven in
Cambodia despite withdrawal of US ground combat forces'; says US air power,
increased flow of Amer weapons to Cambodian forces and presence of S Vietnamese
and Thai troops will frustrate any Communist effort to utilize Cambodian
territory; repts success of operations in Cambodia; statements seen as preview
of rept Nixon will make to nation, are 1st official confirmation that Thai
troops have been or will be sent into country; says US believes it possibly
Communists may seek negotiated settlement; claims allied operations in Cambodia
have succeeded, but N Vietnamese still maintain 'tens of thousands' of troops
there; makes other comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              280 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 30, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 193 words

Sup Ct defers until next yr ruling whether men who oppose Vietnam war, but not
all wars, are entitled to be exempted as conscientious objectors; rules that
Wyzanski ruling in Sisson case was actually a directed verdict of acquittal and
that Govt has no legal right to appeal such acquittal; agrees to rule on issue
of selective conscientious objection by accepting appeals of G P Gillette and L
A Negre, both of whom have had assertions similar to Sisson's turned down;
decision in Sisson case was 5-3; Harlan wrote opinion; Burger, White and Douglas
dissented; Sisson matter remains open until ruling in other cases; Gillette was
sentenced for refusing to show up for induction; Negre, already in service,
sought discharge; orders rearguments next term in 8 cases that raise important
issues including obscenity, criminal anarchy and rights of poor litigants in
civil cases; Ct refuses to hear appeal of H S Ferguson and A Harris convicted of
plot to murder R Wilkins and W M Young Jr; Sup CT, 8-0, rules indigent convicts
cannot be held in prison to work off unpaid fines or ct costs beyond maximum
prison terms permitted for their crimes, W E Williams case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              281 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 30, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 100 words

Withdrawal of US troops from Cambodia completed; Maj Gen Casey hails success of
venture; some US Reprs probing situation conf with returning Amer soldiers,
Saigon; Vietnamese Communist troops renew attack on Cambodian munitions depot at
Longvek; mil spokesmen say 337 Amers were killed, 1,524 wounded in operation; S
Vietnam puts its losses in Cambodian operation at 866 killed, 3,724 wounded;
puts Vietnamese Communist losses at 14,488 killed, 1,427 captured; allied
sources rept 39,000 S Vietnamese troops will remain in Cambodia indefinitely;
illus of US Cavalry Rgt moving back into S Vietnam; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              282 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 30, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Sen, 62-29, rejects Sen Allott move to force an immediate vote on
Hatfield-McGovern amendment which is not scheduled to come up until July;
amendment forces believe less than majority is for amendment; plan ad campaign;
Repub Sen Hansen admits Allott objective is to attempt to defeat amendment and
curb focus on Vietnam war issue; Mansfield appeals for defeat of Allott move in
prior debate; Sens E M Kennedy, McClellan and Metcalf, Dems, vote with Repubs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              283 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 30, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 27 words

Swedish Govt to open permanent diplomatic mission in Hanoi to handle increased
relations with N Vietnam; J-C Oberg named charge d'affaires and head of mission

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              284 of 284 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 30, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 8

LENGTH: 18 words

Sweden will open permanent diplomatic mission in Hanoi next mo to handle
increased relations with N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
