
                               1 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 1, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Cambodia and Vietnam trade charges of aggression after Cambodia severs
diplomatic relations because of border fighting.  Cambodia contends Vietnamese
forces are backed by tanks and warplanes.  Vietnamese Foreign Min spokesman
reptdly says Vietnam wants to settle conflict by negotiation (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 1-78-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY STEVEN V ROBERTS

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

Article on plight of Tran Cao Chai family who escaped Vietnam and became
refugees on Malaysia.  Family has been resettled in US after spending past yr in
Malaysian refugee camp.  Refugee officials say newcomers seem more willing to
accept hardships and start at bottom than earlier Vietnamese refugees.  Notes
many are arriving with little educ or knowledge of English.  Louis Harris poll
indicates that Amers oppose entry of more Indochinese refugees by 57%.  Illus
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 2-78-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 48 words

Vietnam accuses Cambodia of attacking and occupying several areas it claims as
its own as charges intensify in border dispute.  Vietnamese newspaper Nhan Dan
says Cambodian forces have been sent repeatedly to attack and occupy many parts
of Vietnam.  Notes casualties have been high (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 2-78-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 3, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Cambodian Govt refuses to negotiate border dispute until all Vietnamese forces
withdraw.  Again accuses Vietnam of wanting to annex Cambodia.  Phnom Penh radio
broadcast is 1st public response to Vietnam's appeal for early talks to settle
conflict (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 3-78-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 4, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY ELIZABETH M FOWLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 78 words

Educational Attainment in US, Govt study, indicates that there are 1.07 million
women aged 18 to 21 who have begun college, compared with 995,000 men of same
age group in college.  Impetus toward college for men has slowed since Vietnam
War when going to college offered young men method of avoiding draft into
military service.  In addition, back in '60's and early '70's, many men were
still able to utilize GI education benefits to finance college courses (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 4-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 4, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 165 words

US Govt officials rept that conflict between Vietnam and Cambodia has reached
temporary stalemate, with Vietamese forces occupying up to 400 square miles of
Cabmodian territory after Dec '77 offensive.  Skirmishing on disputed frontier
is said to have begun in '73, with sporadic fighting since '75 and full-scale
battles between Sept and Dec '77.  Thousands of dead and wounded reptd.
Equipment on both sides is said to have included tanks and armored cars, with
Vietnam using US-built A-37 bombers.  US officials, deriving information mostly
from monitored radio signals from combat area, assert there is no evidence of
Chinese advisers in field on Cambodia's side, although Cambodians' weapons are
clearly of Chinese origin, while most of Vietnam's weapons are Soviet-made.  US
officials estimate that Vietnam has committed about 60,000 troops to effort,
while Cambodia has counterposed force of 20,000-25,000.  Cambodia-Vietnam map
shows disputed Svay-Rieng region of Cambodia (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 4-78-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 5, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM L SAFIRE

SECTION: Page 17, Column 5

LENGTH: 97 words

William Safire comments on speech made by Chinese Foreign Min Huang Hua on July
30 '77 in light of recent mil conflicts between Cambodia and Vietnam.  Says
Huang attributed fighting to demarcation of borders by France and also blames
Vietnam and USSR.  Safire says natural 1st reaction of US is to take perverse
satisfaction in watching new fighting.  Contends world is too small for proxy
wars between Communist giants, meaning China, which supports Cambodia, and USSR,
which supports Vietnam.  Contends US Govt should make it clear to both that war
will be 'no-win proposition'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 5-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 5, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

Cambodian Embassy spokesman, Peking, says counterattacking soldiers are driving
Vietnamese troops out of country (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 5-78-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Ed supports hands-off stand taken by US in current mil operations between
Cambodia and Vietnam.  Notes '75 departure of US troops from SE Asia unleashed
torrents of nationalistic enmity that had been frozen by colonialism for more
than century.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 6-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Vietnam reptdly releases Amers Cornelia Dellenbaugh, Charles Affel and Leland
Dickerman aboard yacht Brillig after being held on suspicion of violating
territorial waters and engaging in drug trafficking (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 6-78-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 60 words

Vietnamese forces move deep inside Cambodia and reptdly are within 35 miles of
Phnom Penh.  Reptdly have reached Mekong River and are taking over area around
Neak Leung.  Diplomatic sources believe it unlikely that Vietnam is aiming for
Phnom Penh, but say latest advance appears part of straregy to force Cambodians
to agree to talks on border dispute (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 6-78-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 154 words

Cambodia-Vietnam border war continues to intensify as Vietnamese troops push to
within 50 miles of Cambodian capital Phnom Penh.  Since war broke out in Nov
'77, Vietnamese forces have occupied at least 6 district capitals and are now
within 6 miles of key provincial capital.  Phnom Penh radio says fighting is
concentrated in 3 areas.  In Parrot's Beak area, Vietnamese have captured two
key towns on Highway 1, which is Cambodian Army's key supply route, and are
within 6 miles of provincial capital of Saairieng, in Fishhook area.  Vietnamese
have invaded Memot and Krek and are 12 miles from key Route 13, and in Southern
provinces of Taeko and Kampot, Vietnamese forces have occupied two towns and
have laid seige to two others.  Cambodian radio says Cambodian Army will destroy
Vietnamese.  Vietnamese radio claims its attacks on Cambodia are only a limited
military reprisal against Cambodian raids in area (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 6-78-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 97 words

Article on fundamental reasons for current confrontation between Cambodia and
Vietnam.  Notes expansionism by Vietnam in 17th century was low point of Khmer
empire after attacks by Burma and Siam.  Notes border between Cambodia and
Vietnam was redefined by France, and favored Vietnam perhaps because Vietnam's
pressure against colonial rule was stronger than Cambodia's.  Notes border
demarcation left large minorities of both countries on foreign side of border.
Notes deep-seated ethnic hatred dates to 12th century or before.  Illus of
ancient stone carving at Angkor (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 7-78-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 25 words

Fighting between Cambodia and Vietnam reptdly has stalled, with no evidence to
support repts that Vietnamese troops are threatening Phnom Penh (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 7-78-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Armed conflict between Vietnam and Cambodia reptdly has paused while verbal war
continues.  Vietnamese Army reptdly has occupied Parrot's Beak in Cambodia.
Comparative strength of Vietnamese armed forces noted.  Vietnamese Govt charges
of atrocities by Cambodians noted.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 7-78-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KEVIN BUCKLEY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 39

LENGTH: 14 words

Alan Dawson book 55 Days.  The Fall of South Vietnam revd by Kevin Buckley.
Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 8-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KEVIN BUCKLEY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Frank Snepp book Decent Interval.  An Insider's Account of Saigon's Indecent
End.  Told by the CIA's Chief Strategy Analyst in Vietnam, revd by Kevin
Buckley.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 8-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS BUTSON and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 11 words

Fighting between Vietnamese and Cambodian forces revd.  Map (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-1-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 126 words

Cambodian Govt asserts that troops have destroyed 5 Vietnamese divs since Sept,
with about 30,000 Vietnamese casualties reptd.  Vietnam charges that 2 Cambodian
bns have occupied number of places on Vietnamese side of southern border.
Charges Cambodian attacks have increased since beginning of yr and that areas
have been occupied despite strong resistance.  Analysts say Cambodian claims
appear to follow tradition of wildly exaggerated battle repts.  Cambodian repts
have put number of dead and wounded Vietnamese at 18,000, against 309 Cambodians
killed and 600 wounded.  Fighting reptdly has waned, with Vietnamese reinforcing
positions without advancing further.  Sources specifically deny assertions that
troops have reached Mekong River (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-78-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 26 words

Cambodia says it has driven Vietnamese forces from Parrots's Beak area.  Western
and Thai analysts discount Cambodian battle repts as exaggerated (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 9-78-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 127 words

US natl security affairs adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski says Vietnamese-Cambodian
conflict is 1st instance of 'proxy war' between USSR and China, int, CBS-TV
program Face the Nation.  His comments are 1st by high-ranking Carter Adm
official on fighting since Cambodia broke relations with Vietnam.  Brzezinski
reptdly gives more weight to global nature of conflict than most analysts, who
believe conflict was initiated by Cambodia to rectify what they consider to be
erroneous delineation of borders and to defy Vietnamese.  Amer intelligence
sources say there is no evidence to back Vietnamese and Cambodian charges that
either is using Soviet or Chinese advisers in field.  Illus of Cambodians living
in France protesting against Vietnamese mil action (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 9-78-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 32 words

US State Dept spokesman Hodding Carter declines to endorse US natl security
adviser Zgibniew Brezezinski's view that Cambodian-Vietnamese conflict is 'proxy
war' between China and USSR (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 10-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 54 words

Cambodia radio repts country has defeated Vietnam in border war.  Thai
intelligence sources say Vietnamese troops ar entrenched well inside Cambodia.
Cambodian radio accuses Vietnam of conducting invasion aimed at overthrowing
leadership.  Vietnam contends fighting is over Cambodian incursions into its
territory (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 10-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID K SHIPLER

SECTION: Page 8, Column 2

LENGTH: 105 words

Tass takes issue with US natl security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski's assertion
that fighting between Vietnam and Cambodiais 1st case of 'proxy war' between
China and USSR.  Contends current conflict is causing 'sincere anxiety' in USSR.
Official press commentaries in both countries have made clear China's support fo
Cambodia and USSR's backing for Vietnam.  Cambodians have charged that USSR is
supplying advisers to Vietnamese Army.  Phnom Penh radio reptd that 2 blond
Caucasians were killed in Vietnamese tank and persons speaking Russian had been
heard on mil communication circuits.  Vietnam has rejected allegations (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 10-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 11, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES BARRETT RESTON

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

James Reston comment on Carter Adm difficulties in assessing repts from Cambodia
on 'planned' massacre of tens of thousands of people and 'systematic' effort by
Cambodian Govt to wipe out upper and middle classes.  Notes Egypt is only
non-Communist country having diplomatic relations with Cambodia and officials
are virtually under house arrest.  Holds situation raises fundamental question
for world and UN.  Comments on current conflict between Cambodia and Vietnam and
possibility that it may be proxy war between USSR and China.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 11

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 12, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 146 words

Thai and Western analysts reptdly believe Vetnam has achieved mil objection of
incursion into Cambodia and reduced Cambodian forces in eastern region to
virtual impotence.  Goal reptdly was to counter mounting succession of Cambodian
raids into Vietnam border areas to prove Hanoi's readiness to meet force with
force because it was not necessary to prove its preponderant mil superiority in
manpower, equipment and ability to conduct large operations.  Vietnam stepped up
goal to destroy Cambodian forces when Cambodia refused to transfer conflict to
diplomatic sphere and broke relations on Dec 31.  Sources believe continuing
Vietnamese mil presence may achieve Vietnamese goal well beyond original pol
objective and new goal may include overthrow of Cambodian leadership, headed by
Communist Party head and Prime Min Pol Pot.  Illus of Cambodians in Thailand.
Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 12-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 13, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 209 words

Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min Vo Dong Giang, in conversation with Western
journalists following news conf, Bangkok, indicates Vietnam will not move from
present occupation of significant areas in Cambodia unless Cambodian Govt agrees
to negotiate.  Analysts believe Vietnamese strategy aims at posing sufficiently
credible mil threat to Phnom Penh either to force Cambodians to negotiate undre
pressure or wait for debilitating effect of destruction of Cambodian army and
Vietnamese occupation of border region to take hold.  Giang reiterates offer to
negotiate.  Suggests strongly that there are no Vietnamese soldiers in Cambodia.
Amb Vo Van Sung, in Amsterdam, denies presence of Vietnamese troops and
describes mil action as protective.  Giang spoke at conclusion of series of
official visits to SE Asian countries by Foreign Min Nguyen Duy Trinh.  Omission
of Singapore, 5th nation in ASEAN, is believed to be result of strain between 2
countries over Singapore's refusal to return 4 Vietnamese who hijacked plane and
landed in Singapore.  Trinh presents image of Vietnam eager for friendly
relations with all SE Asian nations, despite differences.  Talks in Indonesia,
Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand stressed trade and econ cooperation (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 13-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY WILFRED G BURCHETT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 3

LENGTH: 98 words

Wilfred Burchett article says liberation struggles in Vietnam, Angola and
Mozambique show that people can only be persuaded to take to arms when
repression reaches intolerable levels and all other avenues of change have been
closed.  Says liberation struggles are bound to be protracted, but tend to be
successful if aims reflect aspirations of overwhelming majority of people.  Says
what distinguishes these conflicts from other forms of transfer of power is that
they were undertaken for sake of the oppressed.  Says they will be decisive
models for developing struggle in S Africa.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 15

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 24 words

Natl security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski contention that conflict between
Cambodia and Vietnam is proxy war between USSR and China revd (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 15-1-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 22; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 110 words

Article on visit by Amer women's delegation to Vietnam.  Delegation consisted of
Marilyn Clement, Center for Const Rights dir, Vinnie Burrows, actress and poet,
Marie Sanchez, Cheyenne Indian tribal judge, Sally Benson, affiliated with
Clergy and Laity Concerned, and Judy Lerner, reading specialist at Hastings, NY,
elementary school.  Lerner had visited Hanoi in '71 as part of 3-member peace
delegation.  Recent visit was to compare pol centers in Hanoi and Saigon,
measure postwar reconstruction and be int on Amer attitudes toward Vietnam.
Changes in lifestyle in pre- and post-war Vietnam and differences between Hanoi
and Saigon noted.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 15-2-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 81 words

Substantial progress reptdly is being achieved in Thai effort to negotiate with
Cambodia over border dispute in light of intensified conflicts Cambodia is
having with Vietnam over same issue.  Thai frontier reptd quiet after long
succession of border raids by Cambodian troops.  2 incidents in southern sector
are attributed by informed Thai sources to Cambodian troops, unwilling to be
transferred to Vietnamese front, staging local raids to prive that they should
not be shifted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 15-3-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 93 words

State Dept announces that US Coast Guard and coastal service of Cuba will draft
agreement on traffic in Straits of Florida, as part of series of 'small steps'
to improve relations between US and Cuba.  Agreement between coastal services
will also provide communications link hoped to prevent incidents involving
seizure of US vessels by Cubans when they stray in Cuban waters.  Review of
'small steps' in US relations with Cuba and Vietnam, such as allowing
Cuban-Americans and Vietnamese-Americans to send funds to close relatives in
their homeland (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 15-2-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 23 words

Vietnamese press agency says twice as many foreigners visited country in '77
than in '76.  Lists countries tourists had come from (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 16-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 5

LENGTH: 100 words

SEC charges that Price Waterhouse & Co allowed clients Continental Mortgage
Investors and National Telephone Co to make false and misleading statements to
public investors for 2 years.  Continental was 2d-largest US real estate
investment trust before filing for bankruptcy in '76.  National Telephone leased
and supplied telephone equipment for connection with regulated systems until '75
bankruptcy petition.  SEC asserts Price failed to follow generally accepted
auditing practices in its work for 2 firms.  Price agrees to consent order, but
maintains SEC is unwarranted in filing complaint (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 17-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD B DU BOFF

SECTION: Page 32, Column 5

LENGTH: 27 words

Richard B Du Boff lr on US natl security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski's belief
that dispute between Vietnam and Cambodia is proxy war between China and USSR.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 17

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 36 words

Dinh Ba Thi, chief Vietnamese delegate to UN, takes exception to US natl
security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski's remark characterizing
Cambodian-Vietnamese border fighting as proxy war between China and USSR (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 17-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 19, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 78 words

Patricia M Derian, Asst US Sec of State for Human Rights, visits Vietnamese
refugee camps in Thailand in preparation for testifying in Washington, DC, on
Adm proposal for long-term program to allow further Indochinese refugees into
US.  Derian, after visiting camps, calls for refugees' removal as soon as
possible.  Declines to commit herself or Adm to specific proposals for speeding
refugee departure or increasing number of refugees US is willing to take (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 19-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 19, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Yacht Brillig, with Amers Elizabeth Anne Dellenbaugh, Charles Affel and arrives,
Singapore, after being detained for 3 mos in Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 19-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 19, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 103 words

People's Repub of China, in apparent gesture of support for Cambodia in border
conflict with Vietnam, sends Teng Ying-chao, widow of late Prime Min Chou
En-lai, on visit to Phnom Penh amid speculation that she has been sent to
mediate dispute.  Cambodia has demanded that Vietnam withdraw all troops before
any negotiations start.  Ying-chao is accompanied by Han Nien-lung, sr Deputy
Foreign Min and specialist on SE Asia.  Trip suggests that China is not
concerned that Vietnam might press offensive to capital city.  Troop advance
reptdly has stopped near Neak Luong, 35 mi from Phnom Penh.  Ying-chao por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 19-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 21, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Vietnamese Govt, in statement from ed in official newspaper Nhan Dan read in
English over Hanoi radio, says Cambodia leaves it no choise but to resort to
'legitimate self defense' and 'righteous counteractions' in border conflict.
Observers say statement presages intensified mil action by Vietnam.  Radio
announcement says Cambodia shelled outskirts of Tay Minh and Chau Doc and places
in Mekong Delta (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 21-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY LLOYD ETHEREDGE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 37 words

Prof Lloyd Etheredge lr on ex-CIA analyst Frank Snepp's book Decent Interval, on
failure of US experts during final days of Vietnam war, contends such failures
are aspects of what psychologists call 'groupthink' syndrome.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 22

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

Fox Butterfield assessment of Cambodian-Vietnamese border conflict.  Notes
Chinese relations with Cambodia.  Assesses traditional role China has played in
area.  Notes hostilities between Vietnam and Cambodia and rivalry between China
and USSR, which supports Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-2-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

Article on continued flow of refugees from Vietnam.  Notes refugees currently
leaving by fishing boat to seek asylum abroad represent cross-section of
southern Vietnam's cities.  Says most rural refugees are from coastal villages
and are at least part-time fishermen who either own or work on boats.  Major
reason for leaving is sense that Govt is making life too harsh or dangerous and
appears to be long-lived.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-2-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 118 words

Thai officials are concerned that slow movement of more than 100,000 Indochinese
refugees, principally from Vietnam, to countries of permanent asylum is leading
regional govts to adopt measures to halt inflow.  Number of drownings of
refugees have been reptd from Malaysia and Thailand.  Officials rept
increasingly hostile attitude toward Cambodians who have been in country for
considerable period.  Many have disappeared into Thai prisons as suspected
Communists and are being held under harsh conditions for indefinite periods.
Asian countries want US to assume refugee responsibility.  US effort has been
slowed because of difficulty in finding Amer sponsors and complexity of
screening process (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-3-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 152 words

Swedish, Finnish and Danish Ambs, following official 2-wk visit to Cambodia that
was arranged before current conflict between Cambodia and Vietnam, say Phnom
Penh resembles 'ghost city' with useless currency lying in sts after Communist
rulers blew up state bank.  Diplomats were accompanied by Tanzanian Amb in
Peking and Iraqui Amb to Vietnam.  Ambs decline to discuss details of talks with
Deputy Prime Min Ieng Sary and chief of state Khieu Samphan.  Say there were no
signs of war in capital.  Danish Amb Kjeld Mortensen says he and colleagues were
told current population was 20,000, but it appeared to be much less.  Finnish
Amb Pentil Suomela says apparently many people are brought into city in mornings
and taken out again in evenings.  Says there were no buses or mail or telegraph
services.  Swedish Amb Kaj Bjork says authorities told him there are no plans to
rebuild or recreate Phnom Penh (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 23-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 24, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY PAMELA BLAFER LACK

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

Pamela Blafer Lack article on differences in ways in which Vietnamese and Amer
cultures perceive soc mores.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 24-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 25, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 138 words

Mistreatment of Vietnamese refugees seeking asylum in southern Thailand mounts
at alarming rate as Govt becomes annoyed that rest of world, particularly US, is
not taking refugees out of country at rate faster than that at which they
arrive.  Prime Min Kriangsak Chamanand, in NY Times int on Dec 28, assured that
Thai policy, based on Buddhist principles, does not allow denial of right to
land.  Witnesses say officials refuse some boats to land, forcibly pushing boats
and passengers out to see, jail others for 'illegal entry' and plunder
belongings.  Multiple rape and other personal abuses reptdly have taken place.
Action by US Immigration and Naturalization Service special asst Michael Harpold
to prevent Thai authorities from forcing boat back to sea noted.  Harpold
guaranteed that US would accept refugees (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 25-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 27, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Refugees arriving in Lamsing, Thailand, say Cambodians have penetrated into
southwest Vietnam, inflicting heavy casulaties and forcing evacuation of Ha
Tien, Vietnam.  Vietnamese troops reptdly remain in Parrot's Beak region of
Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 27-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 28, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 53 words

Izvestia commentator Vladimir Kudryavtsev accuses US of instigating
Somalia-Ethiopia and Cambodian-Vietnam conflicts.  Says US is using 'bourgeois
nationalists turned extreme chauvinists' and 'traitors to natl liberation
movement' in 'unprincipled' drive to achieve worldwide domination.  Denounces
Sec Vance (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 28-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 29, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY SARAH DIAMONDSTEIN

SECTION: Section 22; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Sarah Diamondstein, member of Westchester Women for Peace, comment on Judy
Lerner's Jan 15 article on role of women in anti-Vietnam war movement.  Notes
work of orgn aimed principally at internatl disarmament and end to nuclear arms
race (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 29-2-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 29, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 120 words

Former non-commissioned officer in S Vietnamese Navy who arrived in refugee
camp, Lamsing, Thailand, describes operations and orgn of resistence group he
says he belonged to until he fled country.  Rept is thought to be only 1st-hand
acct of resistence groups.  Officer says he was farmer on Phu Quoc Island until
escape and heard from officers of group that similar bands are active on
mainland.  Says group conducted surveillance of Communist troops and
psychological warfare, served as liaison between resistance and population and
recruited combat forces.  Says most of members are former officers and enlisted
men of S Vietnamese armed forces and majority had been hiding in jungle since
fighting ended in '75 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 29-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 29, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Internatl Rescue Com to sponsor citizens' comm that will visit SE Asia in Feb to
study Indochinese refugee problems and especially Vietnamese 'boat people'.
Chmn Leo Cherne says 12-member comm will be headed by himself and William J
Casey, former US Econ Affairs Under Sec (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 29-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 29, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

Vietnam accuses Cambodia of renewing border attacks at Phung Xoai hamlet,
killing 2 persons and burning houses (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 29-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 30, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 2

LENGTH: 92 words

Pres and Mrs Carter welcome more than 400 guests to White House reception to
celebrate 10th anniv of reopening of Ford's Theater.  Carter personally welcomes
Eartha Kitt who has not been at White House since '68 when she gave her
outspoken views against Vietnam War to Lady Bird Johnson.  Speaker Thomas P
O'Neill Jr and wife Millie are on reception line.  Guests include Henry Fonda,
Cliff Robertson, Lorne Greene, Melba Moors and Vincent Price.  Price, James
Whitmore, Delores Hall and Linda Hopkins each perform segment of show they are
in (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 30-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 31, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY PETER ARNETT

SECTION: Page 27, Column 2

LENGTH: 23 words

AP correspondent Peter Arnett comment on 10th anniv of Tet Offensive.  Recalls
Saigon, Vietnam, scene at start of Vietcong attack (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 31

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 31, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY RON KOVIC

SECTION: Page 27, Column 2

LENGTH: 15 words

Ron Kovic comment on 10th anniv of Tet Offensive.  Recalls war experiences.
Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 31

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 31, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 17 words

Cambodian radio broadcast says its troops have eliminated all Vietnamese troops
from country (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 31-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 31, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 199 words

Carter Adm has started discussions with Congress over intention to sell Morocco
aircraft for use against Algerian-backed Polisario guerrillas.  Sources note
that prospective deal is response to concern by Morocco, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and
Iran that US is not acting against Soviet penetration of Africa.  Adm officials
disclose plans to sell 24 OV-10 armed reconnaissance aircraft designed in '60's
by Rockwell International for Vietnam operations, and 24 Cobra helicopter
gunships made by Bell.  Estimate $100 million cost including spare parts and
training.  Note that some State Dept members voice strong opposition to US
involvement in dispute of Morocco and Mauritania with Algeria over former
Spanish Sahara.  Contend that, in order to permit sale, US will have to rewrite
18-year military agreement barring Morocco from deploying US arms beyond its
borders.  Note that if decision is made, Congress would have 50 days to block
sale.  Background details of Western Sahara dispute.  Pres Carter noted as
reporting to news conf that he expects National Security Council recommendations
soon on sale of planes to Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Israel.  Map of Africa showing
area of conflict (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 31-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 1, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Spokesman for Vietnamese delegation to UN rejects charge that espionage was
committed for his country.  Says indictment represents example of Carter Adm
'hostility' toward Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 32-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 1, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 119 words

FBI arrests Ronald L Humphrey, US Information Agency official, and Truong Dinh
Hung (known as David Truong), S Vietnamese student working as mail clerk in
Washington, DC, on charges of spying for Vietnam.  Justice Dept charges they
conspired with several Vietnamese officials to deliver to Hanoi classified State
Dept communications about US defense and relations with Thailand, Singapore,
Vietnam, China and Ethiopia.Spokesman for Vietnamese UN delegation vehemently
denies charge that espionage was committed for Vietnam.  Asserts charges
illustrate 'continued hostility' toward Vietnam.  Truong is son of Truong Dinh
Dzu, who ran 2d in '67 Vietnam Presidential election.  Photo of Humphrey in
handcuffs (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 32-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 2, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

Ronald L Humphrey and Truong Dinh Hung plead not guilty to charges of spying for
Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 33-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 3, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 24 words

A Andrew Giangreco, atty for accused spy Ronald L Humphrey, claims that
Humphrey's common-law wife has son being held 'hostage' in Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 34-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 4, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 49 words

Vietnam mission rejects US explusion of chief delegate Dinh Ba Thi on charges of
espionage as 'totally unacceptable'.  Says Thi will proceed with duties
'normally'.  Terms action detrimental to normalization of relations between
Vietnam and US.  Calls for support from other UN members (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 35-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 4, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 29 words

US used '47 agreement with UN to oust chief Vietnamese Amb Dinh Ba Thi on
charges of complicity in espionage.  Stipulation in agreement relating to UN
delegates noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 35-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 4, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 73 words

Amer officials familiar with espionage charges against USIA employee Ronald L
Humphrey and Vietnamese Truong Dinh Hung feel both men passed secret Amer
documents to Vietnam in effort to obtain leniency for Truong's relatives still
in Vietnam and for son of Humphrey's common-law Vietnamese wife.  Humphrey's
successful efforts to get his common-law wife and 2 of her 3 children released
from Vietnamese jail and flown to US noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 35-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 4, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 66 words

US orders Vietnam's chief UN delegate Dinh Ba Thi to leave US because of alleged
complicity in espionage case involving Ronald L Humphrey and Truong Dinh Hung.
Vietnamese UN delegation responds that Thi will continue to carry out his duties
at UN.  Terms action harmful to Vietnam-US relations.  State Dept sources say
Thi's visa could be deported under terms of '47 agreement with UN (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 35-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MICHAEL WRIGHT, THOMAS BUTSON and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 18 words

Comment on expulsion from US of chief Vietnamese UN Amb Dinh Ba Thi on charges
of espionage.  Thi por (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 36-0-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

US State Dept weighs legal steps to effect expulsion of Vietnam's chief UN
delegate Amb Dinh Ba Thi.  Thi, indicted by grand jury on charges of espionage,
has refused to heed request to leave US (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 36-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

Vietnam protests ouster of UN Amb Dinh Ba Thi by US.  Says charges are
fabricated, and are gross offense that jeopardizes normal activities of other UN
members.  Says charges demonstrate that US desire for normalization of ties with
Vietnam are 'mere words'.  Foreign Min Nguyen Duy Trinh sends lr of protest to
UN Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim.  Charges US with setting 'dangerous precedent'.  Thi
takes formal action asking UN to investigate case.  Confers with Cypriot Amb
Zenon Rossides, chmn of UN com responsible for relations with US.  Thi por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 36-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Vietanam offers Cambodia 3-point border peace plan, including prov for internatl
supervision of border area.  Cambodia claims Vietnamese forces, tanks,
helicopters and Soviet MIG jets struck into Cambodian territory few hrs after
plan was announced.  Proposal calls for immediate end to all hostile mil action,
Hanoi conf at which peace treaty would be signed an agreement on internatl
guarantee and supervision (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 36-2-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 68 words

Marcos Sibley Jr receives second conviction, in Seattle, Washington, for
hijacking United Airlines airplane en route from Reno to Seattle in '72,
demanding $2 million in ransom to aid war-crippled children in Vietnam.  After
first conviction and sentencing to 30-year prison term, Federal appellate court
ordered new trial stating Sibley had not had proper hearing on mental competency
to stand trial (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 37-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 86 words

Phnom Penh, Cambodia, radio broadcast, ignoring Vietnamese proposal calling for
establishment of demilitarized zone on borders of both countries, continues
harsh condemnation of 'Vietnamese aggressors'.  Vietnam also suggested internatl
supervision and guarantees of truce agreement and calls for meeting in Hanoi,
Phnom Penh or border site to conclude treaty.  Cambodia apparently is unwilling
to accept proposal and there is possibility that proposal might be groundwork
for renewed Vietnamese mil action (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 37-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 27 words

US State Dept spokesman says he hopes that recall of Vietnamese delegate to UN
will not affect talks on normalization of relations between US and Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 37-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY KATHERINE TETSCH

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 101 words

Vietnam's chief UN delegate Dinh Ba Thi receives order from Hanoi to return
home, as he repeats intention, during interview, to defy US order to leave.
Claims he is being called home because US interference made it impossible for
him to function as chief delegate.  Asserts that he intends to confront US
officials to deny allegation of espionage and to challenge US right to order him
to leave.  Maintains he has third-world and Communist bloc support in UN.
Incident raises question of whether UN Committee of Host Relations is empowered
to deal with issue.  Photo of Thi and brief career details (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 37

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 8, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 75 words

Vietnam war hero Tom Sheff, who turned himself in to police on drug charge in
Tallahassee, Fla, is released after serving 2 months of 2-year sentence.  Was
first arrested and sentenced in '72, but after court appeals expired, law
officers forgot to take him into custody.  Thereafter Sheff graduated from
college, got married and started a business, but then decided to turn himself in
so that prison sentence would not be hanging over his head (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 39-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 8, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 82 words

US officials say they tried unsuccessfully to talk with Hanoi's UN repr Dinh Ba
Thi before ordering him to leave US because of his alleged involvement in
espionage.  Plan to rebut Vietnamese conplaint that Amers did not consult them
in advance of expulsion order.  UN Com on Host Country Relations to meet to give
Thi opportunity to speak before he leaves for Hanoi.  Case involves Amer Ronald
Louis Humphrey and Vietnamese Truong Dinh Hung, accused of passing govt papers
to Hanoi (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 39-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5

LENGTH: 20 words

Cambodia repts repelling major Vietnamese border attack and scorns Vietnamese
cease-fire call.  Casualty rept (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 40-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 96 words

Analysis of border dispute between Vietnam and Cambodia notes Vietnam is finding
itself in situation where it has not won decisive victory and has to consider
application of more force, with accompanying risks, or try new diplomatic tack,
because Cambodia took extraordinary step by severing diplomatic relations.
Notes Cambodia has maintained high level of aggressiveness in propaganda against
Hanoi regime.  Notes fighting has inflicted heavy casualties on Vietnamese army
and has diverted army from reconstruction and border population from agr
production tasks (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 40-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 10, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Vietnam denounces US for ordering expulsion of Dinh Ba Thi, its UN delegate.
Soviet bloc, Cuba and third-world nations concur with Vietnam.  US tells UN com
that it acted against Dinh on basis of 'precise evidence of his personal
involvement' in espionage (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 41-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 10, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 37 words

Vietnam accuses Cambodia of responding to peace proposal by launching heavy
border attack.  Reiterates peace proposal.Statement reptdly may have been made
as justification for renewed Vietnamese thrust into Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 41-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 10, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 124 words

Pres Carter reportedly approved surveillance by television of United States
Information Agency employee Ronald L Humphrey and Vietnamese native David
Truong, arrested on spying charge.  Incident was apparently first instance in
which an American citizen was subjected to secret observations by TV.  Atty Gen
Griffin Bell signed authorization for surveillance, notifying Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence he was doing so.  Adm officials say Carter decided
case was serious enough to permit special surveillance measures without
obtaining court warrant.  President has authority to do so under executive order
issued by Pres Ford.  Television surveillance noted as recent addition to
counterintelligence instruments used by US Govt (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 41-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 4

LENGTH: 30 words

US Labor Dept sets new compliance revs to ensure that Fed contractors in NYC
area do not discriminate in hiring mentally and physically handicapped and
Vietnam war veterans (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 42-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 23 words

Dinh Ba Thi, chief Vietnamese delegate to UN,leaves US.  Charges expulsion will
impede normalization of Vietnam relations with US (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 42-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 74 words

Justice Dept says Pres Carter approved TV surveillance of Ronald L Humphrey at
his USIA office in effort to reassert exec authority in espionage cases
involving natl security, statement on legality of Carter's action.  US Dist Ct
Judge Albert V Bryan Jr issues restraining order to keep US from expelling Dinh
Ba Thi, Vietnam's UN repr, to permit attys for Humphrey and Truong Dinh Hung to
learn if Dinh would testify in their trials (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 42-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 4

LENGTH: 12 words

Dinh Ba Thi, Vietnamese UN repr expelled by US,arrives in Paris (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 43-0-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

Aerial shortcut through Laos and Vietnam, closed since Communist victory in
Indochina in '75, will be reopened Mar 23 '78.  US, Taiwanese and S Korean
airlines will be barred.  Shortcut reduces by 1 hour flight between Bangkok
(Thailand) and Hong Kong.  Laotian press agency says overflight fees up to $250
a flight will be charged.  Airline sources estimate fuel savings at up to $1,000
a flight (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 43-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 14, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY PETER L BERGER

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

Peter Berger comment on evidence that US apparently is ignoring what he sees as
obligation toward Vietnamese 'boat' refugees.  Contends US extricated itself
from Vietnam war as callously as it was waged.  Holds it is apparent that
abandonment of those who trust US is becoming a habit in that he feels certain
that US will abandon Taiwan and its inhabitants in same manner.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 45

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 14, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY PETER BERGER

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

Prof Peter Berger article scores US contemplating establishing normalization of
relations with China at expense of Taiwan.  Likens abandonment of Taiwan to
abandonment of S Vietnam.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 45

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 15, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY WARREN WEAVER JR

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 96 words

Atty Gen Bell says Justice Dept will file civil suit against former CIA employee
Frank W Snepp 3d for allowing book about his CIA experiences to be published
without prior clearance from agency.  Says Snepp and every other agency employee
signs contract promising to submit for prepublication censorship anything they
write after leaving.  Says lawsuit will represent 1st time Justice Dept has
invited full legal test of that contract.  Snepp's book, Decent Interval,
describes intelligence activities during Vietnam War.  Book was published by
Random House.  Bell illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 46-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 17, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

Excerpts from Haldeman book The Ends of Power, in which he gives his version of
break-in and cover up.  Discusses Henry Kissinger, and recalls Kissinger's
discovery that Russia was installing nuclear naval base in Cuba, his dealings
with Soviet and Chinese diplomats and his backing of Christmas bombing of North
Vietnam.  Gives his acct of how Kissinger was named State Sec.  Illus of mobile,
nuclear missiles of type deployed by Soviet Union.  Nixon, Haldeman and CIA Dir
Helms illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Text 48

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KIRK HONEYCUTT

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

Kirk Honeycutt article on making of film Coming Home, about Vietnam veterans.
Script author is Nancy Dowd and dir is Hal Ashby.  Producer Jerome Hellman and
actress Jane Fonda and partner Bruce Gilbert comment (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 25 words

V Canby article on films about Vietnam war, including Heroes, Rolling Thunder,
The Choirboys, The Boys in Company C and Coming Home.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 3

LENGTH: 66 words

Hanoi press agency repts that Vietnam is using special rehabilitation schools to
retrain its street children who lived life of 'unrestricted disorder'.  Saigon
War invalids and Soc Affairs Service are carrying out extensive efforts to
locate such children.  School reptdly began at end of war in '75 when welfare
authorities began placing children in special programs in Bihn Chanh dist (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-3-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 172 words

Calif had its highest population gain in '76, 204,000, reaching 22 million
total.  35% of newcomers are young, predominantly in 20-24 age group.  17%
population rise in rural areas reflects migration of young and soaring home
prices and rising taxes in metropolitan areas.  Some 80,000 legal aliens settled
in state in '76, most from Mexico but others from Korea and South Vietnam.
Industrial states in East are largest source of new Californians, with about
25,000 from NY, while 8,000 Californians migrated to NY.  Many recent migrants
noted as better educated than before.  Newcomer is quoted as criticizing
California youth for materialism, drug use and delinquency.  Migration has
increased unemployment.  Calif unemployment rate is 7.3%, 1 point higher than
national average.  49% of women work compared with 8% average
nationally.Newcomers cause traffic and school congestion.  Details of Calif
population changes over years.  Illustration of New York migrants Darlene Tymon
and Erin McGill running on Calif beach (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 50

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY JANICE DUREN

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 32 words

Lr from Janice Duren of Clergy and Laity Concerned says charges against Humphrey
and Truong seem greatly exaggerated.  Hopes case will not hamper process of
reconciliation with Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 51

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 23, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 37 words

Navy Sec W Graham Claytor Jr scheduled to present Medal of Honor posthumously to
widow of Capt Michael J Estocin.  Estocin is Navy pilot lost and presumed killed
in bombing raid against N Vietnam nearly 11 yrs ago (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 23, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Vietnamese Govt, in radio broadcast apparently aimed at China, charges that
'imperialists and internatl reactionaries' have armed Cambodia and are behind
Cambodian refusal to negotiate border conflict with Vietnam.  Attack seems
likely to exacerbate further strained relations between Vietnam and China and
lessen chances of China's acting as mediator in dispute.  There is no immediate
response from China (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ANN CRITTENDEN

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 225 words

Profile of embattled Agency for Internatl Development (AID) and interview with
its administrator, former Ohio Gov John J Gilligan.  Gilligan denies rumors he
is resigning, although some sources suggest that Administration is trying to
make him scapegoat for its own reluctance to commit vast new resources to
unpopular cause of foreign aid.  Gilligan attributes continuing disaffection
among staff to his efforts to institute management controls to former chaotic
situation, including curbing spendthrift ways of personnel abroad and diversion
of foreign aid for corrupt purposes, such as black market, and shake-up
top-heavy personnel, pared down to 6,000 from 17,600 at height of Vietnam war by
elimination of youngest and most promising employees.  Byliner notes that
numerous foreign aid experts in and out of Govt blame agency's troubles on
Gilligan himself, for frequently denouncing agency in public and giving
policymakers impression that agency could not manage significantly larger
foreign aid program.  Gilligan supports Sen bill introduced in Jan '78 by late
Sen Hubert H Humphrey to centralize all foreign aid into single agency reporting
to Pres, a bill which is seen as certain to eventually pass.  '49-'80 chart of
actual and estimated foreign aid assistance as percentage of GNP and breakdown
into public and private sources (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 57

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 19, Column 2

LENGTH: 65 words

5 Vietnamese refugees, who rowed small boat across Gulf of Siam from Phu Quoc
Island in 14 days, arrive in Songkhla, Thailand, refugee camp after spending 6
wks in Thai prison for illegal entry.  Group, made up of 2 teen-age girls, 2
teen-age boys and 24-yr-old man, are surprised by questions of why they wanted
to leave Vietnam.  Say most of people they know want to escape country (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 57-1-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 22 words

Vietnam, Laos and Thailand agree on joint Mekong River development.  Communique
urges internatl orgns to help finance effort (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 57-1-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY PETER L BERGER and JEROME A COHEN

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 32 words

Prof Jerome A Cohen lr scores Feb 14 article by Prof Peter L Berger that
compares US intentions to abandon Taiwan in favor of establishing relations with
China to its abandoning Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 58

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

Ed scores Carter Adm handling of Frank Snepp case, in which Govt filed civil
damage suit against Snepp, a former CIA analyst, for publishing book without
prior clearance from agency.  Says Govt has duty to protect important secrets,
but also to protect freedom of speech.  Says CIA might be spared damage of
surprise disclosures if it were allowed to see in advance all books having
secret information, but not allowed to censor material.  Says Govt approach
offers no ideas for solving problem (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 58

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Ed on civil damage suit filed against former CIA employee Frank Snepp by CIA for
Snepp's publication of book charging that US bungled its withdrawal from S
Vietnam.  Holds that Govt is confronted with its duty to try to protect
important secrets and its const responsibility to protect freedom of speech.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 58

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY ROGER WILKINS

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

Roger Wilkins reviews events of '68, noting Kerner Report predicting US would
become nation of 2 societies 'separate and unequal' was just one element in year
which has been described by William Manchester as 'the year everything went
wrong'.  Cites details surrounding assassinations of Rev Martin Luther King Jr
and Robert F Kennedy, protests over Vietnam War, and civil rights movement (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 58-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 90 words

Article on symposium on Vietnam war's '68 Tet offensive held at Univ of NC,
Chapel Hill.  Notes only few hundred of univ's 20,000 students and faculty
attended symposium, which was sponsored by Univ's Curriculum in Peace, War and
Defense.Comments by Gen William C Westmoreland, former CIA dir William Colby,
former middle-level policymaker Morton Halperin, retired Army Col turned
historian Herbert Y Schandler, longtime Govt expert on Vietnamese Communism
Douglas Pike and former Washington Post correspondent Peter Braestrup.  Illus
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 58-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 158 words

Chinese Communist Party leader Hua Kuo-feng addresses National People's
Congress, formally outlining China's new commitment to rapid economic
development, higher living standards and more enriching cultural life.  Cites
economic modernization goals, foreign trade and worker incentives as areas which
need improvement, and indicates China will take stronger position regarding
liberation of Taiwan.  Criticizes Vietnam for its border clashes with Cambodia,
repeats earlier statements that Cultural Revolution ended with arrest of Gang of
Four in '76, and holds primary task will be to continue nationwide campaign
against followers of radicals.  Hua's comments do not indicate who will be named
prime minister by Congress, which is also expected to fill vacancy in its own
chairmanship, but Hua, who currently holds post, and Teng Hsiao-ping, party
deputy chairman, are considered likely candidates.  Photo of opening session of
Congress (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 58-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY GEORGE SHINE and GEORGE SHINE

SECTION: Page 32, Column 5

LENGTH: 20 words

George and Helen Shine lr disputes Janice Buren's Feb 20 lr on US Govt's
continued hostile attitude toward Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 59

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 32 words

US Navy posthumously awards Medal of Honor to Capt Michael J Estocin, pilot who
was listed as missing in action for more than 10 yrs in N Vietnam but was
declared dead only 3 mos ago (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 59-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 3, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY FRANK SNEPP

SECTION: Page 25, Column 2

LENGTH: 132 words

Article by Frank Snepp explains why he published book about CIA activities in
Vietnam without getting clearance from agency.  Claims that his efforts to
express dissatisfaction internally were spurned.  Holds that agency officials
who signed same secrecy oath he signed broke that promise themselves by giving
press self-serving accts of US withdrawal from Vietnam.  Recounts his efforts to
discuss his book with CIA Dir Turner, whom he claims leaked untrue stories to
press about him.  Says Turner is nervous that some of 820 'surplus' officers he
is dismissing will follow his, Snepp's, lead and publish books.  Suggests that
CIA set up 'dissent channel' for officers to air their complaints without 'going
public'.  Says firm rules should govern 'official leaks' by ranking officers
(L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 62

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 8, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JEAN THORAVAL

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Article by Agence France-Presse reporter Jean Thoraval on battle at Thuong
Phuoc, Vietnam, between Vietnamese regulars, provincial forces and local
militia, and Cambodian insurgents.  Thoraval was in group of 3 French
correspondents who covered action.  Says Cambodians have disorganized peasant
life and Vietnamese Army, contrary to some repts, apparently is on defensive.
Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 67-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 9, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 21, Column 5

LENGTH: 116 words

Anthony Lewis on former CIA Dir William E Colby's proposed legis to protect
intelligence secrets.  Notes Colby now urges narrow criminal statute covering
only intelligence sources and techniques 'vulnerable to termination or
frustration by a foreign power if disclosed' and limiting prosecution to
personnel who have signed secrecy agreements.  Says such a law would protect
journalists or other 3d parties from prosecution.  Says passage of such a law
would help rid Pres Carter of embarrassment of Govt suit brought against Frank
Snepp for publishing book about CIA activities without prior agency clearance.
Calls Colby's suggestion a good step toward total reform of espionage laws (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 68

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 9, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DEIRDRE CARMODY

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Frank Snepp files ct papers contending that suit brought against him by Justice
Dept violates 1st Amendment guarantee of freedom of speech.  Govt is suing him
for publishing book, Decent Interval, without prior clearance from CIA.  He is
represented by Harvard Law School Prof Alan Dershowitz and ACLU.  John Russell
of Justice Dept says Govt is testing secrecy oath Snepp signed when he joined
CIA (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 68-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 9, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 37 words

Vietnam renews demand that US provide econ aid for postwar reconstruction.
Deputy Foreign Min Hoang Bich Son, addressing UN Econ and Soc Comm for Asia and
Pacific meeting thanks those countries that have given aid (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 68-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 12, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOHN M LEE

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 123 words

John Lee sees international reaction to US Vietnam policies in '68 reflected in
international monetary system.  Reviews gold rush of '68 in which massive demand
for gold bullion overwhelmed dollar, threatened economic chaos and ultimately
ended system of fixed currency exchange rates.  Notes creation of 'paper gold'
(Special Drawing Rights) was intended to create new form of liquidity to finance
expanded world trade which would not be dependent on finite supply of gold metal
or deficit currencies of Britain and US.  Points out that ongoing currency
crisis prompted formal recognition of present system of floating rates.  Notes,
after decade, efforts to phase out gold and phase in 'paper gold' are still
unfulfilled.  Cartoon (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 71-3-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 13, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 4

LENGTH: 30 words

Random House ad scores Govt for suing Frank Snepp, former CIA analyst who
published book without prior agency approvel.  Accuses CIA of trying to
undermine 1st Amendment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Advertisement 72

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 14, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

Int with Robert W Komer, Defense Sec Brown's adviser for NATO affairs.  Recalls
his work as head of pacification program in South Vietnam.  Says program worked,
but what failed was Vietnamese Govt.  His illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 73

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 15, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

US Army Acting Asst Sec Charles R Ford recommends that those who served in
Vietnam be memorialized soon with plaque at Tomb of Unknowns because no unknown
from Vietanm war has been found to occupy crypt.  Tells HR Veterans Affairs
Subcom that Army still hopes that Vietnam unknown will be selected.Success in
identifying remains of those who died cited as reason no unknown has been found.
Ford notes 2,348 servicemen have not been accounted for (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 74-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 15, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 56 words

US Asst Sec of State Richard C Holbrooke says US remains 'unequivocally ready'
to establish diplomatic and trade relations with Vietnam but not under
conditions imposed by Hanoi.Says negotiations are bogged down over Vietnamesee
insistence that normalization of relations be preceded by US commitment to
provide econ assistance (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 74-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 16, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 6

LENGTH: 84 words

Defense Sec Harold Brown, testifying before House Civil Service Committee,
supports Pres Carter's Civil Service reorganization plan, including its
controversial reduction of across-the-board preference for veterans.  Contends
that laws giving veterans preference for Federal jobs have become 'perpetual
entitlement' causing 'unwarranted distortion' in Federal job system.  Points out
that Pres Carter's proposals would focus help on those who most need it, Vietnam
veterans and handicapped veterans (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 75-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 16, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

Article on drastic transformation Vietnam has made in less than 3 yrs after
hostilities and contrast between north and south.  Thousands of acres, abandoned
because of war, are again cultivation and many roads are under repair, new elec
pylons rise in countryside and hopes are being built in war-torn areas.
Bureaucracy reptdly has not slowed hwy construction, rural home development and
farming.  Most of hundreds of bridges between Hanoi and Saigon have been
repaired.  Agr apparently has been nearly abandoned because of Cambodian raids
along 250-mi strip between Ha Tien on southern coast and Xa Mat.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 75-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 16, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Article examines Philippines bolstering its efforts to strengthen its share of
control of Spratly Islands that are also claimed by China, Taiwan and Vietnam.
Importance of islands, believed to have large oil deposits, discussed.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 75-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 17, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 114 words

Senate approval of Panama Canal neutrality treaty seen as vital symbolic triumph
that Pres Carter desperately needed to strengthen his prestige abroad and to
prove his leadership at home.  For the nation, it symbolizes another
retrenchment of American power in post-Vietnam era.  Disapproval would have
crippled Carter's ability in dealing with Latin America, negotiating with USSR
and his participation in this Spring's economic summit.  White House officials
hope that approval will produce a turnaround in Carter's public image, which
according to recent polls has fallen below that of Presidents Eisenhower,
Kennedy, Johnson and Nixon at the same stage of their presidencies (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 76-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 17, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 32 words

Cambodian leaders reptdly are ready to negotiate solution to Vietnamese border
conflict if Vietnam agrees to respect natl independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 76-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 18, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 6

LENGTH: 52 words

Vietnamese troops reptdly battle 1,700 Cambodian troops who have seized several
stragetic hills overlooking port of Ha Tien, Vietnam.  Repeats demand for
immediate Cambodian withdrawal.  Rept, telling of 4th consecutive day of
fighting, indicates battle was going poorly for Vietnamese in initial stages
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 77-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 19, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 51, Column 5

LENGTH: 56 words

Justice Dept obtains revised, 7-count indictment in spy case against Ronald L
Humphrey and Truong Dinh Hung, who are accusd of funneling secret documents to
Vietnam.  New indictment replaces 1 count of conspiracy to transmit natl
security information to a foreign power with lesser charge of conspiring over
'classified' documents (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 78-4-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 19, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HAITCH

SECTION: Page 41, Column 5

LENGTH: 39 words

Follow-up article on William Calley Jr, convicted of murder of 22 civilians at
My Lai, Vietnam.  Notes Calley currently lives in Columbus, Ga, and occasionally
works at father-in-law's jewelry store.  Mayor Jack Mickle comments (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 78-5-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 20, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 37 words

Cambodian Prime Min Pol Pot says dispute with Vietnam is over border issues and
proposals to form Indochinese fed of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.  Says he
opposes fed because it would reduce Cambodians to minority (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 79-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 21, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 61, Column 1

LENGTH: 135 words

Sup Ct agrees to decide whether public figure who contends that he has been
victim of libel has right to examine state of mind of reporters and editors who
prepared account to which he objects.  Case involves '73 segment of CBS TV
program 60 Minutes, but underlying issues are likely to have profound effect on
virtually all news reptg.  In this case, Anthony Herbert, former Army lt col,
sued CBS producer and reporter for defamation, contending that had portrayed him
as 'liar' by casting doubt on his contention that he had protested atrocities to
his superiors in Vietnam.  Producer of rept is Barry Lando and reporter is Mike
Wallace.  US Dist Judge Charles S Haight Jr ruled that Lando must answer almost
all questions about his state of mind to establish whether malice was involved
in final rept (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 80-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 23, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM L SAFIRE

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 197 words

William Safire argues that US foreign policy is formulated not by Cabinet
members but lower-ranking aides and blames these underlings for foreign policy
long on sternness and short on decisive action.  Names David Aaron of Natl
Security Council and Asst State Sec Richard Moose, former protegees of VP
Mondale and Sen William Fulbright, respectively, as main spokesmen for
'disengagement, withdrawal, accommodation'.  Mentions Anthony Lake, who 'ghosts'
Sec Cyrus Vance's speeches and who left NSC in '70 after Cambodia incursion, as
hand responsible for Carter Adm's nonrecognition of internal settlement in
Rhodesia.  Cites William Quant of NSC as engineer of Middle East policy as well
as Asst State Sec Harold Saunders, whom he describes as former aide to Henry
Kissinger.  Interjects that Kissinger's recent defense of Israeli Prime Min
Menachem Begin is prelude to Kissinger's running for Sen Jacob Javits's Sen seat
in '80.  Also points to 'Mondalite' Lynn Davis of Defense Dept, 'Brookingsite'
Barry Bleckman at Arms Control agency and 'Kennedyite' Bob Hunter at NSC, as
examples of men of influence in Carter Adm who are 'products' of Vietnam war
countermovement (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 82

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 24, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 52 words

Bank of America representative Louis Saubolle asserts proposed industrial
projects of Eisenberg Group would present largest involvement in Vietnam by
Western enterprises since end of war.  Eisenberg Group head Shaul Eisenberg's
business activities in Israel, Far and Middle East, and Latin America noted (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 83-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 24, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 130 words

Eisenberg Group is negotiating with Vietnam for several projects valued at $600
million.  Is Western multinational organization specializing in investment and
development projects in Third World.  Executive Jay Friedman indicates obtaining
financing for projects remains severe problem, noting that Vietnam will need to
secure combination of commercial credit and governmental aid.  Group is headed
by Austrian national Shaul Eisenberg, is registered in Panama and maintains
offices in Israel and in European, Asian, African and South American business
centers.  Possible Eisenberg Group projects include $150-million thermal power
plant, $100-million hydropower installation, $125-million integrated glass and
soda ash plant and $100-million of agricultural tractor imports (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 83-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JULIE SALAMON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 122 words

Profile of Sikorsky Aircraft Division of United Technologies Corp finds company
turning around, after disastrous post-Vietnam lull, with lucrative Black Hawk
Army helicopter contract, which will bring in $4.5 Billion over 10 years, and
with development of sleek new S-76 helicopter for booming civilian market.
Credits role of pres Gerald J Tobias, brought in by United Technologies chmn
Harry Gray for his marketing skills.  Notes that Tobias has brought company back
from dismal $246 million in revenues in '76 and $280 million in '77.Discusses
new advertising and promotion efforts that company has instituted to court
civilian market.  Details maneuvers in attaining '76 Army contract.  2 photos of
Black Hawk helicopter (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 85-6-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 44 words

Vietnam News Agency says country will abolish last traces of private enterprise
and but out the few remaining capitalists.  Saigon's People's Com issues
detailed statement outlining intention aimed at ending speculation, black mktg
and hoarding of goods (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 85-7-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 112 words

Veterans Administrator Max Cleland, finishing his first year in office as
youngest administrator in agency's history, reports VA intends to focus its
attention on 20% of Vietnam-era veterans who have not readjusted to civilian
life.  Notes he has been urging Congress to provide funds for new psychological
services and expanded alcohol and drug abuse treatments, but holds effort will
be 'low key' to reduce stigma of institutionalization and presumption that such
vets are sick.  Details of Cleland's accomplishments in past year cited,
including agency reorganization, upgrading of equal employment opportunity
effort, and computerization of benefits information (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 89-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM F FARRELL

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 104 words

Israelis debate situation in southern Lebanon as UN peace-keeping force moves
in.  Early Israeli withdrawal seems unlikely and some observers express concern
over development of a 'Vietnam-like quagmire'.  Ability of 4,000-man UN force to
patrol area effectively and prevent its use by PLO terrorists is doubted.
Israeli Defense Minister Ezer Weizman and Chief of Staff Lt Gen Mordechai Gus
say that Israel will not tolerate return of guerrillas to Lebanese enclaves from
which they conducted military operations against Israel.  Lebanese Christians
express disapproval of replacement of Israeli forces with UN troops (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 89-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DAVID K SHIPLER

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 128 words

David Shipler analyzes themes of discord undermining Soviet-American relations.
Sees conflicting military and ideological issues as basic divisive features,
compounded by disagreement over concept of detente.  Contends Russian concept of
detente focuses solely on issues of arms control and trade, and excludes any
expansion of interest in third world.  Sees lack of rapport between Soviets and
Pres Carter evidenced in Soviet complaints that Pres Carter's foreign policies
are shapeless and contradictory.  Discusses unsuccessful attempts by both sides
to link unrelated issues to gain political leverage.  Recalls that Nixon Adm in
'72 effectively separated issue of American military activities in Vietnam from
issue of negotiating arms treaty with Soviets (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 89

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JOHN VINOCUR

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 163 words

Third Bertrand Russell international tribunal begins hearings in Frankfurt, West
Germany on '72 exclusion order issued by Bonn Gov, which denies public sector
jobs to people deemed disloyal to West Ger Constitution.  About 4,000 people,
mainly leftists, are estimated to have been affected by order.  Self-appointed
tribunal 1st met as War Crimes Tribunal in '67 at Stockholm to consider alleged
US atrocities in Vietnam.  Tribunal met again in '73 to inquire into torture in
Latin America.  West German political leadership and leftist segments have
denounced purpose of tribunal.  Participants of 28-member tribunal include
British Labour MP, Josephine Richardson, former Irish Republic Min of Health, Dr
Noel Browne, Italian Communist official, Lucio Lombardo Radice, and New York
lawyer, Elliot Taikeff, who is only American on panel.Portuguese officer, Otelo
Saraiva de Carvalho, who is also a tribunal member, has been forbidden by
Portuguese authorities to attend (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 89-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 31, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY ALEXANDER CASELLA

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Alexander Casella comment on vast differences between Cambodia and Vietnam.
Notes that while Vietnam has 'southern' and 'northern' currencies, Cambodia is
only nation without currency.  Notes that while Vietnam encourages some private
ownership, Cambodia seems to have eliminated it entirely.  Outlines diplomatic
differences.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 90-78

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 31, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY MARRO

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 133 words

Atty Gen Bell says he will consider easing secrecy contracts signed by some Govt
employees if Fed cts decide Govt has right to enforce these contracts, int.
Says he might insure that prior revs of books by employees would be done in
timely fashion and by outside agency.  This would eliminate situations in which
former CIA agents have to submit book critical of CIA to that agency's own
officials, who might intentionally delay clearance.  Bell's comments are made
day before Justice Dept goes to ct in its suit against Frank Snepp.  Bell
confirms that his dept questioned ex-Pres Nixon about whether he ordered FBI to
use illegal break-ins and wiretaps to locate radical Weather Underground members
in '70s.  Says Nixon denied giving such order or knowing such techniques were
being used (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 90

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 2

LENGTH: 44 words

Fed Dist Judge Oren R Lewis refuses to grant Justice Dept plea for summary
judgment against Frank Snepp for writing book on CIA without agency approval.
Indicates he will rule that case should go to jury.  Ruling seen as setback for
Govt case.  Case revd (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 91-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ANNE FREMANTLE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 6

LENGTH: 40 words

Anne Fremantle lr expresses hope that no US money will be spent on refugees made
by Israel's incursion into Lebanon.  Points out Israel should provide aid for
these people and US should help refugees it created in Vietnam during war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 92

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY LEONARD S SILK

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 266 words

World Bank Pres Robert S McNamara discusses achievements as head of bank for
decade, changing relationships between industrialized and 3d world countries,
economic interdependence, human rights and US role in World Bank, interview.
Holds that only way to successfully attack poverty in poor countries is to
increase production in those countries and offers instances of World Bank action
in such cases.  Argues that most fundamental of human rights are rights to
minimum acceptable levels of nutrition, health and education, but stresses that
World Bank charter prohibits its intervention in civil rights controversies of
nations.  States that any future loans to Vietnam would be based solely on
economic considerations.  Criticizes US Cong for placing narrow restrictions on
bank lending policies based on narrow domestic economic or political interests.
Asserts that World Bank could not function without US participation.  Urges
establishment of world food grain reserve to combat predicted widespread famine
throughout world in '80's.  Concedes that US farm interests will oppose this
stockpile because of its inhibiting effect on prices.  Concludes that his
greatest satisfaction in 10 years has been growing recognition of economic
interdependence among nations, while greatest setback has been widespread
confusion on meaning of interdependence and lack of communication between rich
and poor nations.  Photo of McNamara, map of world and '64-'77 charts of World
Bank loans to Sahara countries, Asia and Pacific, Latin Amer and Caribbean and
Eur, Middle East and North Africa (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 92

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

US Govt specialists suggest that USSR and Cuba may find pacification of Eritrea
region of Ethiopia more difficult than driving Somali forces from Ogaden region.
1 unnamed specialist estimates that at least 25,000 troops, and possibly more,
are needed to pacify region, which could become 'Soviet Vietnam'.  Specialists
concede that deployment of Cuban forces in Eritrea will create difficult
problems for US and other countries (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 92-4-

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 91 words

Church World Service, arm of Natl Council of Churches, ships 10,000 tons of
wheat, much of it donated by Amer farmers, from Houston, Tex, to Vietnam.
Sponsors criticize Carter Adm for continued lack of normal relations with
country.  While Govt usually provides disaster relife funds for shipping costs
of humanitarian aid, it has declined to do so for Vietnam shipments.  Orgn paid
$800,000 in shipping costs after State Dept turned down request for aid.  Exec
dir Paul MacCleary says $1.6 Million was raised to pay for wheat and shipping
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 94-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 5, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 4

LENGTH: 30 words

Deminex, West German co, signs agreement with Vietnam for offshore oil
exploration.  France's Elf-Aquitaine and Italy's AGIP are also searching for oil
off Vietnamese coast (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 95-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 71 words

Description of antipersonnel weapon known as cluster bomb notes device consists
of several small bombs housed in large canister.  Repts canister explodes after
release from aircraft, and smaller bombs then explode individually, scattering
napalm instead of shrapnel over wide areas.  Notes bomb was used by US during
Vietnam War, and GB and German air forces have experimented with use of cluster
bombs against tanks (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 98-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 146 words

Carter Adm officials disclose Israel used US-supplied cluster bombs, which
scatter small bombs or shrapnel grenades, during its March attack on southern
Lebanon, despite unpublicized '52 agreement to use weapon only during full-scale
war and only against well-entrenched emplacements, such as anti-aircraft missile
sites.  Note Israel has admitted weapon should not have been used and apologized
for action, with some officials seeking to minimize importance of problem and
Sec of State Vance noting crucial issue is whether Israel acted in legitimate
self-defense.  Disclosure that Israelis were using weapon, which was widely
employed by US during Vietnam War, was revealed by US reporters covering March
20 attack on Palestinian camp at Rashidiye.  Reports drew attention of Repr Paul
N McCloskey Jr, who received confirmation of report from Defense Dept officials
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 98-78

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JEROME H SKOLNICK

SECTION: Section 6; Page 127, Column 4

LENGTH: 60 words

Prof Jerome Skolnick takes issue with Eugene Kennedy's March 5 article on late
Chicago (Ill) Mayor Richard J Daley.  Expresses skepticism at Kennedy's
statement that Daley was as opposed to Vietnam War as Sen Eugene McCarthy.
Points out that violence at '68 Democratic Convention in Chicago was preceeded
by other police brutality in city.  Daley photo (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 99

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 11, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY JOHN J O'CONNOR

SECTION: Page 76, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

J J O'Connor revs public TV program Vietnam: Picking Up The Pieces (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 10

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 13, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 90 words

Cambodian radio repts div-sized Vietnamese units have attacked 5 areas along
border but have been repulsed.  Does not mention its own casualties, but says
its forces killed hundreds of attackers.  Mil intelligence sources confirm
fighting in some areas, but say Cambodian claims of Vietnamese casualties appear
to be exaggerated.  Thai and Western intelligence sources say there has been
increase in flow of weapons to Cambodia by People's Repub of China and rept
movement of Vietnamese war planes from northern to southern Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 103-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 14, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

Vietnam denies forces staged large-scale attacks into Cambodia.  Scores Radio
Phnom Penh radio transmission on subject.  Cambodian Prime Min Pol Pot, in
broadcast int, appeals to Vietnamese to accept Cambodian friendship (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 104-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 14, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY JOHN VINOCUR

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 47 words

Red River Rats, Amer fighter pilots who crossed Red River in N Vietnam to attack
Hanoi and Haiphong during war, reunite, Ramstein Air Base, W Ger.  Most agree
that war was 'dumb'.  Majs Greg Ellis and Roger Krause, Capt Gary Sholders and
Lt Col Kenneth Cordier comment.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 104-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 16, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MARVIN KALB

SECTION: Section 6; Page 29

LENGTH: 92 words

Marvin Kalb article on former State Sec Kissinger's current activities.  Notes
he holds 8 paying and 8 nonpaying jobs, and earns estimated $400,000 per yr.
Says he is spending great deal of time writing his memoirs.  Calls book
important part of his ongoing struggle to protect his image and his legacy.
Says Vietnam remains a chronic anguish.  Notes he is still perceived to be man
of power by officials and newsmen alike.  Discusses rumors that he may seek Sen
seat from NY if Sen Javits retires.  Describes typical Kissinger day.  Illus
(L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 106-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 16, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ARNOLD BURNS and STUART SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 113 words

Attys for South-West Africa's Democratic Turnhalle Alliance (DTA) Arnold I Burns
and Stuart G Schwartz letter scores US State Dept's support of South-West Africa
People's Organization (SWAPO) over DTA.  Holds DTA advocates democratic
capitalistic system in which rights of whites and other minorities would be
protected, while SWAPO leans toward socialism and is revolutionary movement.
Claims State Dept fears SWAPO will seek USSR and Cuban aid if US supports DTA
and that US will then face situation similar to Vietnam conflict, but argues
that situation in South-West Africa is different and holds each
communist-western confrontation should be considered separately (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 10

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 19, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 113 words

US Army is giving wider leadership role to noncommissioned officers (NCO's),
granting them 'maximum flexibility' to provide training exercises, and to
exercise authority previously reserved for commissioned officers.  Change in
role concept was spurred by early '70's studies evaluating NCO's problematic
role in Vietnam War, as well as how sergeants in new all-volunteer Army should
cope with post-Vietnam recruits.  Sgt Maj Harmon Hodge, paratrooper who served 3
combat tours in Vietnam, comments that many of new soldiers are married, better
educated and inclined to question orders.  Photo of Sgt Maj Hodge, photos of
troop maneuvers at Fort Bragg, North Carolina (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 109-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 20, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 114 words

War games, which were popular among intellectuals and policy-makers during '60's
but then became associated with Vietnam War, are reptdly becoming popular again,
with specialists believing Carter Adm is beginning to rely heavily on such
analyses to shape national policy.  Computer revolution has given new power to
game theory, and techniques have been refined so that models can simulate and
forecast variety of complicated situations and phenomena.  Details of trend, and
types of games and simulations conducted by Pentagon's Studies, Analysis and
Gaming Agency (SAGA) cited.  Photo of SAGA military crest, and of scientific
adviser Dr Francis B Kapper at SAGA headquarters (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 110-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 64 words

UN General Assembly adopts resolution appropriating $54 million to finance UN
peacekeeking force in Lebanon for 6 months through Sept 18 '78, and apportioning
costs among all 149 UN members.  $10-million shortage is expected, however,
since China, Soviet Union, Ukraine, Poland, Hungary, Mongolia, Laos, Vietnam,
South Yemen and Benin stated they would not pay their assessments (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 112-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY TOM GOLDSTEIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 108 words

American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) experiences dissension and resignation of
key officials, decline in revenue from philanthropic foundations, and loss of
membership from '74 high of 275,000 to present 200,000 level.  Decline in
urgency of civil rights movement and lack of key issue such as ex-Pres Nixon or
Vietnam hurt membership.  Defense of free speech for Nazis, misdeeds by some of
its former officials and hostility from US Supreme Court cause dissension
problems in '77.  Resignation last week of ACLU Executive Director Aryeh Neier
is indication that ACLU leaders have had difficulty adjusting to new political
climate in US.  (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 113-3

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 55 words

Pan American World Airways has applied to Vietnamese Govt for permission to make
daily flights over Vietnamese territory.  Granting of final permission hinges on
whether Carter Adm would allow airline to pay standard overflight charges of
$250 a flight.  Map showing proposed route between Hong Kong and Bangkok over
Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 113-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 24, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Article on Indonesia attempting to normalize frozen relations with China while
insuring that Peking will not attempt to utilize overseas Chinese minority to
subvert Pres Suharto's Govt.  Indonesian officials, including Vice Pres Adam
Malik, comment.  Concern over growing strength of Vietnam noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 114-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY R W APPLE JR

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 73 words

Article on status of former S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu.  He is living in
London, Eng, suburb of Wimbledon, in $200,000 house.  Thieu exiled himself to
Eng in closing days of war.  Speculation on source of his income.  Communist
Govt in Vietnam has asserted that Thieu carried with him 3.5 Tons of gold when
he fled.  Thieu's wife, Nguyen Thi Mai Anh, lives with him, his son is at Eng
boarding school and daughter is in US (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 117-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 28, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 6

LENGTH: 30 words

Le Bao, Vietnamese Amb to Sri Lanka, says Cambodia has stepped up border attacks
on Vietnam and charges Cambodian solders are committing 'barbarous atrocities,'
news conf (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 118-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOHN J O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

J J O'Connor revs public TV programs Vietnam: Picking up the Pieces and Vietnam:
30 Mos After the 30-Yr War (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 12

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY WERNER WISKARI

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 202 words

Der Spiegel correspondent Tiziano Terzani and other reporters are given rare
glimpse of Cambodian refugees in Vietnam, who are said to be living in primitive
camps in conditions of near starvation.  Terzani says thousands have poured into
Vietnam earlier in yr under protection of Vietnamese troops returning from
retaliatory strikes in Cambodia.  Says Vietnamese officials disclosed, during
tour of Cambodian border area, that current policy of accepting refugees from
Cambodia marks reversal of attitude 3 yrs ago.  Quotes some who managed to
return to Vietnam as reptg that all men amoung thousands of refugees sent to
Cambodia were killed by Cambodian Communists.  Far Eastern Econ Rev
correspondent Nayan Chanda says refugees who managed to move away from border
escaped roundup of those sent back.  Estimates Vietnam is training 15,000 to
20,000 Cambodian refugees to fight against current Cambodian rulers.  Prime Min
Pol Pot reptdly told group of Yugoslav reporters that Vietnam plans to include
Cambodia in Indochina fed that would allow Vietnamese to settle in Cambodia by
'thousands and millions each yr, so that within 30 yrs or more Cambodian people
would be turned into a minority'.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 236 words

Henry Kamm examination of Indochina 3 years after departure of US forces finds
Vietnam and Cambodia fighting each other, Vietnam staging air attacks on Laotian
mountain villages and Thailand fighting skirmishes against Cambodian intruders
while non-Communist area nations grow increasingly frightened at unresolved
struggle for power.  Focuses on importance that ancient enmities, revived after
US departure, are having on establishment of alliances.  Examples: old rivalry
between Vietnam and China has made former seek closer ties with USSR.  China has
sided with Cambodia, despite reservations of its Govt.  Thailand fears Vietnam,
and would rather suffer perennial border conflict with independent Cambodia than
contend with federated Cambodia-Vietnam.  Vietnam has shown restraint in
responses to clashes with Cambodia because of its ties to China, but, according
to journalists and international officials who have recently visited Hanoi,
Vietnam has made overthrow of Cambodian Prime Min Pol Pot major objective.
Byliner questions viability of Laos as nation, pointing out that there are
30,000-50,000 Vietnamese forces within its borders and northern tip is under
Chinese domination.  Non-Communist nations, such as Indonesia, Philippines,
Malaysia and Singapore, see Thailand's independence as barometer of Communist
intentions on hegemony.  Illustration, homeless Vietnamese refugees living on
boats (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 12

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 3

LENGTH: 70 words

Vietnam politburo member Nguyen Van Linh, noting 3d anniv of Communist victory
in south, expresses regret that relations with Cambodia are deteriorating and
accuses Cambodian leaders of deliberately provoking border dispute, Hanoi
celebration speech.  Calls for negotiations.  Celebration is attended by entire
Presidium, led by Pres Ton Duc Thang, Communist Party Sec Gen Len Duan and Prime
Min Pham Van Dong (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 121-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY GENE I MAEROFF

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 169 words

Reserve Officers Training Corps is reportedly beginning to make comeback on
several college campuses, after being either totally driven out or diminished
during Vietnam War era.  Steady increase in ROTC enrollment is attributed to
less stringent requirements by Army, Navy and Air Force, and decision to allow
women in corps.  Changes in program include reduction in time spent on drill
field, permission to frequently wear civilian clothes, subjecting freshmen and
sophomores to minimum of regulation, allowing more flexibility in curriculum and
allowing officers to design their own courses.  Training now includes activities
such as mountain-climbing, back-packing and canoeing, making corps more
attractive to outdoor enthusiasts.  Curriculum emphasizes leadership and
management skills, which students believe will help them in civilian job market,
while increase in pay is also considered important factor.  Details of trend
cited.  Photo of Univ of Conn ROTC color guard Sharon Barnes receiving pin (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 12

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BURNHAM

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

Dung Krall, paid agent of CIA and FBI, testifies at espionage trial of Ronald L
Humphrey and Truong Dinh Hung that Truong gave her books, envelopes and messages
to deliver to officials of Vietnamese Communist Govt in Paris.  Humphrey's atty
claims Humphrey gave unimportant documents to Truong in desperate attempt to
normalize relations with Vietnam so that his Vietnamese common-law wife and her
children could come to US (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 122-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 3, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD MILHOUS NIXON

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Excerpts from Nixon's memoirs in which he describes his decision to bomb North
Vietnam during Christmas week, '72.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Text 12

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 3, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 123 words

Chinese official Liao Cheng-chih, head of newly established Overseas Chinese
Affairs Office, issues veiled warning to Vietnam over treatment of Chinese in
Vietnam.  Says China is 'concerned' about recent sudden flight of 'large
numbers' of Chinese in Vietnam.  Did not specify what caused exodus, but
apparently it is linked to crackdown by Vietnamese authorities on merchants in
south, many of whom are Chinese.  Vietnamese, in action aimed at improving bleak
econ and stopping corruption, abolised all private trading in Saigon and ordered
merchants to find new 'productive' occupations.  There are estimated to be 1
million Chinese in area, most of them in Chinese qr, where they have exerted
strong control over area's commerce (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 123-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 3, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 103 words

Summary of 4th of 7 installments from RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon.  In this
installment former Pres Nixon declares that decision to bomb Hanoi area in Dec
'72 was the most difficult one in Vietnam war.  Explains that he could not tell
Americans that bombing was ordered to force Vietnamese to negotiate, because
national pride of Vietnamese would not allow them to accept loss of face in
yielding to ultimatum.  Excerpt underscores Nixon's belief that use of force in
Vietnam produced results.  Includes admission that death of 4 Kent State
students demonstrating against war left him 'utterly dejected' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 123-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 4, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BURNHAM

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 72 words

3d day of espionage trial of Ronald L Humphrey and Truong Dinh Hung.  Fed
prosecutor presents evidence seized in Truong's apt, including 2-page State Dept
memo marked 'top secret'.  Truong's atty Marvin D Miller claims memo was written
in '49 and later declassified.  Says other evidence is available in public
libraries.  Jury hears testimony about series of State Dept cables forwarded by
Truong to officials in Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 124-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 4, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 163 words

Summary of 5th installment in 7-part serialization of former Pres Nixon's
memoirs examines moves toward detente between US and USSR and details summit
conferences with Pres Brezhnev in '72 and '74 in USSR and '73 in US.  Nixon
contends that Watergate scandal 'badly damaged' his ability to counter mounting
opposition to detente in US.  Suggests sense of camaraderie with Brezhnev in
high-level contacts.  Describes 2 stormy sessions in '72 and '73 meetings: in
'72 Brezhnev argued vehemently about Vietnam, indicating that mining of Haiphong
harbor had nearly wrecked summit.  In '73 Brezhnev tried to 'browbeat' Nixon
into imposing on Israel set of 'principles' for Israeli-Arab settlement based on
Arab demands.  Notes that in '73 he presented Brezhnev with Lincoln Continental
auto, which Brezhnev tried out at Camp David and nearly drove off road.  Recalls
that, at San Clemente he insisted on staying at Nixon home and was lodged in
room of Mrs Edward Finch Cox (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 124-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY MARRO

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Attys for former CIA agent Frank W Snepp ask Fed judge to dismiss Govt's civil
suit against him on ground that Govt itself has conceded that Snepp did not
disclose any classified information in his book about CIA activities in Vietnam
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 125-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BURNHAM

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 114 words

Mark W Foster, 1 of defense attys in Humphrey-Truong espionage trial, reads into
record excerpts from State Dept rept which claimed that there was 'little of a
sensitive nature' in documents allegedly transmitted to Vietnam by 2 defendants,
and that damage caused by documents 'was light'.  Foster claims FBI complained
to State Dept that their assessment 'would give the prosecutors trouble,' and
that subsequently State Dept prepared 2d and 3d damage assessment memos.  Donald
W Marsland, supervising FBI official in case, concedes original State Dept
damage assessment 'was not consistent with Mr Christopher's assessment,'
reference to Deputy State Sec Warren Christopher (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 125-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 6

LENGTH: 80 words

State Dept official Kenneth M Quinn testifies in Ronald L Humphrey-Truong Dinh
Hung espionage trial that Govt messages allegedly transmitted to Vietnam could
affect US foreign relations and natl defense.  Acknowledges that he told State
Dept security aide yr ago that compromising of messages would result in 'minor
or no damage'.  Truong attys seek dismissal of indictments because of discovery
of CIA analysis that decision to prosecute 2 men could be 'very close call' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 126-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 7, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Article on seemingly renewed interest in Far East by Carter Adm cites visits to
area by Vice Pres Mondale and natl security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski and
visit to US by Japanese Prime Min Takeo Fukuda.  Relations with China, S Korea,
Philippines and Vietnam and Cambodia discussed.  Cartoon (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 127-6

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 7, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY EASY KLEIN

SECTION: Section 22; Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 81 words

Profile of Stanley Schear, chmn of Westchester County Executive's Committee on
Transitional Services, and leader of campaign to ease the way for community
residences for mentally retarded.  Schear, peace activist during Vietnam
conflict, is scheduled to receive 'Ethics in Action' award of Westchester
Ethical Humanist Society.  Schear's 'go slow' approach is credited with creating
supportive climate toward reducing friction when community residence opens in
Scarsdale in summer (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 127-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 7, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT REINHOLD

SECTION: Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 90 words

W Averell Harriman, who represented US at Yalta, led American delegation at
Vietnam peace talks and has served as confidant of 5 Presidents, has undergone
security check to see if he is loyal enough to represent US at UN disarmament
conference scheduled to begin May 8. State Department spokesman indicates
security check is routine.  Pres Carter has not yet formally announced
Harriman's appointment, though it is understood he will represent US at UN
conference.  Brief note of Harriman's distinguished career.  Photo of Harriman
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 127-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 9, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT J CROMWELL

SECTION: Page 38, Column 6

LENGTH: 72 words

Army Lt Col Robert J Cromwell, retired, letter replies to Apr 29 '78 letter on
issues of armed forces reserves and on military pensions for reservists.  Holds
that US benefited during Korea and Vietnam crises from decisions of
combat-trained officers to remain in reserves despite sacrifice and personal
expense involved.  Holds that small pension provided to these men is small
compensation for many years of devoted service (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 12

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 10, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JOHN WASYLIK

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 154 words

Letter from John Wasylik, Commander in Chief of Veterans of Foreign Wars,
accuses Apr 21 editorial on veterans' compensation of being 'misinforming' and
'perpetuating myths' which Carter Adm would like to promote.  Argues that on
Civil Service tests, veterans do not automatically have points added to their
scores, but must first pass tests and be fully qualified for jobs.  Argues that
promotions, transfers and rehiring are specifically exempt from veterans'
preference act.  Contends Carter Adm proposals would cause more than one-half of
seven and one-half million Vietnam veterans to lose their eligibility in '80,
would allow disabled veterans to be passed over for jobs.  Contends statistics
show that vast majority of women who apply for Federal jobs get them without
much competition from male veterans.  Asks whether 10-year limit on veterans'
preference means that nation's gratitude is limited to 10 years (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 13

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 10, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 94 words

Ronald L Humphrey, former USIA official who is standing trial in Alexandria, Va,
on charges of being espionage agent for Vietnam, says he is a 'proud, loyal
Amer', but admits giving some classified documents and large amounts of other
information to David Truong, Vietnamese student also on trial, in order to win
freedom of Nguyen Tfi Chieu and her children, who are now in Vietnam.  Says
Truong presented himself as effective lobbyist on Capitol Hill for normalization
of relations with Vietnam.  Insists that none of documents involved US natl
defense (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 130-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 10, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 61 words

Hundreds of Vietnamese of Chinese descent besiege Chinese Embassy, Hanoi,
requesting exit visas after Xuan Thuy, member of Communist Party leadership,
invites them to seek visas.Thuy acknowledges that Chinese have left Vietnam,
abandoning industries, cooperatives and schools.  Exodus coincides with
Vietnamese decision to nationalize private business in south (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 130-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 12, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BURNHAM

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

Truong Dinh Hung denies providing Vietnamese officials in Paris and NY with any
material other than such items as Sen speech, Cong record or tech book dealing
with Vietnamese reconstruction, testimony.  Says motive was to 'help bring
Vietnam and Amer together again'.  CIA reptdly once considered attempting to
recruit Truong as undercover agent.  Judge Bryan rules against presenting CIA
assessment of Truong.  US Atty William Cummings declines to comment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 132-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 13, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY SAUL ROSEN

SECTION: Page 22, Column 6

LENGTH: 47 words

Amer Veterans Com chmn Saul Rosen says his orgn supports Pres Carter's proposed
changes in veterans' preferance status for Civil Service, but would make one
modification to allow Vietnam-era veterans one opportunity to use veterans'
preference for initial entry into Civil Service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 13

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 3

LENGTH: 55 words

Dave Koverman, who was blinded in '70 while serving in Vietnam, uses several
electronic gadgets such as path sounder, talking calculator and light probe that
can distinguish colors to help him get around and perform his daily tasks.
Koverman explains how he uses each device to help him compensate for his loss of
sight (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 134-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

More than 150 ethnic Chinese leave Vietnam for Nationalist China (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 134-5

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 36 words

US Supreme Court leaves standing decision denying Quaker conscientious objector
the right, on basis of religious convictions, to refuse to pay part of his
income taxes that he says went to finance Vietnam War (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 136-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 120 words

Truong Dinh Hung, part-time grad student charged with espionage and other
crimes, acknowledges that one of documents he is accused of sending to
Vietnamese officials was marked 'secret,' but says he did not believe it was
secret since subject matter it covered, Amer POW's in Vietnam, had been openly
discussed by HR com, May 15 testimony in Alexandria, Va, trial.  Says he sent
documents not to reprs of Vietnamese Govt, but to eds of Vietnamese-language
newspaper in France.  Says his motive was normalization of relations between US
and Vietnam, a point challenged by Asst US Atty Justin Williams.  Ronald L
Humphrey, former USIA official, is standing trial with Truong, charged with
passing documents to him (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 136-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 18, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 90 words

Heavy border fighting breaks out again between Cambodia and Vietnam, with both
sides stepping up attacks.  New use of armored vehicles by Cambodians and
counter-offensive by Vietnam with heavy air support between Tay Ninh Prov,
northwest of Saigon and Ha Tien, on Gulf of Siam, described.  Vietnam reptdly
has used lull in last 2 mos to replace some of regular forces with paramil units
and guerrillas.  Guerrillas reptdly may have been recruited from Cambodian
refugees in Vietnam camps or ethnic Cambodians born in Vietnam.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 138-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 21, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Prof Walt W Rostow, former adviser to Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, answers
questions on Amer involvement in Vietnam war and its experiences in other SE
Asian countries.  Por (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 141-6

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

People's Repub of China Overseas Chinese Affairs office accuses Vietnam of
maltreatment and mass expulsion of Chinese residents.  Warns country to halt
'erroneous policies'.  Apparent deterioration in Chinese-Vietnamese relations
since China began supporting Cambodia in border dispute noted.  Hsinhua
statement says more than 70,000 Chinese have been expelled in past yr, 50,000 of
them in last 6 wks (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 145-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 26, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY ROGER WILKINS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 118 words

Manpower specialists find Title VII of CETA, which would earmark $400 million of
$11.3 Billion in Fed jobs funds for communities that set up 'private indus
councils' for jobs and training for unemployed minority young people 18 to 24
yrs old and Vietnam veterans, is favored in many areas.  Notes program will
address fundamental issues of how to match skills provided by Govt-financed
training programs to private indus jobs and what would happen to people employed
under CETA after their 12 to 18 mos of subsidized employment expires.  Asst
Labor Sec Ernest Green comments on plan, which is modeled after Natl Alliance of
Businessmen program that has placed 3.5 Million people in jobs in past 10 yrs
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 146-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 27, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY MARRO

SECTION: Page 46, Column 5

LENGTH: 120 words

Justice Dept lawyer Elizabeth Gere, in deposition, says Frank W Snepp 3d was
essentially correct in his assertion that US tried to bribe Gen Duong Van Minh
to run for S Vietnamese presidency in '71.  Snepp made charge in book Decent
Interval which detailed last days of Vietnam war.  Said that after other
opponents of Pres Nguyen Van Thieu had withdrawn from race, then-Amb Ellsworth
Bunker offered bribe to Gen Minh.Said Minh refused after concluding that $3
million offered for his campaign 'was less compelling that the prospect of
assured defeat'.  Gere, in material apparently from CIA rev of recording made of
meeting between Minh and Bunker, says basic rept by Snepp is true.  Bunker
refuses to comment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 147-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HAITCH

SECTION: Page 33, Column 5

LENGTH: 54 words

10,000 tons of wheat, and delegation, sent by Church World Service, an arm of
National Council of Churches, have reached Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.  Wheat
intended for free distribution to schools and hospitals will be milled and
turned into food products in operation overseen by Vietmy, church-labor-civic
committee (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 148-5

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Former Pres Nixon gives party for 300 former POWS and guests celebrating anniv
of release from N Vietnam.  Presents each POW with autographed copy of his book
'RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon'.  Men present Nixon with painting (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 148-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

Record number of 'boat people' fled Vietnam for other countries, primarily
Malaysia and Thailand, in Apr, with number for May likely to be even higher.
2,335 refugees arrived in Malaysia during mo and 835 have been given asylum in
Thai camps.  Reversal of Malaysia's previously inhospitable policy toward boat
people, nationalization of small businesses in southern Vietnam and prevalence
of seasonally calm seas cited as reasons for increased influx (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 148-5

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 31 words

Former Air Force Col George Day, in Quotation of Day during reunion of former
Vietnam POWs, says 'The thing that impresses me most about this group is how
normal we all turned out' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 148-5

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 131 words

Almost 300 former prisoners of war (POW's), reunited for first time since their
release by North Vietnamese 5 years ago, meet in Los Angeles, Calif.  Major
source of wonderment at reunion is fact that, with relatively few exceptions,
POW's from Vietnam War have not had serious physical or mental problems arising
from their captivity.  POW's cite religious faith as major reason for their
ability to survive experience unscarred.  Several POW's describe how experience
of captivity affected them.  Reunion was conceived by former Calif Gov Ronald
Reagan and Dallas millionaire H Ross Perot and was arranged by NAM-POW Inc.
After reunion, several busloads of former POW's visited San Clemente for
cocktail party at home of former Pres Nixon.  Photo of several POW's at reunion
(L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 148-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 139 words

Chinese press agency Hsinhua announces that China is sending ships to Vietnam to
evacuate Chinese residents it claims are being persecuted by Vietnamese
Government.  Announcement gives no indication of when and where ships will go
and whether they will stop at Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, where an
estimated 800,000 ethnic Chinese reside.  Analysts view announcement as another
sign of deteriorating relations between China and Vietnam.  In recent weeks
China has reported that over 83,000 Chinese have fled or been driven across
Vietnamese border and has demanded that Vietnam stop its 'erroneous policy of
ostracizing, persecuting and expelling the Chinese residents'.  Rift between two
countries seen potentially much more damaging for Vietnam and its future and
development and likely to drive Vietnam closer to USSR (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 14

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY BILL MAULDIN

SECTION: Page 13, Column 3

LENGTH: 64 words

Bill Mauldin revives his 2 World War II cartoon creations, Willie and Joe, as
they might be today.  Expresses views through them on today's volunteer army and
amnesty for Vietnam draft evaders.  Suggests that 1 way to get Cubans out of
Africa would be to send more combat troops to Guantanamo.  Cartoon of Willie and
Joe as they might look today.  Old Willie and Joe cartoon (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 14

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 4

LENGTH: 154 words

Congressional survey conducted by Council of Vietnam Veterans shows that 50% of
109 polled congressmen feel that US Government is failing to fulfill its
obligations to veterans of Vietnam war, especially those disabled.  Results of
survey questionnaires, released by Vietnam-Era Veterans in Congress,
organization of 12 reprs and 1 senator, indicate that significant percentage of
those polled have serious reservations about Veterans Administration's (VA)
ability to serve and understand Vietnam-era veterans.  Meanwhile, head of VA Max
Cleland, on ABC News interview program, Issues and Answers, attests to adequate
adjustment of returning Vietnam veterans with statistics, indicating 65% have
used GI bill in some form, 6 out of 10 have used it to attend college,
unemployment rate for veterans between age of 20 to 34 years is 4.5%, and median
income of Vietnam-era veterans is better than that of their peer group (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 14

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 127 words

Chinese fleeing from Vietnam tend to substantiate charges leveled by Chinese
Govt that Vietnamese Govt has harassed them, taken away their property and
forced them to move to uninhabited areas in countryside.  However, they also
suggest that moves by Vietnamese Govt are simply part of a larger plan, which
has also affected Vietnamese themselves, to abolish private business and
relocate middle-class city dwellers in countryside.  Some Vietnamese officials
have apparently taken advantage of implementation of plan to vent old
animosities against Chinese residents.  Most of those fleeing into southern
China appear to be residents of mountainous frontier region or part of Chinese
community of 200,000 in northern half of Vietnam.  Photo of refugees (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 149-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Article on Air Force Major Thomas McLish, former pilot and Vietnam war POW who
spent nearly 7 yrs in prison camps before being released in '73.  McLish has
fulfilled promise that if he ever returned alive he would make something of his
life.  He will graduate from Emory Univ, Atlanta, Ga, as dr specializing in
family practice.  He comments on captivity and future goals (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 150-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 154 words

Vietnam, in statement in Communist Party newspaper Nhan Dan, says it wants to
preserve friendship with China, but charges that China deliberately is
distorting dispute over treatment of ethnic Chinese for nationalist purposes.
Denies Govt has persecuted ethnic Chinese and says false repts about situation
ar being disseminated by Chinese press and TV.  Foreign Min repeats call for
talks, including apparent allusion to statement by China that it wants to send
ships to evacuate Chinese seeking to leave.  Amer reprs of Natl Council of
Churches, on visit to Ho Chi Minh City, say they was no evidence of physical
mistreatment of Chinese, but note streets of Chinese qr of city are
half-deserted, with many shops closed.  Illus, released by Hsinhua, purports to
show med team treating young Chinese woman for wounds received when boat she and
others were using to cross to China was fired on by Vietnamese troops (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 150-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 31, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 166 words

Vietnam renews ambitious program to resettle 10 million people, or 1/5 of
population, in next 20 years by ordering many Chinese of Ho Chi Minh City,
formerly Saigon, to move to uninhabited areas in countryside.  Country has
reportedly relocated 1.33 million people in last 2 years, but program came to
virtual halt after meeting serious resistance in south.  Slowdown prompted
Hanoi, in March, to abolish private business and order many middle-class
residents in south to so-called New Economic Zones, but this crackdown has
angered and frightened many of Vietnam's 1.2 Million ethnic Chinese and has led
to controversy between Hanoi and Peking over Vietnam's treatment of Chinese.
Program is intended to relieve major unemployment problem in parts of south, to
overcome food shortages in north by opening new farmland, to improve police
control of population, and to improve defense by moving settlers to sparsely
inhabited areas near Cambodia.  Details of program cited.  Map of Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 151-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 1, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

Chinese Communist newspaper Wen Wei Pao charges USSR has built guided missile
base in central Vietnam aimed at China.  Accuses Soviet Union of instigating
Vietnam to turn against China and of being behind expulsion of ethnic Chinese.
China has set up refugee camps in 5 provs and says most of refugees, reptdly
totaling 90,000, are being sent to state farms (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 152-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 2, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 90 words

Repr Glenn English, head of Congressional task force on drug abuse, reveals that
virtually all of heroin being used by American military personnel in West Berlin
and more than 65% of heroin used by servicemen in West Germany is delivered with
passive cooperation of East German Government.  Claims during press conference
that use of heroin by servicemen in West Germany is approaching Vietnam levels.
Explains that his facts come from information obtained by Drug Enforcement Adm
from informers, West Berlin police and smugglers (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 153-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 2, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY KENNETH A BRIGGS

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 77 words

Natl Council of Chs delegation on visit to Vietnam.  Says 10,000 tons of wheat
sent by agency was received enthusiastically on May 22.  Under donation terms,
wheat is to be distributed free to schools, hosps and orphanages.  Group leader
Rev Alfred Bartholomew, Ch World Service exec dir Dr Paul F McCleary and Black
Econ Research Center pres Robert S Browne comment.  Delegation members say
Vietnamese officials are eager to normalize relations with US (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 153-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 3, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 115 words

USSR leader Leonid I Brezhnev ends 4-day visit to Czechoslovakia and issues
13-page closing communique, signed by Brezhnev and Czech leader Gustav Husak,
charging US and NATO with interfering in Africa.  Communique, which ignores Pres
Carter's accusations that USSR encourages armed terrorism in Africa, holds USSR
and Czechoslovakia will continue to support oppressed nations of Zimbabwe,
Namibia and South Africa.  Also seeks end to armed provocations on borders of
Angola and Mozambique, lauds successes obtained by Ethiopia, calls for
withdrawal of all foreign troops from Cyprus, affirms support for Vietnam in its
dispute with Cambodia and scores China's militaristic course (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 154-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 4, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 106 words

Editorial outlines conversation between former Sec of State Henry Kissinger and
Sen Daniel Patrick Moynihan in Public Opinion magazine.  Notes Moynihan believes
US is negotiating on arms control agreement with USSR from position of military
and psychological weakness, while Kissinger maintains it is absurd to think of
USSR as stronger in overall assets.  Holds it is dangerous to resurrect logic
used in Vietnam, that aggression by united Communist world must be stopped
regardless of cost in money and lives, and claims it is internationally petty
and domestically provocative to blame Cubans, or cowardice, for US difficulties
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 15

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 4, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KAREN DEWITT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 62 words

Article on decision by US to officially delete Saigon, Vietnam, from Govt
gazetteer and substitute Ho Chi Minh City.  Describes work of US Bd of
Geographic Names, consisting of 9 members, 1 each from Depts of State, Commerce,
Agr, Interior, Defense, Postal Service, CIA, Library of Cong and Govt Printing
Office, who decide on geographical name changes.  Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 155-5

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 6, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 50 words

Vietnam agrees to let Chinese ships pick up Chinese residents in Vietnam who
want to leave.  Foreign Min denies Chinese accusation that country is
'intensively ostracizing, persecuting and expelling' Chinese.  Says Chinese
residents will be allowed to leave after complying with exit procedures (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 157-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 6, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 163 words

China reportedly has started broad new effort to rehabilitate victims of
political persecution and use talents of those purged in '57 'antirightist'
campaign, Cultural Revolution and in '75 and '76 in drive for modernization.
Has reportedly released 110,000 people from detention.  Local officials have
been ordered to give such people back their jobs.  Articles in Chinese press
suggest Government is now concerned with undoing wastefulness of
anti-intellectual thrust of Cultural Revolution, which sent thousands of
professionals to work in factories or countryside.  Restoration program seen as
possible source of problems as workers are forced to give up their jobs to those
who were ousted, and workers fear still another purge.  Chinese press discloses
instances of 'tens of thousands' of cases of torture by radicals.  In related
news Vietnam reportedly has informed China that China may send ships to pick up
Chinese residents in Vietnam who want to go to China (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 157-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 9, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 76 words

Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping, in apparent response to conflict with
Vietnam over ethnic Chinese, says country will reduce assistance to Vietnam.
Accuses Vietnam of maltreating not only Chinese residents but also China
itself.Says Hanoi has expelled 110,000 Chinese residents while pretending they
'escaped'.  Sees no foundation for negotiations.  While Teng did not disclose
nature of aid reduction, he noted aid amounts to $18 million (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 160-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 9, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 194 words

Vietnam is reportedly suffering serious agricultural shortages, chronic
mismanagement, corruption, demoralization and a deteriorating transportation
system.  Industrial production rose 10%-12% in '76 and '77 from very low base,
apparently reflecting recovery from war damage rather than new growth.Exports
rose 41% in '77 to about $300 million but paid for only 1/5 of imports.  Poor
'77 rice crop, 11.3 million tons, almost 18% short of target, is expected to be
followed by another bad crop year.  Observers comment that Vietnamese people
appear to tire easily.  Note that daily rice ration, the staple food, averages
less than a pound.  Inefficiency, clogged ports holding up unloading of ships,
lack of machinery, personnel problems, bribery and corruption are cited among
factors holding up progress.  Construction of $200 million steel mill by French
in Hanoi has been abandoned, and building of Swedish-donated paper mill has had
to be delayed.  Resident of Ho Chi Minh City is quoted as saying Communists have
succeeded in making everyone poor.  Vietnam also noted as involved in unpopular
war against Cambodia and in new confrontation with China (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 16

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 29 words

China rejects call for talks with Vietnam on problem of expulsion of Chinese
nationals.  Says it has been forced to cancel part of aid in order to help those
returning (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 161-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY LINDA CHARLTON

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 68 words

Cambodian Deputy Prime Min Ieng Sary denounces unspecified enemies who he says
have been harassing Cambodians along borders and attempting to invade, UN
speech.  Statement apparently aludes to border conflicts with Vietnam.
Cambodian mission shows film devoted largely to proving charges of aggression by
Vietnam.  Showing was well attended and many in audience appeared to be from
Asian delegations (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 161-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY J ANTHONY LUKAS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9

LENGTH: 25 words

Book Chance and Circumstance.  The Draft, the War and the Vietnam Generation by
Lawrence M Baskir and William A Strauss revd by J Anthony Lukas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 16

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JAMES BARRETT RESTON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 5

LENGTH: 101 words

James Reston reviews Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's recent address to Harvard
graduates.  Assails Solzhenitsyn's suggestion that spiritual bankruptcy and
physical cowardice of US led it to seek end to Vietnam War.  Contends
Solzhenitsyn makes contradiction by arguing that only moral criteria can help
West against Communist strategy, but only US military power and willpower could
have stopped bloodshed in Vietnam War by continuing it.  Agrees with
Solzhenitsyn's criticisms of press.  Maintains Solzhenitsyn is right to complain
that hastiness and superficiality are psychic disease of Twentieth Century (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 16

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 55, Column 2

LENGTH: 70 words

Max Cleland, administrator of Veterans Administration, recently began campaign
urging Vietnam veterans to use GI Bill education benefits before their
eligibility expires.  Focus of campaign will be on 11 states where fewer than
50% of eligible veterans have availed themselves of bill.  States are: Vermont,
NJ, Indiana, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Ohio, Maryland, New
Hampshire, Iowa and Illinois (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 162-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

Havana meetings May 18-21 of 25-member coordinating bureau of 85-member movement
of nonaligned nations revealed serious strains resulting from alleged efforts of
Cuba, Angola and Vietnam to adopt pro-Soviet positions.  Yugoslavian and
Indonesian representatives asserted in interviews that move to expel Cuba might
develop if it continued to behave in an aligned manner.  Moderates among members
also expressed concern over fact that Cuba is scheduled to be host for 6th
meeting of nonaligned leaders in '79.  Details of nonaligned movement noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 162-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 14, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Cambodian Deputy Prime Min Ieng Sary charges Amer and Vietnamese agents helped
foment 3 unsuccessful coups against Govt since '75.  Says Cambodia is willing to
negotiate with Vietnam on border dispute if Vietnam promises to respect
'territorial integrity' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 165-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 156 words

King Juan Carlos and Queen Sophia arrive in Peking.  Welcomed at airport by Chmn
Hua Kuo-feng and Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping.  Illus.  Teng, at banquet,
lauds Spain's history of standing up to foreign aggressors.  Says term
'guerrilla' is Spanish in origin.  Visit is 1st to Communist China by Eur
monarch.  Peking seen seeking to improve relations with W Eur in effort to
strengthen Western resolve against power of USSR.  Diplomats who attended
meeting of Thailand-China Friendship Assn say that Teng speech there accused
USSR of encouraging Vietnam to turn against China as part of Moscow plan for
world domination.  Say Teng blamed USSR for moves regarded in China as campaign
to persecute or and expel ethnic Chinese from Vietnnam.  Say Teng also said USSR
plan is to allow Vietnam to take Laos and Cambodia and to dominate Indochina.
Say Teng hinted that Russians may be using former US naval base at Cam Ranh Bay
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 168-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID P CALLEO

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 2

LENGTH: 103 words

David Calleo article says US efforts to inhibit diffusion of nuclear tech and
control supplies of nuclear fuel appear to mix US desire to curb spread of
nuclear weapons with Amer indus and commercial primacy.  Says US stand is based
on premise that stability depends on there being only 2 nuclear power, USSR and
US, and on US ability and willingness to protect allies without taking econ
advantage of protector's role.  Says this basis has been made obsolete by such
developments as oil crisis, nuclear deterrence capability of GB, France and
China, US withdrawal from Vietnam, Watergate and drift toward Cong Govt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 16

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY IRVIN MOLOTSKY

SECTION: Section 21; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

NYS Repubs endorse East Hampton Town Tax Assessor John Behan to run for NYS
Assembly seat being vacated by Perry B Duryea.  Behan lost both legs fighting in
Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 169-5

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Chinese Amb to Vietnam Chen Chih-fang returns to China because of illness.
Return comes in midst of dispute between both countries over movement of ethnic
Chinese out of Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 169-5

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 19, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY MARRO

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

Govt's civil suit against former CIA officer Frank W Snepp 3d for writing book
about agency activities in Vietnam without receiving prior clearance from agency
to open on June 20 before Fed Dist Judge Oren R Lewis.  Underlying question of
whether Snepp breached contract he signed on joining agency is broader issue of
whether Govt could theoretically use such 'secrecy oaths' as legally binding
contracts to prevent Govt employees from calling public attention to serious
Govt abuses.  Snepp's attys, Mark H Lynch of ACLU and John C Sims, claim Snepp
was required only to submit classified information for rev.  Say Snepp's book
contained no such information.  Snepp por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 170-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 19, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

Assessment of Vietnam Communist leadership 3 yrs after end of war notes it has
remained cohesive despite troubles.  Notes analysts in Hong Kong say country's
major asset in grappling with troubles, including border war with Cambodia,
continued mil and pol involvement in Laos, faltering econ, demoralization and
corruption, is ability to maintain unity.  Problems outlined and role Vietnam
has taken in each noted.  Communist Party Sec Gen Le Duan por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 170-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY WARREN WEAVER JR

SECTION: Section 2; Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 54 words

Sup Ct declines to rev decision clearing way for trial of $1.2 million lawsuit
against 4 Fed officials, 3 prosecutors and 1 special FBI agent, filed by 8
members of Vietnam Veterans Against War.  Veterans were indicted in '72 for
violations of Fed anti-riot laws in connection with protest plans for Repub Natl
Conv (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 171-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

Vietnam radio broadcast says China has ordered it to close consulates in 3
Chinese cities.  Move comes as 2 Chinese ships stand by to begin large-scale
evacuation of Chinese refugees from Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 171-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 66 words

Vietnam denies repts that its forces have invaded Cambodia.  Diplomats and
intelligence sources in Bangkok, Thailand, describe repts as inaccurate and
exaggerated.  Sporadic border fighting comtinues.  Hanoi radio rept asserts that
many Cambodian armed regiments have invaded Vietnam.  Casualty rept.  Cambodian
Amb in Peking Pech Cheang says he knows nothing of new invasion by Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 171-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 21, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 33 words

UN World Food Program reports it plans to send $2.4 Million in aid to Vietnam,
whose rice crop was damaged by plant disease and pests.  Notes aid will help
feed 500,000 people for 2 months (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 172-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 21, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY MARRO

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

CIA Dir Stansfield Turner claims CIA has already been damaged by Frank Snepp's
unauthorized publication of his book, Decent Interval, and that more damage
could result unless Govt wins its suit against Snepp, testimony in 1st day of
hearing.  Fears CIA will appear to 'have no control' over intelligence secrets.
Snepp claims he did not violate 'secrecy agreement' he signed on joining agency
since his book contains no classified information.  Fed Dist Judge Oren R Lewis
is hearing case (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 172-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 21, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 79 words

Nationalist China, alarmed by deteriorating situation in Chinese communities of
Vietnam, quickens evacuation of remaining 1,500 ethnic Chinese in Ho Chi Minh
City who have received Taiwan entry permits.  Refugees arriving in Taipei rept
Vietnam Govt is forcing increasing number of residents of city to resettle in
'new econ zones'.  Comparitively quite attitude of Taiwan in dealing with
Vietnam noted.  Internatl Red Cross is ading China in refugee rescue effort (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 172-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 21, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 153 words

Vietnam charges China's closing of 3 Vietnamese consulates in south is part of
policy that includes support for Cambodia in border dispute with Vietnam.
Analysts in Hong Kong say there is evidence that substantial fleet of Chinese
vessels have been operating in Tonkin Gulf between Hainan Island and Vietnam.
Recent events reptdly have made some diplomats apprehensive about possibility of
armed conflict.  Analysts believe neither country now appears guided by careful
calculation of their own interests.  Chinese Foreign Min spokesman confirms that
Vietnam has been told to close consulates.  Order evidently reflects impatience
with Vietnam in delaying for 18 mos appeal by China that it be allowed to open
consulate in Ho Chi Minh City.  Ironically, Vietnam has announced agreement to
establish Chinese consulate in Oct.  Hong Kong Communist newspapers charge that
USSR is behind many Vietnamese policies (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 172-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 21, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 140 words

Vietnam charges that China's closing of 3 Vietnamese consulates in southern
China is part of policy that includes support for Cambodia in its border war
with Vietnam.  Observers report that substantial fleet of Chinese vessels was
operating in previous week in Gulf of Tonkin between Hainan Island and
Vietnamese coast.  Although it was unclear what kind of ships were involved,
Hanoi reportedly reacted as if they were a military force.  In related news,
Vietnamese Government claims in note to Chinese Foreign Ministry that Chinese
embassy in Hanoi had failed to provide information required before ships
carrying Chinese refugees could land.  Note adds that Chinese ships could stay
in port only 3 days, hardly long enough to do necessary paperwork.  It is not
yet known whether vessels have reached their destinations in Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 172-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 22, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY MARRO

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 61 words

Fed Judge Oren R Lewis says he feels Frank Snepp deliberately and wrongfully
violated 'secrecy agreement' with CIA by publishing book without prior clearance
from agency, and that he did it for money.  Says he will issue his formal ruling
after revg all testimony and evidence.  Mark H Lynch, representing Snepp on
behalf of ACLU, says they will appeal case (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 173-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 23, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 71 words

Defense Sec Harold Brown, in address to Univ of Pacific College of Dentistry
graduating class, asserts there is rekindling of academic community support for
military.  Holds that since end of Vietnam War, Americans have become aware of
need to match USSR's increasing military strength with strong US defense
capability.  Address is one in series of speeches Brown is scheduled to make in
San Francisco (Calif) area (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 174-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 23, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY MARRO

SECTION: Page 8, Column 2

LENGTH: 10 words

Impressions from trial of former CIA agent Frank Snepp (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 174-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 23, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 103 words

Vietnamese Foreign Min says Chinese ships sent to evacuate ethnic Chinese are
being prevented from landing because of 'absurd' demands.  Ships were supposed
to have docked June 20 at Ho Chi Minh City and Haiphong, but apparently have not
been allowed to enter Vietnamese waters.  Vietnam says Chinese conditions
include 1 that Vietnam accept Peking's description of refugees as 'Chinese
residents who are victims of ostracism, persecution and explusion'.  Vietnam
apparently has insisted that refugees be called 'Vietnamese of Chinese descent'
who 'wish to leave Vietnam for China'.  Other Chinese demands noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 174-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 23, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Illus of Vietnam refugees Mrs Nguyen Thi Yen and daughter Hyong as boat people
seeking help 5 mos ago and in Tampa, Fla, apt after sponsors brought them to US.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 174-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

Vietnam assails China for 'procrastination' over departure arrangements for
ethnic Chinese in Vietnam and says 3 ports are ready to handle those departing.
Docking arrangements for 2 Chinese ships sent to Vietnam to ferry Chinese back
appear to be bogged down in propaganda squabble over procedure (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 175-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

Ed says Govt's suit against Frank Snepp, former CIA analyst who published book
without prior clearance from agency, is disturbing because Snepp's book
contained no secrets.  Claims Govt is seeking contractual right to censor
non-secrets.  Lauds suggection made by former CIA Dir William Colby, that
pre-publication rev be available, but not mandatory (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 17

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Vietnam Govt reaction to People's Repub of China's order to close Vietnamese
consulates in 3 cities and clera its diplomats from country after Vietnamese
crackdown that has resulted in 130,000 ethnic Chinese leaving country revd.
Illus (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 176-4

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE HABERMAN and CAROLINE RAND HERRON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

Govt is expected to win its suit against former CIA analyst Frank Snepp, who
wrote book about agency activities in Vietnam without prior clearance from
agency.  Ruling would make it easier for Govt to enforce secrecy oaths with Govt
employees in sensitive jobs (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 176-4

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 28 words

Phnom Penh, Cambodia, radio says country has smashed coup attempt backed by
Vietnam and US CIA.  Says 6 members of Vietnamese Communist Party were arrested
in May (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 176-5

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY TERENCE SMITH

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 120 words

Pres Carter, in visit to Texas, warns his hopes of reducing Fed budget deficit
by $7 billion in '78 are being threatened by several appropriations bills before
Congress.  Also meets with black leaders in Houston, and watches Ft Hood Army
training maneuver, largest display since Vietnam War, which was reduced by half
because of controversy over its $2.1 Million projected cost.  Holds maneuver,
involving 100 tanks, 75 armored personnel carriers and missiles firing 90,000
rounds of live ammunition, was 'impressive'.  Trip is seen as attempt to extend
political favor to Repr Jack Brooks, whose Government Operations Committee is
key to Carter's proposed Civil Service Comm reform.  Photo of Carter with
soldier (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 176-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 28, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 40 words

Hanoi radio says Vietnamese forces have wiped out 2 Cambodian Army bns and
inflicted major losses on other large units during conflicts on Vietnamese side
of border.  Vietnam News Agency repts Cambodian casualty total of almost 160
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 179-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 29, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

Vietnam reptdly begins mil operation against Cambodia, thrusting troops well
inside Cambodian territory and heavy bombing and artillery support, despite risk
People's Repub of China's wrath.  Bulk of fighting reptd north of Parrot's Beak
region (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 180-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 30, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 18 words

Vietnam becomes 10th member of Council for Mutual Economic Assistance with
unanimous Comecon approval (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 181-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 252 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 30, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 6

LENGTH: 55 words

Chinese refugees from Vietnam say USSR experts have installed 3 radar stations
in Vietnam near China's Yunnan Prov and additional Vietnamese troops have been
sent to area.  Say USSR Communist Party officials have discussed Soviet
installations at Amer-built base at Cam Ranh Bay with long-range missiles
pointed toward China (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 181-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
