
                               1 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 1, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

US mil command in Vietnam orders Armed Forces Radio Network there to 'phase out'
record 'The Battle Hymn of Lt CAlley', sent to station from Us by ARmed Forces
Radio and TV SERvice glorifying Lt W L Calley Jr, who was convicted of murder in
connection with alleged '68 massacre in Vietnam; record said to have ranked high
on US popularity charts, particularly in South, but has attracted only marginal
interest in NY area; text of song lyric; enlinted men in Saigon generally
support Calley; 1 wall sign says 'Kill a gook for Calley'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 1, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 40 words

US troops capture strongly fortified bunker complex 27 mi from Saigon after 8-hr
battle; 17 Vietcong soldiers killed, 17 Amers wounded; 2 helicopters lost, 1 in
Central Highlands, 1 in eastern Cambodia; 3 crewmen killed, 1 wounded in crashes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 1, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 4

LENGTH: 84 words

Hundreds of lawyers demonstrate against Vietnam war, rally, city Hall Pk, NYC;
joined by Reprs Paul N McCloskey and Herman Badillo, NYC Bar Assn pres B Botein
and assn ex-pres F T P Plimpton; McCloskey asks lawyers to start debate on
whether Pres exceeded his const powers and should be impeached; Mayor Lindsay,
in s, says war hurts cities by channeling money elsewhere; N Dorsen (ACLU) and
Repr Abzug criticize legal profession; Abzug urges 'agitation' by lawyers; Mayor
Lindsay proclaims Law Day USA

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 1, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 51 words

Sgt Dwight Johnson, shot and killed by Detroit store owner, Charles
Vandendeghem, who said Johnson tried to rob him; Johnson, a Medal of Hon winner
in Vietnam war and an Army recruiter when killed, had been cited for
'unsurpassed heroism' in war and was on convalescent leave following psychiatric
treatment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 1, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 2

LENGTH: 41 words

Ed scores Saigon's eviction order to newsman D Luce; notes his exposure of
'tiger cage' cells in Conson Is prison; lauds his exposure of 'brutality and
hypocrisy of Amer effort' to maintain the Saigon regime; scores Saigon threat to
press freedom

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 1, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

H K Dastur discusses R Southey's 19th century poem on battle of Blenheim during
18th century war of Spanish Succession, which he feels might have been written
about Vietnam; poem depicts suffering and futility of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 1, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 17 words

University Settlement House (NYC) pilot program to help Vietnam war veterans
find jobs discussed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 1, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 2

LENGTH: 71 words

24-hr table tennis match being played in traffic island in Times Sq, NYC, by
wives, mothers and children of men who are prisoners of war or missing in action
in Southeast Asia; Repr Mario Biaggi, match's sponsor, says match is being
played in effort to solicit signatures for petition that will be sent to
Communist Chinese Chmn Mao Tse-tung calling for his help in obtaining complete
list of prisoners held in N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 1, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

N Vietnamese ambush an Amer reconaissance patrol in Ashau Valley, kill 5 Amers,
wound 10

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 1, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 116 words

Pres Nixon welcomes home from Vietnam vanguard of 1st Marine Div, Camp
Pendleton, Calif, with pledge to end war 'in a way worthy of your service';
illus; presents Pres Unit Citation to First Marine Div; pays homage to 29
marines in div who won Medal of Hon, all but 2 posthumously; pledges that war
will end in a way that US goal of a S Vietnam able to defend itself from a
Communist take-over is achieved; says troops have come home with 'mission
accomplished'; says they left Vietnam with the S Vietnamese assuming major
burden of their own defense and soon developing capability for complete defense
without aid of US troops; says troops can continue to be withdrawn at almost a
div a month

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Survey by US agency, Civil Operations and Rural Development Support, shows
hostility towards and fear of Amer soldiers felt by many Vietnamese who live
near US mil bases; surveys made in 5 villages rept many complaints against
soldiers; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 26 words

Bipartisan group of 45 Congressmen introduces legis that would guarantee minimum
unemployment ins benefit for Vietnam veterans of $75 a wk for up to 52 wks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 17 words

Maj W L Miller Jr, West Point grad and Vietnam war veteran, seeks discharge as
conscientious objector

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 119 words

US B-52s attack Ashau Valley sector of S Vietnam where US patrol was ambushed;
additional casualties reptd in ambush are 3 Amers killed, 1 wounded in
helicopter shot down; 2 other helicopters shot down in northern Ashau Valley;
7,752 US aircraft of all types lost since '61; B-52s make 2 strikes in NW corner
of S Vietnam; other small actions reptd; map; US command announces start of
withdrawal of 101st Airborne Div; 4,000 men pulled out of combat status and
started processing for withdrawal soon; Pres Nguyen Van Thieu repeats vow never
to accept coalition with Communists, TV message seen as thrust at Vice Pres
Nguyen Cao Ky who urges that 'people of other side' be allowed to participate in
pres elections

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 2

LENGTH: 23 words

S Vietnamese Govt spokesman denies NY Times rept that writer Don Luce had been
told he could stay in S Vietnam if he supported the Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 160 words

Brookings Institution study concludes that increasing spending under existing
Govt programs and those proposed by Pres Nixon would use up entire normal growth
in tax revenues in next 3 yrs; says new or expanded programs would require
either higher taxes or possibly inflationary deficit spending; analysis of
Nixon's budget and rept on outlook were directed by C L Schultze; study sees no
room in budget for new or expanded programs through '74, but says $17-billion
might be available by '76; criticizes Nixon's insistence that budget be balanced
under full-employment concept; welcomes swing in fiscal '71 budget to actual
deficit of $18.6-billion and approximate balance on full-employment basis; study
estimates that defense outlays, even assuming almost complete elimination of
Vietnam war outlays and continuation of mil posture proposed by Pres Nixon, will
rise from $76-billion in fiscal '72 to $82-billion in fiscal '74 and $88-billion
in fiscal '76

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

M Frankel comment on antiwar demonstrations and Pres Nixon's attitude towards
them; discusses differences between Nixon and his critics; says that,
cumulatively, the protests have figured to some extent in US and N Vietnamese
policy decision; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 47 words

Comment on Ashau Valley operation; S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu seen
wanting to demonstrate that S Vietnamese troops are back on the offensive; Amers
seek chance to 'finish the job' of wiping out enemy supply caches; operation
seen as more cautious affair than Laos operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 17 words

Illus of Communist China outdoor mural that says 'Victory in Indochina War. Kill
American imperialists'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 2

LENGTH: 20 words

Comment on writer Don Luce's exposure of incompetence and cruelty in Saigon and
his expulsion order by Govt; his por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 2

LENGTH: 72 words

Ed takes issue with Pres Nixon's rejection of Hanoi proposal at Paris talks to
discuss fixing of withdrawal date for US forces so as to be able to take up
question of POWs release; notes there is no reference to 'unconditional'
withdrawal; also takes issue with US failure to consider Vietcong offer not to
shoot at Amer troops who refrain from attack; says it could lead to negotiation
of local cease-fire on an experimental basis

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 109 words

J Reston scores militant demonstrators' efforts to block Washington workers from
going to work as ineffective way to end the Vietnam war; says Pres Nixon is more
likely to be influenced by quiet pol action, particularly by voter registration,
than by anything else; suggests antiwar militants engage in pol action such as
regis 18-21-yr-olds rather than st demonstrations; suggests antiwar militants
engage in pol action such as working for Sen John O Pastore bill to control
campaign spending; suggests Nixon Adm responds to pol action and that one such
area is through Sen Jacob O Javits bill curbing his powers of mil action abroad
as comdr in chief

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 5

LENGTH: 62 words

Tom Wicker comment on Pres Nixon's Apr 29 TV news conf; urges exploration by
Nixon of Hanoi offer to discuss withdrawal date and POWs; says some tacit
understanding might be reached which in turn could lead to more substantive
talks about future of Indochina, including the 'chance' of the S Vietnamese
regime's survival for which Nixon now says US is fighting the war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

Legislators in 10 states introduce bills designed to force US Sup Ct to clarify
who is empowered to commit US troops to wars such as in Vietnam; support for
bills is limited in traditionally conservative state legislatures; legis is
pattered after bill signed into law in Mass in '70; bill challenges const of US
involvement in war; some Congressmen have also offered bills designed to limit
war powers of Pres; Sen Javit's bill is most comprehensive

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 44 words

S Vietnamese rept no new contact with enemy in mts around Ashau Valley; most
allied action of last wk was concentrated in 3 critical areas along Laotian-S
Vietnamese border where allies seek to halt infiltration of enemy before rainy
season starts; details; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 35 words

US jet attacks AA position 80 mi NE of demilitarized zone; N Vietnamese troops
reptdly attack dist hq, Dailoc; kill 15 militiamen, wound 53; reptdly withdraw
after several hrs of fighting; leave behind 92 dead

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 135 words

Japanese Finance Min repts that private and govt aid to developing nations rose
44% in '70 to $1.824-billion and totaled 93% of country's GNP; notes total is
near 1% of GNP goal set by UN; Min Aichi notes official development assistance
totaled only $458-million, about 25% of total figure; quantity and quality of
country's aid seen vastly improved in recent yrs while terms of aid remain among
most stringent; average length of loans made in '70 put at 21.6 yrs and interest
rate at 3.59% compared to '69 average for 16 nations composing Development
Assistance Com of 27.8 yrs and interest rate of 2.8%; Mins from Japan,
Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and S Vietnam,
Ministerial Conf on Econ Development of SE Asia, to meet, Kuala Lumpur; Min
Aichi will rept on Japan's aid plans

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

ADA conv resolution urging Cong to impeach Pres Nixon for 'high crimes' in
Indochina describes war as violation of the Const, UN Charter and '28 Treaty of
Paris

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 40 words

Sen Edmund Muskie says Indochina war has caused Amers to lose confidence in
country but says 'it could recapture that sense of excitement about both our
past and our future,' s, Chicago, at celebration marking 180th anniv of Polish
const

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 24 words

Lr says Vietnam war could be over 'before the dawn of another day' if Amer would
unite behind Pres Nixon so that Hanoi would get the message

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 35 words

US Army spokesman in US repts a brigadier gen is under investigation for
allegedly shooting to death 6 Vietnamese civilians as he flew over them in
Quangngai Prov in '68; allegation is made by a helicopter pilot

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 43 words

Sen James W Fulbright says demonstrators' plans to disrupt workings of Govt
jeopardize chances for Sen passage of bill setting troops withdrawal date from
Vietnam; Sen Charles H Percy backs action to prevent revolutionaries from
destroying 'our form of govt'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 270 words

DC police rout 30,000 Mayday Tribe antiwar protesters from their encampment on
the banks of the Potomac in a sudden strike that begins after dawn; decision to
disperse protesters reptdly made by Nixon Adm at meeting attended by Police
Chief J V Wilson and others; youths scatter over Washington by early noon to
regroup in univs, chs and private homes; police control all movements through NW
sec of city; 50,000 protesters who came for rally and rock concert caught by
surprise; many leave for home; others, in a bitter mood, stay in city; 242 held,
mostly for unlawful entry; most held in $300 bail; Mayday leaders renew pledge
to try to stop the Govt because it had not stopped the war; Deputy Atty Gen
Kleindienst is reptdly in charge of over-all security for wk's activities; 1,500
young women march with Vietcong flags and banners for women's liberation; R
Davis, S Peck, T Young, other group leaders says Adm's action will not stop
planned action by group; score Nixon for imposing martial law; 10,000
demonstrators flock to univ campuses including 1,000 to Amer Univ, 6,000 to
Georgetown Univ and 3,000 to George Washington Univ; at least 1,000
demonstrators from nearby Washington, DC, antiwar protest use of Amer Univ
Student Union and dormitories; pres Williams says normal rules will remain in
force but that no action will be taken against uninvited demonstrators; Williams
scores city authorities for not providing accommodations for protesters;
regional groups meet in various locations to plan and train for disruptions; Fed
troops move into city; map shows target areas designated by protesters; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 118 words

US Defense Dept concedes allied forces in S Vietnam destroyed enemy hosps, but
contends such actions occurred because they were not marked by Vietcong;
statement made in reply to variety of war crime allegations made in 41 pubs
summarized by N Sheehan in Mar 28 NY Times Book Rev; in reply to written
questions, denies US and allies withheld med aid from civilians; says they tried
to hold down civilian casualties by avoiding mil action 'beyond that degree
which is necessary for mil purposes as laid down by the rules of war'; says
Amers resettled some civilians in area where they could be better protected;
also cites change in policy regarding civilians in areas where crop defoliants
were to be used

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 16 words

S Vietnam spokesman says Vietnam will observe cease-fire on May 9 on anniv of
Buddha's birth

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 92 words

PRes Nixon urges N Vietnam to accept offer by Sweden to intern POWs for duration
of war; Nixon press sec Ziegler says Nixon noted 'with great satisfaction' press
repts from Stockholm that Sweden would be willing to transport Amer and N
Vietnamese POWs for internment in Sweden; Sweden says such an arrangement
depends on arrangement between US and N Vietnam; Adm does not explain why it
took 3 days for Nixon to comment on Swedish offer or why he relies on news rept
of offer rather than on diplomatic channels; Nixon returns to Washington from
Calif

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Sec Stanley Resor, in Saigon, ending 10-day rev of Vietnamization program, says
while progress is encouraging, 'a difficult period lies ahead' because of
continuing pullout of US troops, news conf; lists figures on troops withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 24 words

About 4,000 S Vietnamese rail workers stage 24-hr strike, 1st ry strike in
nation's history, in move to underline requests for wage increase

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 5, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

Dai Viet Revolutionary party, strongly anti-Communist party in Hue, organized
demonstration Apr 13 against Mayor Le Van Than and caused his ouster on grounds
of involvement with Communists; Mayor considered by many Vietnamese and Amers to
be among most effective, hard-working prov chiefs; party leader H Thuc Ky urges
greater motivation in fighting Communists and corruption; another party official
Prof Le Dinh Cai charges there are Communist infiltrators and agents among the
An Quang Buddhists in Hue

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 5, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 39 words

US air base, Danang, other US and allied installations shelled; US B-52s bomb
enemy infiltration routes across Laotian border; US helicopter gunships
supporting S Vietnamese infantrymen in SE sector of Cambodia kill 13 enemy
soldiers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 5, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 43 words

N Vietnam in effect rejects US proposal that POWs from both sides be held in
neutral country; Sweden has indicated she will accept POWs; Xuan Thuy, in Paris,
repeats that POWs release can only be dealt with after US sets deadline for
withdrawal of US troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 5, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 115 words

Rev C McIntire says his Victory Now in Vietnam March set for May 15 in
Washington will outdo Apr 24 peace rally, news conf; scores Pres Nixon for
withdrawing troops from Vietnam; says US could end war in 6 to 8 wks with
increased mil effort; says Nixon is 'misled by evil spirits'; says teams of
students and clergymen representing his movement will debate left-wing students
at univ campuses; says that his group has invited Nationalist Chinese table
tennis team to visit US; says that if Nixon greets Communist Chinese team, he
will demand that Taiwan players be also greeted; says he will present award to J
Edgar Hoover at Washington rally he plans to counter antiwar demonstrations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 5, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 4

LENGTH: 42 words

White House welcomes 6-yr-old Cathy Frazier, '71 cystic fibrosis poster girl,
and her parents but not their Congressman, Repr D W Riegle Jr, outspoken critic
of Adm's Vietnam policy; visit only took place on condition that Riegle withdraw
as sponsor

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 48 words

B-52 raids increased against targets in NW corner of S Vietnam; map; S Vietnam
protests to Internatl Control Comm against 'intensified and indiscriminate'
shellings of civilian centers by N Vietnam; claims there were 151 shellings in
wk in which 20 civilians were killed and 75 wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 14 words

Vietcong shells Danang, S Vietnam; 16 civilians killed, 4 wounded; 3 soldiers
killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 63, Column 2

LENGTH: 103 words

Dow Chem stockholders oppose, 22 million to 650,000, resolution offered by
group, Med Com for Human Rights of Phila, calling on Dow to change its ctf of
incorporation to preclude its mfr of napalm; co has not made napalm since May
'69; Dr T Tapper, in support of resolution, says majority of Amers do not back
US Govt Vietnam policy and that millions of Amers could not agree with Dow's mgt
view that US Govt represents the will of the people; annual meeting; co declares
3-for-2 stock split and increases dividend by 10" per share; meeting is free of
demonstrations that have marred meetings in previous yrs; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 188 words

Police arrest 1,146 young people for 'unlawful assembly' on Capitol grounds,
apparently ending last major confrontation planned in a 3-wk 'peace offensive'
this spring; protesters had massed on HR bldg steps to demand that Cong ratify a
'people's treaty' with N Vietnam to end the war; failed to disrupt Cong; protest
leaders decide to continue taking to sts in protest; plan march on S Vietnamese
Embassy; DC Appeals Ct affirms lower ct ruling that police acted improperly on
May 3 in arresting individuals in groups and carting them to impromptu prisons
without making specific individual charges; revert to customary procedure of 1
arrest at a time; some Reprs scuffle with protesters; Capitol police initially
refuse to let demonstrators onto Capitol grounds; do so after Reprs Abzug and
Dellums say protesters are their 'guests'; Capitol Police Chief Powell tells
protesters they are illegally gathered and warns them to leave; confusion among
police about specific law that protesters violated noted; Chief Wilson issues
statement assuming responsibility for May 3 order to suspend arrest procedures
and make mass arrests

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 7, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

S Vietnam repts its troops clash with N Vietnamese soldiers near Snoul, kill 72;
repts its jets made heavy attack on enemy troop concentration 15 mi from
Cambodian border on previous day; US helicopters lend heavy support to S
Vietnamese soldiers; US wkly rept; 65 Amer combat deaths reptd, 592 wounded;
details on S and N Vietnamese casualties; map; illus of weary US soldier
resting, W of Ashau Valley

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 7, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 93 words

Amb D Bruce, on basis of N Vietnamese delegate Xuan Thuy's recent withdrawal
statement, says at 112th session of Paris peace talks that there can be no
negotiations on total withdrawal of US troops unless withdrawal of N Vietnamese
troops is also included; N Vietnam, which refuses to acknowledge presence of its
troops in other parts of Indochina, calls US proposal absurd; Hanoi spokesman
denies there were secret contacts between both sides to explore recent Communist
statements; US reprs silent; Hanoi spokesman also links dollar crisis in Eur to
war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 7, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

US Army bulldozers cut through enemy infiltration route from Cambodia to Saigon
areas, Duchue; clear 1,400 acres, knowck down houses; Army officials say
operation is necessary to deny enemy concealment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 7, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 87 words

NY Times correspondent Malcolm W Browne is 1 of 6 foreign correspondents allowed
into E Pakistan for tour with official escorts; repts Gen T Khan estimates that
150 persons were killed in Dacca on night of Mar 25 and that other estimates
were 'wildly exaggerated'; Khan says troops fired on students only when fired
upon first; doubts emergence of guerrilla war of type fought in Vietnam; other
correspondents represent AP, Reuters, Time Inc, Financial Times of London and
Hsinhua, Chinese Communist press agecy agency

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 7, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 4

LENGTH: 180 words

HR Pub Health and Environment Com chmn Rogers announces that he is offering
legis to add $10-million immediately to VA programs for treatment of narcotics
addicts and to require armed forces to treat addicts before returning them to
civilian life; accuses Defense Dept and VA of trying to deal with addiction
problem with '1st aid kit'; estimates that 30,000 US servicemen in Vietnam are
addicted to narcotics; says that Defense Dept has only $2-million in budget for
fiscal '72 for 5 drug treatment clinics established in Jan and 12 more to be
established by July 1; says that additional $10-million will enable VA to go
ahead with plan to establish 12 more clinics and that he plans to seek
$20-million more in future to expand number of clinics to 30; scores HEW Dept
decision to close down Ft Worth drug addiction hosp, 1 of only 2 Fed hosps with
treatment and rehabilitation capability; US Customs Bureau orders intensified
inspection of Amer soldiers returning to US and of packages they send to US from
SE Asia, in effort to stem flood of hard narcotics, especially heroin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 7, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 5

LENGTH: 17 words

Lr asks proponents of US withdrawal to urge N Vietnam to withdraw from other
Indochinese countries

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 7, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 76 words

2,000 to 4,000 protest war in front of J F Kennedy Fed Bldg, Boston; police act
forcefully to keep bldg open; arrest 130 protesters; illus; action culminates 2
days of peaceful protest coordinated by People's Coalition for Peace and
Justice; about 50 hold antiwar protest at entrance of Fed Bldg, Buffalo; 100
demonstrators pelt Ohio State Univ ROTC cadets during mil rev; about 50 antiwar
students end 2-day sit-in at entrances to Kent State Univ ROTC hq

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 7, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 153 words

Justice Dept seeks grand jury probe of Rennie Davis and John R Froines, whom it
charges with conspiring to interfere with Fed workers and to deprive others of
their rights, and probe of Abbie Hoffman by another grand jury; Hoffman freed in
$20,000 bail; his wife says he was beaten by a Washington policeman; announced
antiwar demonstration at S Vietnamese Embassy draws only 60 people; youths kept
away from embassy; outnumbered 5 to 1 by police; 14 held during the day; Davis
says protests are only 'a beginning'; promises resumption; Repr Waggoner scores
Congressmen who support protest; Abzug defends their support; Sen Kennedy
charges Adm 'undermined Const' by forcing Washington police to make mass
arrests, s, Iona Coll, NY; White House repr says arrests violated no rights,
news conf; Superior Ct has been in 24-hr-session each for 4 days processing
arrests; 500 are still in jail; Hoffman freed on $20,000 bail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 8, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 83 words

48-hr cease-fire proclaimed by Vietcong in observance of Buddha's birth begins;
little ground fighting reptd; B-52s bomb some outlets of Ho Chi Minh Trail in NW
corner of S Vietnam; map; 2 US planes reptdly destroy 3 AA guns near Bankarai
Pass; loss of another US plane reptd; over a dozen USMC units numbering 3,085
men taken off combat for withdrawal soon; move will leave about 9,000 marines in
S Vietnam, all of whom, except for some advisers, will be withdrawn by end of
May of in early June

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 8, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 176 words

Cambodia quietly shelves consideration of Nationalist China's proposal that they
exch embassies, delays sending permanent diplomatic mission to Taipei; moves
linked to uncertainty created in Cambodia by possibility of improved US-Chinese
relations; Govt official says permanent mission will probably be based in Taipei
but not at this time; notes that although Communist China closed its embassy in
Pnompenh after overthrow of Norodom Sihanouk in '70, it has not officially
broken diplomatic ties; Govt official Donc Rasy voices Cambodians concern that
US may sacrifice Cambodia in improving ties with China; officials hold US and
China can end war in S Vietnam and Laos by partition, but no such solution is
possible in Cambodia; Cambodian officials believe US and Communist China could
end fighting in S Vietnam and Laos by partition along present lines of battle;
but say that no partition is possible in Cambodia, which has no common border
with either N Vietnam or China and whose territorial integrity under 1 govt was
recognized by '54 Geneva accords

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 8, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 50 words

S Vietnamese Min Tran Van Lam, in Paris, says S Vietnam seeks to re-establish
ties with France; ties were broken in June '65; diplomatic observers doubt
France will want to modify status of her diplomatic relations with any of the
parties to peace talks because she is the host country for the talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 8, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 3

LENGTH: 52 words

US Army spokesman says Danny S Notley refuses to name those involved in alleged
killing of 30 Vietnamese civilians by US soldiers in Apr '69; Notley first made
pub his allegations before an informal HR com in Apr; Notley says he does not
want enlisted men made into 'scapegoats'; Army says it will continue probe

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 8, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 55 words

Internatl Confed for Disarmament and Peace gen sec P Duff lr on Apr 18 ed takes
issue with ed's reference to N Vietnamese 'barbarity' in handling of POWs; says
N Vietnam obeys Geneva Conv which excepts from its provisions POWs guilty of war
crimes; takes issue also with accusations of brutality made by returned POWs; ed
reply

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 9, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 128 words

Estimated 15,000 to 20,000 demonstrate, Washington, under Rev C McIntire
leadership in behalf of mil victory in Vietnam; illus; tone of protest is almost
as anti-Nixon as in the antiwar protests; expected phone message to rally from
Nguyen Cao Ky does not come through; Pres Nixon meets with Mayor Washington,
Chief Wilson and Gens Exton, Gleszer and Southward who helped with law
enforcement during protests of last 2 wks; lauds them for efficient work and
says any similar protests in future should be handled in same way; reptdly said
Govt has 'responsibility to protect right to protest but also right not to
protest'; those attending Washington rally for mil victory in Vietnam cheer when
McIntire hails FBI dir J Edgar Hoover as stanch fighter against Communism

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 9, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 52, Column 4

LENGTH: 33 words

Amer por photographer Richard Avedon, in S Vietnam to take pictures of S
Vietnamese and Amers affected by the war for his book, Hard Times, deplores war;
he comments on work and conditions there

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 9, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 186 words

Edwin L Dale Jr on Brookings study; sees it marking epitaph of hopes that growth
in US, with its companion growth of Fed revenues, combined with end of Vietnam
war, would open for US in '70s wide range of choices and resources for solving
problems; would give Govt cash resources to devote to domestic problems and even
tax reduction; says study finds that combination of existing programs and the
few proposed Nixon additions will use up all revenue growth in next 3 fiscal
yrs; outlines some of items that major growth in spending will absorb; concludes
program that would truly reform nation's welfare system in direction of both
more equity and more work incentive would cost vastly more than Nixon's
proposal; notes former budget dir C L Schultze estimate that defense spending in
fiscal '74 will rise to $82-billion, about $5-billion above what Adm estimated
would be needed in fiscal '75; book, 'Setting National Priorities: the 1972
Budget', by various authors, denies that combination of end of war and growth in
US revenues will give US Govt cash resources to devote to domestic problems and
tax reduction

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 9, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 25 words

Comment on growing Cong opposition to Vietnam war at rate that may leave Pres
Nixon little choice but to withdraw from Vietnam before the end of '72

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 9, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 5

LENGTH: 26 words

Lr says it is not worth one more Amer life to stay in Vietnam one more day
because Communists will control all of Vietnam within 10 yrs after US pulls out

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 9, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20, Column 0

LENGTH: 25 words

Ex-Under Sec T Hoopes article on US involvement in Vietnam offers suggestions
for US withdrawal; comments on effects of withdrawal on S Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 9, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 118 words

US and S Vietnamese troops being 24-hr truce in S Vietnam in hon of 2,515th
anniv of Buddha's birthday; enemy announced a 48-hr truce; US command announces
1 truce violation so far, S Vietnamese rept another; US and S Vietnamese say
their troops will continue to provide 'dynamic security' of their base areas
during truce; fighting in Cambodia continues despite 24-hr truce in S Vietnam
hon Buddha's birthday; Mrs Nguyen Thanh Nhan, pres of S Vietnam's Buddhist
Women's Assn, says 'desire for peace among Vietnamese and of the world will some
day overpower the thunder of cannons'; says if superpowers find ways to get
along with each other, the Viet race should be able to 'stop the killing between
us'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 9, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 91, Column 7

LENGTH: 77 words

Mrs Nguyen Thanh Nhan, in quotation of day on the anniversary of Buddha's
birthday, says 'The desire for peace among the Vietnamese people and of the
world will some day overpower the thunder of cannons. There is no reason why we
of the Viet race cannot stop the killing between us when the superpowers who
only yesterday were threatening to destroy each other with H-bombs are now
finding a way to get along with each other. We should be awakened by that fact'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 42 words

Buddhist priest Thich Chon The burns self to death, Hue, in protest against
Vietnam war; leaves behind lrs to Pres Nixon, S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu
and other leaders urging them to work for peace; 4 other monks have burned
themselves in last yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 4

LENGTH: 35 words

Lr recalls how P Mendes-France ended the French war against Indochina in 1 mo,
as he promised, after being elected Premier; says Pres Nixon either does not
know or chooses to ignore how Mendes-France ended war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 8 words

Don Luce leaves S Vietnam after nearly 13 yrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

5 Vietnamese women back Danny Notley's rept of slayings in Truong Khanh; say
Amers burned the houses, killed 60 people in 2 groups, then bombed the village

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 120 words

Article on Pres Nixon's strategy for '72 elections as it now begins to take
shape; he has begun to channel larger amounts of his time and resources of his
staff to campaign; ways in which he is addressing himself with greater fanfare
and frequency to constituency that elected him noted; skeleton campaign
operation has been established near White House and new personnel have been
added to White House staff to promote him and his policies, while sr personnel
have quietly shifted their energies from creating policy to task of consol
Nixon's grasp on bureaucracy and selling his program; he has also devoted less
and less energy to defense of Indochina policy; basic pol calculations of his
tone and tempo outlined

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 81 words

24-hr allied truce ends with S Vietnamese and Amer accusing the enemy of 51
cease-fire violations, including mining of a ferryboat that took lives of 36
civilians; enemy's unilaterally declared 48-hr truce has not ended; ferryboat
mined near Dongha; map; observance of Buddha's birthday passes in Saigon without
the kind of major anti-Govt protests by Buddhist leaders that marked the
celebration in past yrs; Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky, a Catholic, sends repr, to An
Quang celebration

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 213 words

Amb E Bunker, 4 yrs in post in S Vietnam and about to celebrate 77th birthday,
revs his yrs in office, int; expected to leave post shortly after V Vietnamese
pres elections in Oct; foresees need for US advisers in Vietnam for several yrs
more and for US air power for at least 2 or 3 more years; says US troop
strength, now about 280,000, should drop to about 100,000 by next May; thinks
const govt in S Vietnam has worked 'remarkably well'; says there has been 'very
great progress' on the mil side; sees chances for a pol settlement improved
after the S Vietnamese pres elections because Hanoi may decide to negotiate
seriously when it sees a regime that will be in power for the next 4 yrs;
criticism of Bunker relationship to Pres Nguyen Van Thieu by war opponents
noted; close and effective ties with Gen Abrams noted; Bunker illus; Amb Bunker
says he is worried about the econ future of S Vietnam, that 'difficult econ
problems' lie ahead because of the departure of Amer troops and that 'econ
assistance on a major scale' will be needed from the US for a considerable
period of time; says const govt in S Vietnam has worked 'remarkably well'; lauds
Pres Nguyen Van Thieu as man of 'considerable intellectual ability' but says US
will take no sides in forthcoming elections

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

Don Luce leaves S Vietnam after 13 yrs there as newsman and soc worker

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 6

LENGTH: 37 words

Amb Ellsworth Bunker, in quotation of day referring to his diplomatic career in
Saigon, says 'I've never had any doubt that if we have the determination, the
patience and the will, we would achieve reasonable success here'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 11, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 19 words

Pfc J Moyler to be tried by gen ct-martial for slaying on Jan 27 of his comdr
Capt W F Reichert at Ankae base camp

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 11, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 69 words

US command announces beginning of withdrawal of Americal Div with withdrawal of
an inf bn from combat S of Danang; announces deactivation of 2,215-man USMC
logistic command at Danang; US forces reduced by 6,300 men to total of 267,100
in wk; allied commands rept 66 enemy attacks with heavy loss of S Vietnamese
lives during wk-end cease-fires; 48 hr Vietcong cease-fire ends; US B-52s resume
bombing in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 11, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 93 words

Sen M Mansfield considering offering amendment to extension of Selective Service
Act that would cut US forces in Eur by half; says prime concern is dollar
outflow; projected amendment would be restrictive, not a sense-of-Sen one as was
case in earlier Mansfield resolution; various US Sens seek to use draft
extension legis as vehicle to force end of Vietnam war and to re-examine extent
of US overseas commitments; amendments ready to be offered in coming wks bar
sending of draftees to Vietnam and require withdrawal of all troops from Vietnam
by end of '71

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 11, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 12 words

N Vietnamese Communist party chief Le Duan arrives in Peking from Moscow

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 11, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

Dr Dang Tan, former N Vietnamese official who defected to S Vietnam in Sept '69,
says USSR, Chinese, Cuban, N Korean and French 'mil strategists' advise
Communist forces in S Vietnam, int, Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 11, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 9 words

S Vietnamese Buddhist hierarchy excommunicates Chon The

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 11, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 44 words

Lr on calls for US withdrawal from Indochina queries results of abandoning
Indochinese; illus; asks supporters of immediate withdrawal of US troops to
consider presence of N Vietnamese troops outside of N Vietnam while there are no
invading troops in N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 11, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

Danny Notley's atty, T Ensign, says Notley will give full details of alleged
killings in Truong Khanh, S Vietnam, to a specailly apptd Pres comm, news conf;
says he has no hope Army will probe incident; says Army, in news release,
charged that Notley and the Citizens Comm of Inquiry on US War Crimes in Vietnam
impede probe

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 12, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 55 words

US command repts N Vietnamese MIG-21 interceptor attacked an unarmed US
reconnaissance plane twice over Plaine des Jarres while a 2d MIG-21 circled
overhead; says US plane was not damaged; pilot details attack; US planes
continue attacks on Ho Chi Minh Trail; N Vietnamese appear to be preparing trail
for upcoming rainy season

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 12, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 38 words

Laotian Govt soldiers and policemen assault charge d'affaires Nguyen Giap and 3
other N Vietnamese diplomats who walk out on s by Premier Souvanna Phouma when
he denounces Hanoi Govt for having sent troops into Laos, Vientiane

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 12, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 19 words

Illus of memorial service, Tayninh, S Vietnam, for Cao Hoai Sang, one of Cao Dai
sect founders who died Apr 21

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 12, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 112 words

Sen J C Stennis, supporter of US Vietnam policy, offers legis to curb power of
Pres to commit US to war without consent of Cong; exempts Vietnam war from his
bill, but says he has been influenced by the 'lessons' of that war; opponents of
war in Sen Foreign Relations Com continue their attempt to use Congress's power
over appropriations to force end to war; Sen Eagleton tells com that during an
inspection trip to Vietnam in Apr he was told by top US commanders that they
were operating on planning assumption that a 'residual force' would remain in
Vietnam for 'an indefinite period' and that US air power would be maintained
'for an even more protracted period'; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 12, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 135 words

ILGWU policy statement, made at Miami Beach conv, deplores war but backs US
policies; warns world faces danger of other Vietnams as long as totalitarian
movements impose their system on others by force; says US has been seeking to
end war by reconvening the Geneva Conf, but says Hanoi and Vietcong, 'aided and
abetted by Moscow and Peking' oppose settlement that would allow S Vietnamese
right of self-determination; says US does not seek territory or 'a single dollar
of advantage' in war; union pres L Stulberg says statment reaffirms union's
previous position and is in line with AFL-CIO's firm support of the war; conv
delegates approve statement backing Israel and attempts to achieve peace
guaranteed by secure borders; laud Sen Jackson's criticism, made in s to conv,
of Soviet moves in Middle East

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 12, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 178 words

AFL-CIO Exec Council issues statement scoring Pres Nixon's decision to withhold
$12-billion appropriated by Cong for domestic programs as anti-inflation move;
charges 'cynical pol' aim of holding funds until they can be doled out piecemeal
to achieve maximum econ impact timed for '72 Pres election; outlines 10-point
program by which Adm can convert econ from war to peace and create jobs for
hundreds of thousands of defense workers and veterans among the unemployed;
calls for nationwide Fed pub service jobs program; urges Sen to approve
HR-passed $2-billion pub works bill; other proposals noted; also criticizes him
for not developing programs that would shift funds that have been made available
by lower defense spending to domestic programs; George Meany says AFL-CIO Exec
Council still backs Nixon's policy of withdrawing from Vietnam without setting a
definite pullout date, news conf, Atlanta; says he detects no loss of support
for Adm's Vietnam policy among rank-and-file; describes as 'stupid' tactics used
last wk by antiwar protesters in Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 12, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 133 words

Repr P N McCloskey backs up his repeated threat to oppose Pres Nixon in the Pres
primaries unless the Pres changes his Vietnam policy by opening natl campaign
office in Washington; Nixon aide H G Klein says Adm does not take McCloskey bid
seriously; por; House Speaker Albert comes to aid of Washington Ptl W F Fox, who
has been dropped from police force because he failed by 1/2 inch to meet force's
height requirement; David Eisenhower will not be able to attend Patricia Nixon's
wedding because he will be on sea duty; illus; 100-yr-old W Deffner, W Ger Soc
Dem party's oldest member, gets Order of Merit from Brandt, party leaders'
meeting; says his only wish is that Brandt be re-elected in '73; Sen Harris asks
Cong to name July 14 Woody Guthrie Day to hon his contributions to US tradition

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 13, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 21 words

Laotian spokesman says N Vietnamese jets fly bombing and strafing missions
against Govt troops positions in Plaine des Jarres

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 13, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

US planes reptdly destroy 13 AA guns in Mugia Pass; reptdly fired on gun sties
after N Vietnamese fired on planes while they were over Laos; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 13, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

Repr McCloskey accuses Nixon Adm of lying to Amer people and concealing
information from them, breakfast meeting with newsmen; cites examples, which
mostly deal with Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 13, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 1

LENGTH: 98 words

Ed takes issue with Nixon Adm's negative approach to recent Vietcong offer, at
Paris peace talks, to negotiate local cease-fires with US mil units; is also
critical of Amb Bruce's lack or response to hint repeated 3 times by Xuan Thuy,
that Communists would 'discuss' a date for US withdrawal and release of US POWs
as part of a pkg deal; says that with removal by Hanoi of the past pre-condition
of the setting of a fixed date by US for withdrawal for discussing POWs,
exploration of their proposal may open way for wider-ranging negotiation
covering full cease-fire and a pol settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 13, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

Prof H Marcuse article on meaning of Lt W L Calley's actions at Mylai, S
Vietnam, and response of large part of Amer people to verdict; says 'silent
majority' has found its martyr in Calley, its Horst Wessel, who was popular hero
of the Nazis; scores 'mad rush away from individual responsibility'; says guilt
of a society in which massacres and body counts are part of normal mental
equipment turns into 'proud....identification with the crime and the criminal'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 13, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 5

LENGTH: 97 words

Bruce N Kesler, member of Vietnam Veterans for a Just Peace, says his orgn is
committed to the Vietnamese people and to the establishment of an opportunity to
create an indigenous govt by free choice; citing Vietnam Veterans Against the
War attitude of shock at this war's devastation, says that to distinguish this
war from others is a distortion; says orgn resents charges that all Amer
soldiers are war criminials; says Lt Calley deserves punishment, that his
actions were an aberration, not the rule; says US punishes its offenders; asks
when Hanoi will start punishing its own

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 13, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 65, Column 4

LENGTH: 99 words

Standard Oil (NJ) chmn J K Jamieson, predicting appreciable gain in co earnings,
says demand for oil alone is expected to rise from 40-million bbls daily in '70
to 70-million in '80, annual meeting; pres Brisco says in '71 big problem will
be that of meeting energy needs rather than coping with surplus of supplies;
annual meeting picketed by group called Internatl Boycott of Standard Oil Com,
protesting 'Standard Oil's role in the Vietnam war'; co chmn J K Jamieson says
co's only action in S Vietnam is a mortg operation and co has no relationship
with present S Vietnamese Govt; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

34 Amers, 360 S Vietnamese die in combat, wk; enemy dead reptd at 2,028

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

N Vietnamese forces make 2 strong assaults against S Vietnamese marines, Ashau
Valley; attacks are 1st major fighting in valley since S Vietnamese began
campaign against enemy valley stronghold a mo ago; both attacks reptd repulsed
with 200 N Vietnamese killed, 90 S Vietnamese killed or wounded; earlier, S
Vietnamese reptd destroying a N Vietnamese base camp and arms factory in Ashau
area; US B-52s continue bombing in NW cormer of S Vietnam were some outlets of
the Ho Chi Minh Trail enter S Vietnam; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 25 words

Kate Webb gives further details on her experiences during 23 days of captivity
by Vietnamese and her final release; illus after her return to Pnompenh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

Paris peace talks 113th session opens 4th yr of talks; each side blames the
other for failure to stop the war; Xuan Thuy and US spokesman S Ledogar comment
on impasse, news confs; at session, Communists insist that US set withdrawal
date; Bruce again proposes immediate cease-fire and withdrawal of all 'external
forces' from S Vietnam; Communists at Paris peace talks back and clarify new
Pathel Lao proposal for cease-fire; say offer goes beyond previous ones in that
it calls for an immediate and gen cease-fire and immediate talks on restoration
of a coalition Govt; Souvanna Phouma reptdly terms offer interesting but calls
for withdrawal of all foreign troops from Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 20 words

June 5th date set for ct-martial of Sp/4 Flint on charge of killing Maj R Degen
and attempted killing of Maj M Davis

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 3

LENGTH: 15 words

Lr urges 'tremendous commitment to reconstruction' by US in Vietnam following US
withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 4

LENGTH: 56 words

Lr takes issue with belief that immediate US withdrawal will result in immediate
Communist take-over of S Vietnam and yrs of violent retribution; says Communist
take-over of South will have a positive effect; says recent Gallup poll taken in
S Vietnam indicates that some 65% of those polled want an immediate and complete
US withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 55, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

2 US planes attack 2 N Vietnamese missile sites, 37th such attack of yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 28 words

Don Luce testifies that S Vietnamese Govt holds at least 100,000 pol prisoners,
Sen Foreign Relations Com; says prisoners are tortured and held under subhuman
conditions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 113 words

Hanoi press agency radio broadcast says N Vietnam agrees to accept formally a
group of N Vietnamese POWs held in S Vietnam; S Vietnam has freed scores of N
Vietnamese POWs but Hanoi has never acknowledged such acts; broadcast does not
mention proposal to send 1,200 other N Vietnamese POWs held 4 yrs or more to a
neutral country; broadcast sets specific terms for methods of release and
acceptance of the POWs; US State Dept officials express hope that N Vietnamese
agreement to accept POWs could lead to release of ailing Amer POWs held by N
Vietnam; Amb Bunker calls N Vietnamese move on POWs encouraging; hopes it will
be 1st step leading to release of US and allied POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 15, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 128 words

S Vietnamese troops with US air support make new sweep into E Cambodia to
disrupt a complex of enemy centers that are used to carry out attacks in S
Vietnam provs of Haunghia and Longan; 60 enemy reptd killed; S Vietnamese task
force driving northward from Mekong Delta reptdly kill 27 enemy soldiers; 15
enemy soldiers reptd killed in Ashau Valley area; US air raids in NW corner of S
Vietnam stall N Vietnamese attempt to build new infiltration route from Laos;
map; new S Vietnamese sweep, supported by US aircraft, reptd to be under way in
eastern Cambodia between Kandol Chrum and Kompong Trach; drive reptdly involves
5,000 S Vietnamese troops, was sparked by sharp increase in enemy activity in 2
S Vietnamese provs; at least 60 enemy soldiers reptd killed; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 15, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 33 words

USMC orders gen ct-martial for Sgt J M Sweeney charged with desertion and aiding
the enemy while a POW; Sweeney, confined at Quantico, Va, is 1st US serviceman
charged with aiding enemy in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 15, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 191 words

State Sec Rogers, in over 3-hr appearance before Sen Foreign Relations Com,
holds proposed legis to restrict Pres war powers is impractical, probably
unconst and would weaken Pres ability to act in a crisis; stresses Cong and exec
branch should deal with issue in spirit of cooperation and mutual trust; is
criticized by both Dems and Repubs, who protest that cooperation and
consultation has not worked and has only led to usurpation of powers by Pres;
Sen Case says effect of hearing is to turn issue into another const
confrontation; Fulbright expresses his disappointment at 'negative response' of
exec branch; suggests Nixon Adm has endorsed stand by former Under Sec
Katzenbach that power of Cong to declare war is outmoded in nuclear age; Rogers,
bristling, says he 'specifically and emphatically' rejects such contention;
Fulbright warns that stand by exec branch may cause Cong to go too far in other
direction in effort to redress what it considers to be imbalance; Sec Rogers
says it is within Congress's power to refuse appropriations to force a
withdrawal from Vietnam as proposed in McGovern-Hatfield amendment; he and
Rogers illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 57 words

H Wilson, ex-Prime Min of GB, says, in memoirs, that he and USSR Premier Kosygin
came close to arranging Vietnam peace talks in Feb '67 but were sabotaged by
Johnson Adm; episode also described by others, notably Chester L Cooper in his
book The Last Crusade; Wilson's memoirs are appearing in serial form in London
Sunday Times; Wilson por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 40 words

John Paul Vann, Amer civilian, apptd dir of US Second Regional Assistance Group;
apptmt puts more emphasis on central coastal region that had lagged in
pacification; Vann replaces Maj Gen C P Brown, assigned to new duties outside
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 81 words

Amer Baptist Conv urges Pres Nixon and Cong to withdraw all US mil personnel
from Indochina, except those in diplomatic service, 'hopefully' by Dec 31, '71;
vote is 1,451 to 199; amendment to delete word 'hopefully' defeated; resolution
also urges troops to refrain from taking initiative in mil action, urges US
pursue impartial role in S Vietnamese elections and pledge support of econ
reconstruction under UN auspices; says war harms US society and economy and
destroys natl unity

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

US personnel carrier hits land mine 20 mi from Danang; 5 Amers killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 53, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

Bank of Amer officials see bank as favorite target for bomb attacks in Calif
because of its visibility and notoriety; cite big sales in posters of
bank-burning at Isla Vista branch; Gov Ronald Reagan recently attributed
bombings as part of broader pattern in Calif; since Feb '70, branches have been
attacked 39 times, 22 by explosive devices and 17 by fire bombs; exec vp P E
Sullivan int; Center of New Corp Priorities' complaint concerning bank's
involvement in Vietnam noted; Regan says that there were 4,443 bomb threats
during last 10 mos of '70, and that there were 1,052 incidents in which bombs
were found

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 97, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

Bklyn (NY) Diocese official wkly, once an archconservative 'defender of the
faith', has evolved along liberal lines and now gives frequent support to reform
and renewal within ch; has espoused conscientious objection to Vietnam war; D
Zirkel, ed, declares he is merely reflecting new freedom in ch following Vatican
Council II; contends most readers welcome change; says paper has been 'blessed'
by understanding bishops who never interfere; illus of Tablet's new format

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 38 words

US role in recent monetary crisis revd; factors involved in continuing payments
deficits discussed; payments deficit seen all but eliminated if
balance-of-payments drain of Vietnam war were ended; graph on dollar flows in
'70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHS & CHARTS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 31 words

Correction on caption of May 2 (IV,3:2) illus of Chinese Communist poster;
correct translation of slogan is American Imperialism Is Bound to be Defeated',
not 'Kill American Imperialists'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Ed discusses Cambodia's instability despite resolution of Cabinet crisis; says
major question is how Amer involvement can be ended in near future; sees
negotiated settlement that restores neutral status to all Indochina as only hope

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

James Reston on current controversy over how to give Pres powers necessary to
defend US in time of nuclear weapons and ICBMs and still maintain control of
Cong; sees Pres authority to use nuclear weapons new element in debate which
clearly destroys old concept of 'equal balance' between exec and Cong; quotes W
Lippmann on issue; notes how Nixon asserted his right to invade Cambodia and
Laos without prior consultation with Cong and how Sens Mansfield and Fulbright,
among others, fearing Cong may be losing all effective control over Pres power,
are trying to compel Nixon to withdraw from Vietnam by end of '71

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 53 words

Article notes Fulbright Comm in GB figures showing 726 Amer profs teaching in GB
in '70-71, compared to 294 in '61; many members of Brit acad community and Amer
profs now working in England cite Vietnam war, student unrest on Amer campus and
pub or perish policy in Amer univs as reasons for increase in migration; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 79 words

S Vietnamese mil command announces multi-bn force launches new operation in
Parrot's Beak region of eastern Cambodia near Kompong Rau; action is reptd
light, with 14 enemy soldiers killed since start of operation; Amers continue
air support of ground forces; Saigon spokesman denies repts that new operation
has been launched in Kompong Trach area; map; US planes on missions in Laos
attack AA gun sites in N Vietnam for the 36th and 37th times in '71; earlier
attacks revd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 171 words

NY Times series on heroin addiction by US troops in Vietnam reaches epidemic
proportions; US mil command, US Embassy and S Vietnamese Govt, who have been
slow in reacting to situation, now intensify their efforts to curb flow of
heroin to soldiers, punish the sellers and rehabilitate addicts; Amb Ellsworth
Bunker, Gen Abrams and US Narcotics Bur Dir J Ingersoll recently discussed with
Pres Nguyen Van Thieu measures to be taken by S Vietnamese Govt; heroin users
estimated at 10% to 25% of the lower-ranking enlisted men, most of them
draftees; some field surveys rept units with over 50% of the men on heroin;
overdose deaths expected to rise in '71 despite reduction in US troops; Maj R
Ratner, psychiatrist at Longbinh rehabilitation center, says men take to heroin
because Vietnam in many ways is a ghetto for the enlisted man; comment on faults
in Army rehabilitation program as seen by many officers; some addicts say that
the crackdown and arrests for smoking marijuana may have driven some soldiers to
heroin; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 118 words

S Vietnamese mil authorities act to halt flow of what they claim is inaccurate
press information on operations in Cambodia; Maj G E Martin, Amer information
officer in Saigon, says there will be no more briefings by Amer officers on S
Vietnamese mil activities; links decision to complaints about news articles that
followed sessions by Lt Gen Nguyen Van Minh, comdr of S Vietnamese forces in
Cambodia; Martin says background briefings had been poorly attended, that he had
recommended that they be dropped even before Nguyen Van Minh complained; S
Vietnam arty reptdly kills 14 of enemy, Ashau Valley; US unit of 23d Americal
Div reptdly attacked near Hoi Ac; 2 Amers killed, 5 wounded; 5 of enemy killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 38 words

N Vietnamese gunners fire 2 surface-to-air missiles at an Amer gunship flying
over Ho Chi Minh Trail; aircraft undamaged; US plane, on bombing mission over
Laos, fires at N Vietnam missile site 87 mi NW of demilitarized zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 26 words

'Scag Alley', in Saigon, where servicemen get drugs, described; drugs also on
sale in many other back sts and bars frequented by servicemen in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 10 words

N Vietnam Communist chief Le Duan leaves China for Hanoi

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 3

LENGTH: 108 words

'72 Pres aspirants Sen Muskie, McGovern, Bayh, Hughes s at Wis Jefferson-Jackson
Day $100 Dinner, Milwaukee; their appearance seen raising curtain on what may be
longest primary campaign in Wis; Gov Lucey says they were invited to speak
because they appeared to be most active contenders; Muskie tours Milwaukee's
Polish-Amer areas; lunches with Wis labor leaders; Bayh and Muskie say they
would seek to establish voluntary wage-price restraints to reduce unemployment
and check inflation if elected Pres; declare they would impose controls if
necessary; discuss question of US troops in Thailand, their withdrawal or role
in S Vietnam fighting

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 197 words

Anthony Lewis in comment on Brit ex-Prime Min Harold Wilson blaming others in
his memoirs for things that have gone wrong, repts he blames Brit Foreign Office
for wrecking his efforts in Anglo-French relations by leaking its version of de
Gaulle's '69 suggestion to Amb Soames for new W Eur assn outside EEC with
4-power directorate; notes Wilson recalls his efforts to defend parity of
sterling and fact that it was devalued 3 yrs later; comment on Rhodesian
rebellion; Wilson, worried that then Pres Lyndon Johnson might 'give way to
hawks,' sought conf; Johnson lost temper with Wilson, a leader of a country with
no troops in Vietnam, advising him how to fight the war; Wilson sarcasm about US
peace efforts cited; failure of Wilson to use power to influence US opinion by
ending Brit support of US policy noted; notes Wilson spoke of GB playing major
role in forging unity of Eur in '67, while he now charges it is Heath's policy
to seek humiliating terms for Brit entry into EEC; says Wilson knows terms for
entry are ones he would have sought and only ones available; says gen belief is
that he is tempted to turn against Eur on calculation that this will return him
to office

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 4

LENGTH: 18 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky scores corrupt conditions creating poverty,
s, Saigon; illus; excerpts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

NY Times series on growing problem of drug addiction among mil personnel,
particularly those returning from Vietnam; discusses Army's Operation Awareness,
begun at Ft Bragg, which is first rehabilitation program of its kind at any US
mil installation; illus; HR subcom, in Apr 28 rept, found that about 50% of men
entering service had experimented with drugs, up to 60% of men already in
service have experimented with drugs and upwards of 10% of personnel in Vietnam
could be using hard drugs; Defense Dept Asst Gen Counsel Bartimo, in rept to Sen
Armed Services Com, estimates that number of hard-drug cases investigated in '67
totaled 573 and tripled in '70; other statistics

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 376 words

Article on fund-rasing methods among big contributors; Citizens Research
Foundation estimates that $75-million will be raised and spent by Dem and Repub
aspirants before '72 natl convs; most of millions to finance primary campaigns
will come from 'big givers'_people who contribute $1,000 to $1-million to a
campaign; motives range from friendship and idealism to expectation of favors;
nearly 1/2 of big givers are in NYC area; fund-raisers estimate that 40-60% of
Dem preconv money will come from area; Repub estimate is 25-35% because Repubs
have successfully cultivated new big givers in Calif, Tex and Midwest; only few
people in each campaign will know who put up money because of inadequacy of
legis governing preconv spending; ints with some big givers provide insights
into how big contributing works and reasons why they doubt spending curbs being
debated in Cong will change fund-raising system; reasons for doubts include
following: many contributions are made surreptitiously by corps, with some of
contributions in form of services; many contributions are in cash; dummy
campaign coms are formed in states that have no pol spending laws; contributions
are often disguised as loans that are never repaid or are repaid only in part;
differences in style between Repub and Dem fund-raisers noted; cites unreleased
study by Citizens Research Foundation showing that in '68 $45-million was raised
and spent by Dem and Repub candidates before natl convs and only $2-million of
it appeared on official repts filed with Fed and state agencies; foundation head
H E Alexander, in forthcoming book Financing the 1968 Campaign, says records
required by Fed and state law account for about $40-million of $50-million spent
by Nixon and Humphrey after they were nominated, compared with $2-million
accounted for during preconv period; cites inadequacy of legis governing preconv
spending; major contributors to Dems and Repubs listed; Muskie, Hughes, Wis Gov
Lucey, Bayh, McGovern illus at dinner; others illus; how $15,000 was raised for
trip to Washington by Vietnam Veterans Against the War at gathering of NYC's
wealthier men at apt of E Bronfman, where veterans' leader John F Kerry spoke
noted; P J Levin and Abraham Feinberg among those who donated

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 18, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 68 words

74-member Italian econ delegation headed by Min Zagari leaves for Communist
China; Zagari says Italian exporters should make long-term plans to provide
Chinese mkt with equipment and supplies for production rather than consumer
goods; Zagari says he will watch for any signal of Chinese willingness for pol
talks with West; says that 'positive signs' for a settlement in Vietnam have
become visible lately

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 18, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 120 words

NY Times series; article finds that newly intensified Amer campaign to stop flow
of heroin to US servicemen is being hampered by Asian attitudes and, it is
believed, official involvement; says that handful of highly trained Amers
working with Saigon Govt to counteract epidemic spread of addiction complains
privately that traditional Vietnamese indifference to narcotics problem makes it
difficult to get strong and consistent suppression program under way; situation
discussed; illus; Amers attempting to curb flow of heroin to US servicemen in S
Vietnam note that Vientiane appears to be source of processed heroin; see signs
that there is a link between heroin traffic and Royal Laotian Army, which
controls Vientiane

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 18, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 51 words

Army Sec Stanley Resor, returned to US from inspection tour of S Vietnam, says
by fall US will have no significant ground combat role, news conf; says 70% of
US combat forces have been withdrawn; says S Vietnamese have major ground role,
that although they have made progress they have a 'lot more to do'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 18, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

US command repts US troop strength in Vietnam reduced by 4,600 men last wk to
262,500, lowest total since Mar '66, when there were 231,000 men

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 18, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 33 words

N Vietnamese troops reptd to be advancing in force toward Houei Kong, Govt's 1
remaining stronghold on plateau; 3 bns of special forces, recruited by US, are
stationed in area, appear to be isolated

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 18, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 38 words

Col Oran K Henderson trial; deputy gen counsel to Army Bland West testifies
Henderson was informed of his rights on each occasion he appeared before Defense
Dept probe into alleged cover-up of Mylai massacre; Henderson illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 18, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 270 words

US Sup Ct, 5-4, upholds constitutionality of state 'hit and run' laws that
require drivers involved in auto accidents to stop and give their names and
addresses; holds Constitution's privilege against self-incrimination is not
violated when information obtained from driver who stops is used by police to
convict driver of traffic offenses; ruling overturns Calif ct decision in case
of J T Byers, who was involved in '66 accident; Chief Justice Burger writes
prevailing opinion, concludes driver who identifies himself at accident scene
performs essentially neutral act because accident might be fault of others or
might be nobody's fault; Justice Harlan, in concurring, says aim of hit-and-run
law is to make drivers pay for damage caused by them, not to set them up for
criminal prosecution; Justice Brennan dissent noted; Ct, 8-1, upholds right of
residents of an interracial neighborhood, Chicago, to distribute leaflets in
suburban Westchester, Ill, accusing real estate broker J M Keefe of using
'block-busting and scare-tactics' in selling houses in racially mixed inner-city
neighborhood; reverses lower ct ruling; Ct, 8-1, rules that person who opposed
Vietnam war so thoroughly that he would not formally apply for draft-exempt
status as divinity student or conscientious objector could not claim that he was
mistakenly classified 1-A at trial for refusing to rept for induction, case of V
F McGee Jr; Ct agrees to decide if Govt may constitutionally forbid importation
from abroad of obscene matter that is intended for private use only; Assoc
Justic Douglas is in hosp having heart pacemaker battery replaced

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 18, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

US Vice Pres Agnew says that while US and S Vietnam arrange to repatriate 570
sick and wounded N Vietnamese POWs, Hanoi, despite its announced willingness to
accept them on June 4, shows no inclination to release Amer POWs or permit them
to be interned in Sweden, s, ARC conv; charges Hanoi uses Amer POWs as pol
hostages to bargain for concessions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 18, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 89 words

Laotian command repts fall of Paksong, last important Govt position in Boloven
Plateau, and nearby fortified position of Ban Houei Sai; concedes losses give
enemy all but complete control over strategic plateau, free access to Ho Chi
Minh Trail and approach route for troop and supply movements into S map;
Vietnam; Amer pilots rept N Vietnamese soldiers conduct house-to-house searches
in Paksong and are blocking hwy less than 20 mi from town; acting Defense Min
Sissouk Na Champassak returns to Vientiane after hurried trip to Pakse

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 19, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 20 words

4 US jets attack AA gun sites after 4 different sites reptdly fire on 2 unarmed
reconaissance planes escorted by jets

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 19, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 5

LENGTH: 18 words

Lr says Pres Nixon did not start Vietnam war but asks who is responsible for 68
battle deaths in wk of May 6

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 19, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 5

LENGTH: 41 words

Lr from retired USN Lt K Penney says US should withdraw from Vietnam war, but
should first level Hanoi and mine Haiphong harbor; comparing US handling of
Korean and Vietnam wars, criticizes the then Pres Truman's conduct of Korean
'police action'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 19, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 95 words

Enemy troops overrun town of Dong Hene, Laos; fall of town and Paksong poses
direct threat to Pakse and Savannakhet, 2 major towns of panhandle; Laotian
officials are hopeful that enemy has no interest in seizing major towns;
presence of Amers in both threatened cities noted; map; increased air and ground
activity reptd in SW corner of S Vietnam where N Vietnamese earlier shot down a
US helicopter gunship; 1 crewman killed, the other rescued; B-52s pound a border
mt pass on edge of Khesanh plateau; N Vietnamese troops raid S Vietnamese troops
on NE of Ashau Valley

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 20, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 84 words

Communist China, in ed in Jenmin Jih Pao and other leading Peking pubs, portrays
US as beset by troubles at home and abroad; appears to aim at reaffirming
distinction recently made between Amer people and US Govt; ed marks 1st anniv of
Mao statement calling on people of world to unite and defeat 'US aggressors and
all their running dogs'; describes Indochina as 'main battlefield in the world
people's struggle against US imperialism'; says war has touched off 'violent
revolutionary storms in the US'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 20, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

S Vietnamese reptdly fight 6-hr battle with enemy in Ashau Valley; 1 US
helicopter shot down, 2 others and a plane damaged by ground fire; 14 enemy
killed, 4 S Vietnamese wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 20, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 16 words

700 S Vietnamese troops search for a major N Vietnamese base and command hq
along Laotian border

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 20, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 6

LENGTH: 245 words

Laotian Premier Souvanna Phouma lauds Communist China's historically
nonaggressive attitude toward Laos, hopes an improvement in Chinese-Amer
relations will lead to restraints on what he terms N Vietnam's aggression, int,
Vientiane; believes China will find it in its interest to prevent N Vietnam from
turning Indochina states into satellites; Souvanna Phouma, up to now, has
avoided any pub statement on China's attitude but in private voices concern over
China's long term aims for its neighbors; accuses N Vietnam of stepping up its
offensive in Laos with dual aim of expanding Ho Chi Minh supply trails and
forcing his Govt to accept Pathet Lao proposals for cease-fire and halt in US
bombing; says he would accept proposals if they were followed immediately by
withdrawal of all foreign troops under Internatl Control Comm supervision; holds
USSR continues to have leading responsibility, on Communist side, for restoring
peace and respect for sovereignty and neutrality of Laos; refrains from
criticizing rd China is bldg in northern Laos; notes there might be some
justification for theory that China is bldg rd to increase its influence in
future of Laos; hopes that with improved Chinese-Amer relations, China would be
in a better position to moderate Hanoi's aggressiveness, in which case he might
appeal to China to use its influence to restore peace; says it is in China's
interest to prevent N Vietnam from turning other Indochinese states into
satellites

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 20, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 144 words

US is turning S Vietnamese Air Force into one of the largest in the world; at
same time it places limits on its tactical and strategic capabilities on
assumption that war will continue to wind down; Brit Gen J H Watkins, chief US
adviser to Saigon Air Force, says that even when force reaches its planned
strength it will not be able to take over what the USAF is doing in S Vietnam;
US reptdly denies certain aircraft to Vietnamese because of doubts about whether
Saigon could afford to operate them, about whether it could maintain and repair
them and about what it might do if it had them; details on training, plane
strength and types of planes; US tech advisers seen having to stay on a long
time; illus; USAF has 40,000 men and planes at 5 bases in S Vietnam; planes also
fly missions from Seventh Fleet in Tonkin Gulf; there are some 3,000 US
helicopters

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 21, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 18 words

24 Amers killed, wk, 240 wounded; 280 S Vietnamese killed, 812 wounded; 1,400
enemy estimated killed in wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 21, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 17 words

Vietnam Peace Talks Session put off until May 27 to allow French Govt employes
to observe RC holiday

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 21, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 3

LENGTH: 72 words

Ho Thong Minh, ex-defense min of S Vietnam now living in Paris, urges peaceful
solution of war based on S Vietnamese self-determination, or allowing S
Vietnamese to settle their own affairs without foreign interference; says if
peace candidate is elected in S Vietnamese election, new Govt could negotiate
with Provisional Revolutionary Govt and then discuss with Hanoi measures leading
to peaceful reunification of Vietnam; cartoon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

US aircraft carrier Midway returns to active duty in Tonkin Gulf after 5 yrs off
the line for modernizations; her planes bomb Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 75 words

Amer officials, noting tighter procedures by S Vietnamese officials at curbing
smuggling of heroin at Saigon Airport, express pessimism concerning
effectiveness; say that heroin smugglers are using more subtle means, including
mil airports; Customs officials at Tansonnhut airport, in sharp change, crack
down on smugglers; crackdown follows disclosure in a US rept dated Feb 8, which
said sole function of airport customs was to aid the smugglers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 27 words

US helicopters airlift 2,000 S Vietnamese into E Cambodia for drive against 2 N
Vietnamese divs; land 20 mi inside Cambodia; some fighting involving tanks reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

Sen sets votes on amendments by Sen Gaylord Nelson to bar draftees from Vietnam
and by Sen Edward Kennedy to bar combat enlistment bonus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 7

LENGTH: 36 words

Ore state Sen approves bill to exempt Ore servicemen from serving in wars that
have not been declared by Cong; Eugene, Ore, in referendum, votes 5,470-39,957
for US to complete withdrawal from Vietnam by end of '71

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

L S Anderson reply to J D Alden May 11 lr takes issue with 'myth' that N
Vietnamese are aggressors in their own country; says prime aggressor in
Indochina is US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 2

LENGTH: 91 words

Article on security preparations for dedication ceremonies of Johnson Library in
Austin, Tex; number of guards doubled after antiwar groups say they will storm
police lines if necessary to make their views known; Tex Veterans for Peace hold
demonstration; score bldg of library as 'misuse' of tax money for 'personal
glorification of Amer leader'; some militants say they will break through police
barricades if necessary to disrupt dedication; Tex ct issues temporary
restraining order barring militant interruptions of dedication ceremonies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

First Natl Bank of Chicago chmn and US Pres Comm on Internatl Trade and
Investment member Gaylord Freeman says that nonescalation of Middle East
hostilities is 1 element upon which expansion of commerce between US and Eastern
Eur hinges, news conf, Belgrade; says end of Vietnam war is 1 of conditions
required for East-West trade liberalization; listing prerequisites to US
liberalization of trade with Communist countries, says there must be no more
'wars of liberation'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 63, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 28 words

US Defense Sec Laird urges S Vietnam authorities to be more realistic in facing
up to problem of how to stop narcotics from reaching Amer servicemen, s,
Washington (DC)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 72 words

30 US soldiers killed, 50 wounded in 3 rocket and mortar attacks in northern war
zone of S Vietnam; deaths exceed all US battlefield casualties reptd last wk;
attacks occur at base called Charlie 2 that guards demilitarized zone, at base
17 mi SE of Hue and at field position 30 mi S of Danang; virtually all dead and
over half of the wounded are victims of single 100-lb rocket that struck Charlie
2; other smaller action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 51 words

N Vietnamese shell US bases along demilitarized zone for 4th day; Amers counter
with arty barrages; Maj R Merritt says N Vietnamese are careful never to fire
from northern half of zone or from N Vietnam apparently to forestall retaliation
by US on N Vietnamese soil; fighting reptd in Ashau Valley; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 60 words

Stanley R Resor, in farewell news conf as Army Sec, says US decision to enter
Vietnam war will prove to have been unwise if pub revulsion results in new
isolationism, reduction in mil forces in Eur and threat to prospects of Eur
unity; Resor doubts whether draft can be replaced by all-volunteer army by
mid-'73; terms mil pay rises proposed by HR unworkable

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 106 words

Amer Friends Service Com official Charles Read, back in US from visit to N
Vietnam, says he believes N Vietnamese would begin freeing Amer POWs as soon as
Pres Nixon sets firm date for withdrawing all US forces, int; suggests Hanoi
would be willing to negotiate a release schedule that runs parallel to troop
withdrawal; repts his findings to State Dept; officials there doubt that there
is a significant change in Hanoi's previous stand that all US troops be
withdrawn before any POWs would be released; $25,000 worth of open-heart
surgical equipment delivered to a N Vietnamese hosp, Hanoi, by C Reed, 3d such
shipment com has made

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 8

LENGTH: 35 words

Delegation of 173 wives and relatives of US servicemen missing or held prisoner
in Indochina arrive, Geneva, for visit timed to coincide with IRC meeting on
revising '49 Geneva Convs to apply them to civil wars

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

Reprs Clarence Miller and Frank Bow offer legis to make it a Fed crime to
display a Vietcong flag while US is still fighting in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

YMCA Natl Council urges complete withdrawal by US at 'earliest possible time',
1st time pol action is taken by orgn; pledges reconstruction support for any
part of Indochina and aid to returning servicemen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 5

LENGTH: 35 words

Ex-Pres Lyndon Johnson tells Gen William Westmoeland that errors he made in
Vietnam war were his own and not due to people misinforming him, remarks after
dedication of L B Johnson Library at Tex Univ, Austin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 56, Column 4; (GP)

LENGTH: 73 words

Gallup Poll shows 69% of those polled do not believe Pres Nixon Adm is telling
pub all it should know about the war in Vietnam, 21% believe it is; 51% belive
all troops will not be out for at least 2 yrs, and perhaps never, 15% believe
they will be out by end of '72, 9% by end of '71; 72% disagree with Nixon
statement that 'we will have peace in the next generation' if US leaves S
Vietnam in a position to defend herself; 17% agree

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 19 words

Lr says fighting in Vietnam will not prevent another war, urges an imperfect
peace as better than an imperfect war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 174 words

$18.6-million Lyndon Baines Johnson Library dedicated in nationally televised
ceremony that draws 3,000 guests, including Pres Nixon; Nixon, on behalf of
nation, accepts bldg on Tex Univ campus; ceremony takes place against backdrop
of antiwar slogans, chanted from a distance; 1,200 Tex hwy ptl and Tex Rangers
keep about 2,000 demonstrators several blocks from library; 28 demonstrators
arrested; demonstrations led by 60 veterans who throw their medals, ribbons and
other war mementos over lines of policemen blocking them from library; notable
guests listed; Johnson stresses that he or staff did not winnow out any of his
papers before donating them to library; says library contains papers from his 40
yrs of pub service; leads Nixon on guided tour of library; Nixon gives him White
House painting of Pres Jackson by T Sully for library; antiwar demonstration,
barbecue on library grounds described; illus of Nixon, Johnson and wives, of
antiwar demonstration, of dedication ceremony, of Johnson's grandson; Nixon
leaves for stay in Fla

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 274 words

N Vietnamese chief negotiator Xuan Thuy says question of Amer POWs could be
easily settled if Pres Nixon set a date for total US withdrawal, int, Paris;
does not believe Nixon really intends to withdraw all US forces; says Nixon's
stated reasons for refusing to set a date are only a pretext for keeping troops
in Vietnam; notes that French POWs taken in earlier war had been released after
the Geneva Conf ended the fighting in '54; says POWs are a question for the
aftermath of a war, that it is illogical to raise the question in the middle of
a war; adds that N Vietnam, however, is ready to do something immediately before
the end of hostilities if Nixon set a withdrawal date; says if Hanoi now
released POWs, Nixon could say he cannot withdraw troops because S Vietnam is
not yet strong enough or that there would be a bloodbath; says Hanoi does not
expect a withdrawal within a few months, but it should be a reasonable date;
expresses confidence in a mil victory by 'liberation forces' in all Indochina;
says Nixon made 'three great errors'--in his Vietnamization policy, and in the
moves into Cambodia and Laos; says the 'errors' prove Nixon wants to settle war
only by a mil victory; says 'Vietnamese people think Nixon is cruel, lying and
deliberately engaging in genocide'; por; says major Nixon 'mistake' was to
'stage the coup d'etat' that ousted Norodom Sihanouk from power in Cambodia;
charges Nixon hoped to draw Cambodia to Amer side and isolate revolutionary
forces but instead has made Cambodia a battlefield; says another major Nixon
'mistake' was incursion into Laos; charges Amer and S Vietnamese met 'bitter
defeat'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 97 words

3 S Vietnamese Pres aspirants in coming election start their unofficial
campaigning; Gen Duong Van Minh's and Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky's sessions on the
tennis cts seen seen as demonstration of a developing pol alliance against Pres
Nguyen Van Thieu, who prefers fishing; Nguyen Van Thieu, in s, repeats his 'four
no's': no coalition govt, no neutralism, no Communist party, no concession of
land to the Communists; aides of Nguyen Cao Ky insist his break with Nguyen Van
Thieu, whom he charges with running a corrupt govt, is irrevocable; comment on
pol speculation in Saigon; pors

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 73 words

Mekong Delta regional pacification meeting held, Cantho, conducted by Maj Gen J
H Cushman and attended by Deputy Amb W E Colby, who is in over-all charge of US
role in pacification program; meeting warns US pacification advisers in delta
that enemy is engaged in low-key phase of pol consolidation while waiting for
Amers to leave; cautions advisers against false sense of security and success
during current lull in mil activity; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 45 words

N Vietnamese shell US bases along demilitarized zone for 5th day; US bombers
seek to destroy enemy emplacements; 2 time bombs explode, Quangtri base; S
Vietnamese launch new division-sized operation, Central Highlands; rept 179 N
Vietnamese killed in weekend fighting

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 202 words

Apprehension that deluge of drug addicted former servicemen may be released into
Amer soc is being reflected in 4 bills coming up in Cong to require armed
services to keep addicts in service until they are cured; 1 of bills, sponsored
by Repr Halpern, would oblige addict to undergo treatment and rehabilitation on
his own time; his enlistment would be suspended while he was being cured; other
bills, sponsored by Reprs Koch, Rogers, Monagan and Carey, would merely extend
soldier's enlistment to provide for rehabilitation; Odyssey House proposes that
960-bed rehabilitation test project be divided among 4 services at cost of
$5,710,400; problems in rehabilitating addicts discussed; legislators say
services are under obligation to cure them because many become addicted because
of peculiar circumstances in Vietnam; sponsor of 1 bill, Repr Halpern, just
returned from Vietnam, repts he found heroin easily available from street
vendors near Army bases; estimates at least 60,000 men are addicted; Reprs
Murphy and Steele say that 'under no circumstances' should mil be allowed to
return addicts to civilian life unrehabilitated; rept, after Far East tour, that
number of mil addicts may be as high as 78,000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 152 words

3d in series of 'Dump Nixon' rallies organized by Allard K Lowenstein held,
Bloomington, Minn; ex-Sen McCarthy suggests he might lead 3d party if major
parties do not nominate candidates committed to ending war and reforming US pol,
s; McCarthy ridicules Dem Party Chmn O'Brien, Sens Humphrey and Muskie and
ex-Sec McNamara; says Congressionally mandated withdrawal from Vietnam may be
counterproductive and invite chaos in Indochina; urges instead that US negotiate
for a pol settlement; scores Nixon's Vietnamization policy as plan 'to change
the color of the corpses'; organizers, for 1st time, attract a few prominent
Repubs, including Mr and Mrs F P Heffelfinger, leading party contributors;
Lowenstein says his movement seeks to elect new Pres, not start another protest
movement; other speakers include Reprs Riegle and McCloskey, Lowenstein, and J
Kerry, leader of Vietnam veterans' protest in Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

A Lewis comment on int with N Vietnamese chief negotiator Xuan Thuy; notes his
confidence that his side will win and his suspicion of US policy and motives;
says he gave no indication that N Vietnam was prepared to give ground on its
aims or its negotiating tactics

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

S Vietnamese Govt decides to retry student Huynh Tan Mam on charges of treason;
he and 40 other students were arrested Mar '70 on charges of being members of a
Vietcong youth orgn; his trial in '70 ended when Sup Ct ruled that mil field ct
judging his case was unconst; new mil ct will try him and 21 other students;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 331 words

US scientists Dr Arthur Galston and Dr Ethan Signer, in Shanghai en route to US,
say that Communist China has developed much scientific information that US is
unaware of and that Chinese indicated they favor greater exchanges of
scientists; 2 are believed to be 1st US scientists to visit country in last 20
yrs and are certainly 1st to be allowed into Chinese research establishments;
they visited Natl Acad of Science in Peking, Peking U, Chung Shan U in Canton
and Futan U in Shanghai; Galston says they were given access to labs, libraries,
conf rooms and met with members of scientific staffs from whom they recd
considerable data on scientific advances; several projects and experiments they
observed described; rept China has develped method for mass-producing
gibberellin, plant hormone which significantly increases crop yields; Galston
and Signer rept that Natl Acad of Sciences, closed during Cultural Revolution
between '66 and '68, has been reorganized and is now operating; rept that acad
officials welcome sending delegates to internatl confs but they will not attend
any meeting attended by Nationalist Chinese repr; say they will urge greater
US-Chinese contacts after their return to US; Galston says that upon their
arrival, they were met by Dr Loo Shih-wei, who returned to China about 1947
after completing his doctorate at Calif Inst of Tech, where Galston was faculty
member; Loo Shih-wei accompanied 2 throughout their entire tour; pors; Galston
and Signer observe and photograph use of acupuncture to anesthetize patients
during 4 major operations at Peking Hosp No 3; Galston calls technique
'remarkable' and describes operation to remove tumor; says that Western
pharmacology has much to learn from traditional Chinese med; after visiting N
Vietnam, say North Vietnamese are making important progress in educ and pub
health; rept population increasing at annual rate of 2.8% or about 600,000 a yr;
rept being received by N Vietnamese Premier Pham Van Dong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 88 words

Enemy demolition experts creep into US base at Camranh Bay, S Vietnam and blow
up one and a half million gals of aviation fuel; no Amer casualties listed;
attack seen as 1 in series of enemy breaches of US base security; incident
underscores concern among US comdrs that US troops are becoming lax and
therefore vulnerable; other similar attacks by enemy demolition experts cited;
Gen Abrams anger troops' troops laxity noted; earlier enemy troops attacked a US
base 25 mi NW of Saigon, killing 1 Amer, wounding 18 others; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 14 words

16-yr-old Buddhist Phan Gia Ly immolates himself in antiwar protest, Hue, S
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Govt repts N Vietnamese forces attacked 2 Govt positions in northern sec of
Laos, were driven back from 1 but managed to rampage the other and kill 22
dependents of soldiers, wound 28 others

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Pres Nixon's press sec Ziegler says Adm rejects Gallup Poll which indicated that
69% believed they were not being told all that was known on the war in Vietnam;
insists Nixon makes a particular point of disclosing complete information;
suggests that results of poll are dependent on phrasing of questions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

US planes carry on normal operations out of Camranh Bay, S Vietnam although
fires burn more than 18 hrs after the enemy attack; mil spokesman says there is
plenty of aviation fuel available at Nhatrang and Phanrang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 110 words

Max Frankel comment on US policy stance on various issues in light of diplomatic
thaw in relations with USSR and Communist China; notes thesis in Washington that
USSR has decided to abandon diplomacy of simultaneous detente with W Eur and
continued tension with US in favor of relaxation with West as whole; comments on
diplomatic implications of USSR decision to be more forthcoming in arms control
and Eur troops reductions talks; notes Nixon Adm must soon choose stand on
Chinese representation in UN issue; sr US officials in Washington believe thaws
in US relations with USSR and China may add to frustration in Hanoi and make the
final withdrawal easier

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 27 words

Pretrial hearing for Capt Medina, charged with responsibility for Mylai
massacre, postponed until June 16 because mil judge is conducting ct-martial
elsewhere

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 107 words

Article on Repr Wilbur Mills's activities that indicate he plans to play key
role in Dem Pres pol; until 2 mos ago, he rarely spoke outside his Ark dist; now
he is 'on road' 2 days a week; he has spoken to 4 state legislatures in 4 wks;
says he is not candidate but would accept nomination; HR Dem group has organized
campaign to draft him through series of endorsements; his views on such major
issues as Vietnam, econ and racial integration outlined; Mills illus; discusses
his view that integration is dead matter since cts have broadened their
interpretation of it; slight difference between Repr Mills and Pres Nixon on
econ policy noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 4

LENGTH: 59 words

Lr holds it is doubtful that revaluation of some Eur currencies will have
deflationary effects; says it is entirely fruitless to attempt revaluation in
time of overheated prosperity without freezing prices and wages; holds US
payments deficit can be traced to expenditures for Vietnam war; notes US gold
holdings present problem that requires resolution

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 5

LENGTH: 26 words

Lr on S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao s (May 17,35:4) admitting corruption in
S Vietnamese Govt asks why Amers must die in support of such a 'democracy'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Tom Wicker says N Vietnamese chief negotiator Xuan Thuy, in int, makes plain the
essential illogic of Pres Nixon's stand linking POW release to troops
withdrawal; comments on E McCarthy's advocating a negotiated settlement rather
than a unilateral US withdrawal by a certain date

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

D Acheson, commenting on the debate concerning Pres Nixon's intentions regarding
troops withdrawal from Vietnam, says 'logic of the facts' would make clear a
complete withdrawal by the end of '72; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 25, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 12 words

Illus of 2 US soldiers, survivors of attack on Charlie 2 base, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 26, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 51 words

Henderson trial; Col W V Wilson, who made 1st Defense Dept probe of Mylai
massacre, questions if Henderson would have been able to probe incident
thoroughly and carry out his normal duties as brigade comdr at same time,
testimony; says after he finished his probe, he did not consider Henderson a
suspect

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 26, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 81 words

Sen Jacob Javits, ending 3-day visit in Saigon, says S Vietnam will need
$2-billion a yr in US mil and econ aid after US withdraws, news conf; says he
finds S Vietnamese and Amer officials confident S Vietnam could survive on its
own if US left a 'transitional force' there; says they anticipate need for such
a force probably until end of '73; says acceptance of aid would come only if S
Vietnam agreed to 'strict accountability' and showed 'reasonable prospect for
effective govt'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 26, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 27 words

US State Dept says there is 'no deal' involved in POWs release by S Vietnam;
hopes, but has no reason to believe, that Hanoi would proceed to release Amer
POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 26, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 164 words

Cong investigation team headed by Reprs Steele and Murphy, in rept to HR Finance
Com, repts that heroin addiction has become so great a problem in SE Asia that
only effective solution is withdrawal of all troops from area; says that bribery
and corruption at highest official levels in SE Asia have left little room for
hope that heroin traffic can be halted in near future; says only real long term
solution to problem of opium-heroin production is to outlaw cultivation of opium
poppies throughout world; rept detailed; repts 10% to 15% of US troops are
addicted and that in some units addiction may be as high as 25%; Repr R H Steele
is chief author of rept; repts at least 2 top-ranking Laotian officials,
including chief of gen staff, are deeply involved in heroin traffic; says some S
Vietnamese and Amer support personnel involved in Laotian campaign needed
treatment for heroin withdrawal pains because drugs were not readily available;
sees propects dim to halt flow of heroin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 26, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 17 words

Sen roll-call on amendments to extend draft and bar sending draftees to Vietnam
unless they volunteer

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 26, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 47 words

Repr William Mills, Repub, wins special election to fill 1st Cong Dist seat
vacated by Morton, defeating Boyer, Dem; tally; during campaign, both candidates
backed Pres Nixon's Vietnam policy and espoused conservative views although
Boyer was critical of Nixon Adm domestic policies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 26, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 191 words

Sen Strom Thurmond asks Pres Nixon to name Albert W Watson to Mil Appeals Ct;
says White House has informed him that apptmt will be made, subject to FBI
clearance; apptmt has been opposed by group of mil lawyers on grounds Watson is
arch-conservative and segregationist; Wesley Storer, who took his brother
Glenn's place as a soldier in Vietnam and served there a few days before he was
found out, returns to his home town of Yarmouth, Me; his brother Glenn who hates
Vietnam and had been home on leave returns to Vietnam to face charges of being
absent without leave; illus; Saudi Arabia King Faisal arrives, San Francisco;
attends dinner given by Standard Oil (California); to visit Williamsburg, Va, en
route to Washington, DC; UN Sec Gen Thant says his decision against term
extension is absolutely final; Astronaut Worden says Apollo 15 astronauts asked
emblem designer E Pucci to make it red, white and blue for partiotic reasons;
emblem described; illus; band leader Guy Lombardo receives hon degree from Univ
of W Ontario; Del Repr Little convicted on charges of violating census laws by
refusing to answer certain questions; will appeal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 26, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 3

LENGTH: 37 words

Dr G Margolis lr arguing against the present US mil draft system cites the
overrepresentation of 'less privileged whites and all but the very upper crust
of nonwhites' among draftees in Vietnam; illus of a Negro soldier

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 26, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 5

LENGTH: 18 words

Reply to May 7 lr on N Vietnamese troops in other offer US asks what US is doing
there; urges US withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 26, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 55 words

US Sen rejects (52-21) Nelson amendment to draft law barring assignment of
draftees to combat in Vietnam after the end of the yr without their assent; in
debate on amendment, Nelson quotes Defense Dept statistics in arguing that
draftees bear heaviest burden of war; Sen Stennis says proposal could create 2
classes of soldiers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 26, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 50 words

Biog of Dwight H Johnson, a Medal of Hon winner in Vietnam war, who was shot and
killed Apr 30 as he tried to rob a grocery store in Detroit; his early life,
life in Vietnam and psychological difficulties in making adjustments in his home
city, Detroit, because of his war experiences recounted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 26, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 19 words

S Vietnam says it is ready to accept N Vietnamese conditions for June 4 release
of POWs from S Vietnamse camps

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 27, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 71 words

US mil finds, as US role in war declines, that disposal of equipment in Vietnam
is more complicated than it was to build it or bring it in; so far 570,000 tons
of equipment have been returned to US; removal process described; illus; 19,978
kinds of items worth over $25-million when new turned over to S Vietnam;
equipment not returned to US or given to S Vietnam is put up for inspection by
US Govt agencies for use elsewhere

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 27, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 98 words

Prof J W Lewis says recent changes in Communist China's foreign policy offer US
opportunity to solicit Chinese aid and participation in internatl conf to
negotiate end to war, Sen Foreign Relations Com; holds allied actions in Laos
and Cambodia compelled China to expand its support for Communist revolutionaries
in Indochina; C W Yost urges Cong set specific date for US troops withdrawal,
says Hanoi would then release Amer POWs 'by that date, perhaps even before it';
Prof R A Falk urges US not only withdraw its troops but also back formation of
provisional coalition govt in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 27, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 95 words

US mil command issues order declaring all Vietnamese pharmacies off limits to
Amer servicemen in S Vietnam; order, which is another attempt to curtail
widespread use of drugs by troops, taken because variety of pharmaceutical
products normally available only by prescription in US are available without
prescription in local pharmacies; order also says that immediate action will be
taken to place off limits all known bars, hotels and other establishments and
areas where there is evidence that selling, pushing or trafficking of narcotics
or dangerous drugs take place

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 27, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 37 words

S Vietnamese Premier Tran Thien Khiem says that his Govt and Cambodia are ready
to sign agreement aimed at controlling smuggling, including that of heroin and
other narcotics, into S Vietnam, news conf, Pnompenh, Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 27, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 26 words

Informed sources in Saigon rept US pressure behind S Vietnamese decision to
accept Hanoi's conditions on June 4 POWs release; IRC role in transfer described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 27, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 4

LENGTH: 91 words

United Presb Ch assembly delegates, in voting to continue assembly's $100,000
Emergency Fund for Legal Aid, urges fund dirs to give matter serious thought
before channeling any additional funds to Davis Defense Com; $10,000 grant made
earlier has been criticized by many assembly delegates; assembly urges Pres
Nixon and Cong to end all mil involvement in Indochina 'as soon as possible' but
no later than the end of '71; calls for immediate cease-fire by both sides;
approves $70-million campaign within decade to 'help people help themselves'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 27, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 4

LENGTH: 11 words

Lr charges N Vietnam is not negotiating in Paris to end the war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 87 words

S Vietnamese forces, supported by Amer airpower, repulse N Vietnamese attack on
town of Snoul, beat back 4 attacks on Snoul's environs; rept 56 enemy soldiers
killed, their own casualties light; about 18,000 to 20,000 S Vietnamese soldiers
are reptd to be deployed along Route 7 and 2 other major routes in eastern
Cambodia; map; US planes aid S Vietnamese forces in repelling N Vietnamese
attack on Snoul, E Cambodia; 56 enemy reptd killed; S Vietnamese rept killing 80
enemy in 4 clashes in northern qr of S Vietnam; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

US command repts 38 Amers died in combat, 92 were wounded, wk; says there are
omissions in rept because of delay in reptg system; 476 S Vietnamese reptd
killed, 1,015 wounded; 3,063 enemy reptd killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (AFP)

LENGTH: 24 words

Le Dat Thuong, Vietcong officer who defected to Cambodian Army, says Vietcong
arty, not Cambodian, damaged Angkor Wat temple, news conf, Pnompenh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 214 words

Cong study mission urges, in rept made pub, that Army be required to identify
and rehabilitate the 26,000 to 39,000 heroin addicts in S Vietnam before
returning them to civilian life; rept recommends that if mil rehabilitation
efforts fail, an addict's commanding officer be required, prior to addict's
discharge, to commit him to the VA for 3 yrs for treatment and rehabilitation;
Repr Steele says soldier going to Vietnam runs greater risk of becoming an
addict than a combat casualty; Repr M F Murphy notes present denial of VA
facilities to addicts; rept estimates there are 30,000 to 40,000 servicemen
addicts in SE Asia, most of them in S Vietnam; rept cites official corruption
involved in situation; Steele says mission was aware of repts of S Vietnamese
Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky involvement in drug traffic but had been unable to
verify repts; rept says that so many soldiers in Vietnam are becoming addicted
to heroin that Nixon should order all troops home unless authorities in that
country, as well as in Laos and Thailand, halt drug traffic; suggest that
corruption at highest levels of Govts and mil of 3 countries leaves little hope
for halting traffic, but forecast 'major moves' by Nixon Adm in next 6 wks to
put pressure on SE Asian Govts; recommendations detailed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7

LENGTH: 91 words

5 Vietnam Moratorium Com officers appeal for contributions to enable them to pay
off a $15,000 debt to IRS and avoid seizure of their autos and other property; 5
are Sam Brown, David Mixner, Michael Driver, Marge Sklencar and Stephen Wilcox;
IRS claim represents withholding taxes on salaries of persons employed by the
com at the time of the '69 protests against the US incursion into Cambodia;
Brown says he sees no harassment in IRS action; says IRS has given 5 reasonable
length of time to try to raise money; deadline is set for June 3

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 93 words

Over 100 Amer women, members of Natl League of Families of Amer POWs and Missing
in SE Asia, stand vigil outside Paris bldg where peace talks are held; show
interest in N Vietnamese demand for fixed date for US withdrawal as price of
discussing release of Amer POWs; US reprs hold to their counterdemand that N
Vietnam announce similar measures to withdraw its forces from S Vietnam,
Cambodia and Laos; league official Mrs J Vinson says league seeks guarantee that
if withdrawal date is set by US all POWs held by enemy would be released prior
to that date

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 178 words

White House seen having decided to use stand-in candidates for Pres Nixon rather
than put his name on ballot in most primary races against Adm opponents; Taft is
1st to be identified as such; he says he will be Ohio favorite son, standing in
for Nixon, in effort to unite Ohio Repubs, press conf; sources say stand-ins
will be used to keep Nixon 'above combat,' seemingly preoccupied not with pol
but with affairs of state; say they are also being used to avoid seeming to take
challenger seriously; Taft charges 'forces from outside Ohio are plotting to
embarrass' Nixon; scores McCloskey and Goodell; McCloskey says Taft is trying to
protect Nixon from test of his Vietnam policy by Ohio voters; Goodell sees White
House worried about Repub insurgents; Taft and Sen Saxbe have told Adm that Ohio
Repub disunity could cost Nixon the state; Taft will not attempt to purge Ohio
Repub chmn Andrews; concedes he and Andrews have had 'differences from time to
time' but holds party must not be further split; ex-Sen Bricker warns Taft
against attempt to 'dump' Andrews; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 54 words

Prof B H Beckhart lr holds Vietnam war and loss of competitive power by US
business are to blame for US payments deficit; says basic remedies are to tailor
foreign expenditures to econ capacity and to check domestic inflation; says US
is condemned to progressive devaluations of dollar if pol considerations stand
in way

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 6

LENGTH: 23 words

Repr Robert H Steele says 'The soldier going to S Vietnam today runs a far
greater risk of becoming a heroin addict than a combat casualty'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 29, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 70 words

Allied forces claim to win new battle for Snoul; reptdly kill 99 enemy in 3-hr
battle near town; US and S Vietnamese planes reptdly kill 120 enemy about a mi
NE of Snoul; 8 S Vietnames officially reptd killed, 18 wounded, but repts from
scene say toll is much higher; N Vietnamese reptdly attack base near Pleiku,
reptdly lose 128 men; 56 N Vietnamese reptd killed, 6 S Vietnamese wounded in
Ashau Valley fighting; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 29, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Japanese co that sells polyester fabrics to S Vietnam sponsors Saigon's 1st
beauty contest

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 29, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 132 words

VFW comdr Herbert R Rainwater says US troop withdrawals from Vietnam should be
done at rate matching release of US POWs, Sen Foreign Relations Com; says enemy
cannot be trusted to release POWs if US withdraws unilaterally; urges US stop
withdrawals and not resume them until Hanoi begins releasing Amer POWs; says
press coverage of war is not 'hindered by facts'; scores critics of US war
policy; Rainwater scores Vietnam veterans's antiwar demonstration early in May;
scores veteran leader John F Kerry, who testified to com against war; Sen
Fulbright defends Kerry; Repr McCloskey testifies that briefings given by US
Govt officials in S Vietnam and Laos are 'deceptive, incomplete and misleading;
says intent is to conceal information from Amers as if they are the enemy;
Rainwater por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 29, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 7

LENGTH: 126 words

Anti-war protestors clash with rightists at Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd
semi-annual shareholder meeting, Tokyo; denounce co's investments in armaments
and defense-related industries; protestors include Peace in Vietnam members; are
silenced by sokaiya, group that demands payment from co to keep proceedings in
order; with their assistance co pres Y makita succeeds in getting agenda
approved; antipollution shareholders thwarted in attempts to express their
dissent at annual meeting of Nippon Kokan, which is accused of polluting air
with its steelmaking furnaces; antipollution shareholders thwarted in attempts
to express their dissent at annual meeting of Daishowa Paper & Pulp, which is
accused of discharging untreated chem wastes into rivers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 29, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 131 words

Internatl Conf on Cities final session; Vice Pres Agnew scores idea of Fed
Govt's moving hastily and with massive expenditure of funds to help cities 'as
soon as din of crisis and rhetoric of disaster' is heard; stresses Nixon Adm
policies of decentralization and revenue sharing as opposed to plea of many
Mayors for massive Fed aid; attacks NYC Mayor Lindsay's proposal for natl
cities; stresses Nixon Adm determination to maintain strong mil posture in Eur,
s to conf on cities, Indianapolis, sponsored by Adm and NATO; s seen helping
seal strong, pro-Adm cast on conf; youth who penetrated security ring waves
Vietcong flag during Agnew introduction; peace demonstrators protesting Agnew's
appearance are confined outside hall; Sec Richardson, D P Moynihan, Norway Min
Nordli also s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 30, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

S Vietnam's 1st internatl rock music festival takes place; Amer soldiers and
young Vietnamese attend; festival is benefit for families of Vietnamese soldiers
killed in Laotian operation earlier this yr; is organized by Vietnamese pub;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 30, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 51 words

Enemy attacks 8 US and S Vietnamese positions ranging from 85 mi N to 100 mi W
of Saigon; attacks are small; allied casualties reptdly are 2 killed, 25
wounded; Vietcong force reptdly attacks USN repair barge on Mekong River; 6
Amers reptdly wounded, a helicopter on board wrecked; details on other fighting

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 30, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

12 civilians killed, 11 wounded in N Vietnamese rocket attack on Danang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 30, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 25 words

Zumwalt says amnesty program for USN addicts is ltd to 11,400 men serving in
Vietnam war zone and does not involve men in Seventh Fleet in the Pacific

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 30, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 55, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Woodside, Queens, to dedicate memorial to local residents killed in World Wars I
and II, in Korea and Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 30, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Comment on S Vietnamese offer to repatriate N Vietnamese POWs, accepted by N
Vietnam, and US hope that N Vietnam will reciprocate by releasing some of the
339 Amer POWs it has acknowledged it is holding; illus of Amer POW Lt B Smith
getting med checkup in N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 30, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Tom Wicker analyzes pres election situation in S Vietnam; says US is 'tacitly
and explicitly' aiding Nguyen Van Thieu re-election campaign; urges US Cong
doves pass Sen Stevenson's resolution that would establish an Amer comm to
monitor US pol activities in S Vietnam between now and the election

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 30, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 108 words

US Chief of Naval Operations Adm E R Zumwalt announces that 30-day amnesty
program to rehabilitate Navy drug addicts in Vietnam will start July 1 and will
enable those who wish to kick habit to do so without prejudicing their careers,
news conf; says mil has responsibility to help addicts rehabilitate themselves
so that they will not return to civilian life with handicap; says amnesty period
will consist of helping addicts through withdrawal period and psychiatric
treatment to develop mental attitude necessary to help them from picking up
habit again; says program will be limited to Navy drug addicts presently serving
in Vietnam war zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 67 words

48 S Vietnamese students attending San Diego State Univ, Calif, are puzzled by
bitterness of US debate over war and resentful of hostility shown to them by
some antiwar militants on campus; say many students look upon them as the enemy,
not the Vietcong; resent criticism that US is fighting the war for S Vietnamese;
say many US students believe N Vietnamese propaganda; S Vietnamese students
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 53 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky confirms at news conf that he is a
candidate for Pres in Oct 3 election but tells newsmen to wait for a few days
for further details about his plans; observers say he will have difficulty
meeting nomination conditions that pro-Govt Deputies are trying to restore in
the election law

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 163 words

175 out of 479 Colgate Univ graduates stand up before Sec of State Rogers, who
spoke at ceremonies, to back up pledge of not accepting a combat role in
Indochina if drafted; pledge is announced by class valedictorian T W O'Brien;
hundreds of parents, faculty members and visitors stand up in support of
protesting students; earlier, Rogers, in s, said Pres Nixon is getting US out of
the war; illus; Rogers says NATO Mins Council, at forthcoming Lisbon conf hopes
to formulate new initiative to open talks with USSR on reducing forces in
Central Eur; says what is needed for future is not US neo-isolationism from
world affairs but 'more creative and realistic Amer participation' with broad
pub backing; appeals for foreign policy support from young; cites US plan to
withdraw 12,000 Amer soldiers from Japan, 20,000 from Korea, 9,000 from
Philippines and 16,000 from Thailand; says that he sees no need for changing US
policy in Middle East despite signing of UAR-USSR treaty

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 19 words

Pathet Lao leader Prince Souphanouvong pays unpublicized visit to N Vietnam with
delegation of Laotian officials

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

A H Weiler revs film, 'The Great Chicago Conspiracy Circus,' on '68 Chicago 7
conspiracy trial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 46 words

About 100 Vietnam veterans and 300 sympathetic Lexington, Mass, townspeople
fined $5 each for violating 3 AM curfew during peace demonstration and campout
on Lexington Green; veterans set out from Concord on peace march to Boston along
route followed by Brit troops in 1775

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 84 words

Lr charges Pres Nixon attaches to his 'peace' offerings conditions acceptable
only to a defeated foe; says he uses POWs as 'pawns'; says POWs are not
customarily released until a war is over; says that although Nixon claims to
have inherited the war situation, the pol goals were defined by Eisenhower-Nixon
Adm in '54 when it insisted at Geneva that Vietnam be partitioned and the south
barred from exercising self-determination because of the otherwise certain
election of a Communist-led govt; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 246 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 6

LENGTH: 112 words

Hanson W Baldwin denies assertion that US war in Indochina is based on killing
civilians; says if charge is true the population of both N and S Vietnam would
have been decimated by now instead of having increased since '65; claims number
of civilian casualties have been 'greatly exaggerated'; compares number of
civilians killed in Vietnam with those killed in other wars and mil actions;
says civilian casualties are far less in Vietnam war; cites Sen Kennedy Subcom
on Refugees estimate of a total of 1,100,000 civilian casualties since '65,
which Amb Bunker pointed out as 'based on extrapolations'; charges extreme
critics of US war conduct resort to the 'Big Lie'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
