
                               1 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 105 words

S Vietnamese House of Reprs, by narrow majority and after 2 days of boisterous
debate, votes that 3 members (Tran Ngoc Chau, Hoang Ho and Pham The Truc) are
guilty of engaging in pro-Communist activities; vote constitutes limited victory
for Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, who originally charged 3 with Communist affiliations
and asked House to remove their immunity from prosecution; House action leaves
immunity intact; Nguyen Van Thieu spokesman says Govt will try again next wk to
muster necessary votes for impeachment of 3; about 50 opposition reprs leave
hall and denounce vote; other details; group of opposition members illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 2

LENGTH: 105 words

US rept (as of Dec 20, 1969) of 9 yrs of Vietnam fighting lists 39,893 Amers
killed, 261,969 wounded and 1,350 missing and captured; rept lists 584,578 enemy
soldiers killed during same period; lists 68,309 S Vietnamese soldiers killed
since '65; details on recent action during 3-day New Yr's cease-fire declared by
enemy; allies have declared 1-day cease-fire; proclaimed 24-hr New Yr allied
cease-fire shattered by 30 significant violations that claim lives of 5 Amers
and 40 enemy; since enemy began its 3-day cease-fire, battles initiated by both
sides have claimed lives of 221 enemy and 16 allied soldiers; details on action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 25 words

Unusual methods used by US brigade commanded by Brig Gen H S Cunningham in
providing security for pacification in Bongson area of S Vietnam discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 79 words

Internatl Press Inst '69 press freedom survey says Vice Pres Agnew's attacks on
press and TV were most serious threat to press freedom in West; says most
serious aspect of attacks is implication that they were inspired by Pres Nixon;
Agnew, in Nov, scored TV networks for immediate analysis of Nixon's Nov 3
Vietnam s and later scored handling of news by some newspapers and magazines; in
rev of '60s, says underdeveloped nations are falling further behind in press
freedom

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 124 words

Vice Pres Agnew on Far East tour to explain to US allies Pres Nixon's doctrine
of Asian self-reliance; interrupts tour to make 1-day stop in Saigon; meets with
Pres Nguyen Van Thieu; brings New Yr's greetings to Amer troops; is accompanied
by Amb Bunker, Deputy Amb Berger and Gen Rosson upon arrival at Pres Palace;
greeted by Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky; in Manilla reptdly reassured Pres Marcos
that US intended to remain power in Pacific; Amer sources say reassurance was
essential because Asian leaders feared doctrine meant US was 'cutting and
running'; say view was made more pronounced by Nov 19 issuance of partial
transcript of secret Sen hearings on US defense commitments to Philippines;
Agnew prepares to leave Manila; wife accompanies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Sen H Williams makes unannounced visit to S Vietnam partly to investigate black
mkt currency manipulations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Army announces it will try Sgt D Mitchell on charges of assault with intent to
murder in connection with alleged massacre by US troops of S Vietnamese
civilians in '68 at Songmy; announces trial will be open to pub; notes mil judge
will be authorized to close portions of it; previously announced ct-martial will
be held to try Mitchell's platoon leader, Lt W L Calley Jr; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 30 words

C L Sulzberger holds Laos is most significant Amer policy failure in past
decade; stresses Laos's strategic importance as main mil hwy from N to S
Vietnam; revs US policy 'mistakes'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 6

LENGTH: 54 words

Lr, commenting on James Reston Dec 17 article saying N Vietnamese Communists
have been struggling for 23 yrs to clear 'peninsula' of foreign troops, says it
would be more accurate to say that Vietnamese Communists, from both North and
South Vietnam, have been struggling for 23 yrs to fasten totalitarianism upon
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 199 words

George C Wallace, who headed 3d party movement in '68 Pres election, sees '70s
as time when he will have his greatest impact, int, Montgomery, Ala; says
'unfashionable' ideas he put forward several yrs ago are suddenly finding
acceptance everywhere; holds he represents majority viewpoint in country; views
outlined; he says Pres Nixon's Southern strategy will fail because Nixon will
not be willing to move Repub party far enough in direction Southerners and
others who think like them want it to go; predicts tax revolt by working class,
lower middle class and farmers against tax exemptions for oil men and against
low tax rates for very rich; says increased militancy on part of
'Marxist-Communist-led' protest groups will lead to counter-militancy from
right, including demands for measures so repressive that they will infringe on
rights of law-abiding citizens; says US is not prepared to lose in Vietnam, and
therefore no Pres will be able to 'cut and run'; sees US in '70s trying to avoid
involvement in a war in which US natl interest is not clearly at stake; sees
some relaxation of tensions between US and USSR; doubts any US Pres will find it
necessary to use nuclear weapons; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 40 words

Vietcong issues communique describing mil situation as 'very good' and
instructing its troops to kill as many Amers and S Vietnamese Govt soldiers as
possible; issues communique calling on S Vietnamese soldiers to desert and join
Vietcong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

H Ross Perot expresses disappointment over failure of his quest but says he is
not giving up, news conf, NYC; says he will seek from Amers 'millions and
millions of lrs' of support to induce N Vietnam to provide better treatment for
prisoners; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

Allied and enemy forces expected to resume full-scale offensive operations
following expiration of New Yr's truces; US command charges enemy with 111
violations; 6 Amers, 123 enemy and 20 S Vietnamese soldiers and civilians reptd
killed in incidents; details on action; more than 40,000 Amers have been killed
in Vietnam war; casualty figures for last wk released

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 8

LENGTH: 38 words

S Vietnamese militant Buddhist faction pub account of alleged massacre
containing charges that almost 600 people were killed; says it will seek
$125-million in compensation from US Govt for victims; US officials decline
comment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 32 words

Deserted ammunition ship Badger State still burning 1-wk after being rocked by
explosion while enroute to Vietnam with cargo of bombs and rockets; USN abandons
salvage plans; 26 dead or missing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 126 words

Vice Pres Agnew visits wounded US soldiers at Longbinh hosp; says his visit to
Vietnam confirms to him 'wisdom' of US policy; says US follows right path in
seeking negotiated settlement while giving S Vietnamese time to gather strength
to demonstrate to Communists that they have nothing to gain by prolonging the
fighting; says his conversations with Nguyen Van Thieu and Bunker touched on
both strengths and weaknesses; visits with wounded soldiers at Longbinh hosp,
visits US soldiers at 2 arty sites; presents Nguyen Van Thieu with plaque
containing 4 tiny chips of moon and Vietnamese flag that was carried on Apollo
11 moon flight; Agnew congratulating US troops; says they should not be misled
by what they see and read in certain publications; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 2

LENGTH: 69 words

Ed deplores tendency of US Army authorities to manage news aimed at US
servicemen; deplores mgt in cases where news is merely unfavorable, not vital;
cites case of Sgt H Morgan of Armed Forces Radio and TV Network, who was
transferred from Saigon to Danang after making wry ref to Vice Pres Agnew and
being accused of editorializing by superior; notes instances of suppression
involving Stars and Stripes Pacific ed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 14 words

S Vietnamese servicemen and civil servants to receive bonus for lunar new yr
(Tet)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 45 words

US troops kill 16 enemy in sharp clash near Cambodian border; enemy shells 12
targets; Vietcong's 3-day New Yr's truce ends; US B-52s resume raids; US command
says there were 115 enemy attacks on allied forces during 1-day allied truce;
repts 6 Amers and 167 enemy killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Article on relaxed atmosphere in Hanoi; propaganda posters said to be few, their
tone said to be mild; views of N Vietnamese leaders on diverse subjects noted;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Consensus in Saigon said to be that '69 was very good yr for Pres Nguyen Van
Thieu; diplomats and observers in Saigon hold he is in position of remarkable
strength; some problems that faced him in '69 noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 104 words

Vice Pres Agnew arrives, Taipei; gets tumultous reception; confs privately with
Pres Chiang Kai-shek; presents moon rocks to him; illus; in talks with newsmen
en route to China says he hopes to convince Chiang that US plans to seek
'meaningful dialogue' with Communist China will not diminish US posture of
support for Nationalist Govt; makes like pledge in s on arrival; says attempt to
increase trade is part of Amer policy to lessen tension; predicts enemy will
time any new offensives to help stir up antiwar protests in US; says he wishes
everyone in US could have chance to 'look around' in Vietnam; leaves for
Thailand

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Comment on N Vietnamese mil strategy shift recently outlined by Min Vo Nguyen
Giap; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Comment on S Vietnamese House vote against 3 members and Pres Nguyen Van Thieu's
efforts against opposition

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 10 words

Lr says N Vietnam and USSR are aggressors in Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 36, Column 0

LENGTH: 33 words

Lr, commenting on Nov 30 articles by W Goodman and T Meehan on Nov 15 antiwar
demonstrations in Washington, says Goodman seems biased against radical leaders
of New Mobilization Com; Goodman replies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

Lawyer Carl McAfee, representing 28 families of US soldiers missing or captured
in Vietnam, arrives in Moscow to seek 'humanitarian gesture' from USSR

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 57, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

Negro soldier Billy H Terry Jr, killed in Vietnam, becomes lst Negro buried in
Elmwood Cemetery, Birmingham, Ala, previously rigidly restricted to whites; ct
ordered burial there in Dec; mil funeral described; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 52, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

Pres Nixon thanks Bob Hope for his Xmas tour of Amer mil bases in Vietnam; Nixon
confs with B Hope at latter's estate near Burbank, then golfs with him, James
Stewart, Fred MacMurray; occasion is his golfing debut before newsmen; other
working activities noted; confs with Budget Bur Dir Mayo, San Clemente; says all
major budget decisions have been made

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

James Forest and another Amer reach Hanoi as part of peace delegation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 69 words

Premier O Palme's planned visit to receive hon degree in May seen move to
improve Swedish-US ties by clarifying Sweden's stands on Vietnam, including Soc
Dem Govt's outspoken criticism of US policy in Vietnam; demands for action to
improve relations come from business interests and labor; US econ threats to
Sweden noted; Nixon Adm has still not sent amb to Stockholm to replace W W
Heath, who resigned a yr ago

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 94 words

Associated Press survey of world censorship in '69 repts Greek Govt imposes no
censorship on outgoing news but sometimes attempts to distort or repress it;
heavy domestic censorship in Peru but no restrictions on outgoing news; Greek
papers must adhere to strict controls; foreign correspondents have no difficulty
in transmitting news from Poland but dispatches are circulated among Communist
officials and phones are tapped; S Vietnam Govt suspended 14 papers in '69;
foreign correspondents generally transmit news freely but a few have been
restricted in field

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

Amb Pham Dang Lam, S Vietnam's chief negotiator, returns to Saigon for routine
talks with S Vietnamese Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Nixon Adm officials are concerned that pol and econ situation in S Vietnam is
deteriorating and this could affect pace of Vietnamization; keep close watch on
situation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

RC nuns rehabilitate homeless and troubled girls at Home of the Good Shepherd,
Vinhlong, S Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 54 words

N Vietnamese troops attack Amer field camp near Ducpho and kill 7 Amers, wound
11; 29 enemy killed; other details; enemy gunners in buffer zone shell targets
in S Vietnam 3 times; other recent action discussed; S Vietnamese Govt repts 10
civilians killed, 50 wounded, in enemy shelling of 2 refugee camps near Anhoa;
map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

Vietnam-bound ship, delayed when dockers refused to handle mil cargo as protest
against war, arrives Vungtau with shipment, including beer, after Govt
commissioned freighter into Navy and used sailors to load ship

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 42 words

Vietnam-bound ship, delayed when dockers refused to handle mil cargo as protest
against Vietnam war, arrives Vungtau S Vietnam with shipment, including
1,632,000 cans of beer, after Govt commissioned freighter into Navy and used
sailors to load ship

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 22 words

Maj K Raby and Capt A Daniel arrive in Saigon; say they plan to meet with Lt Gen
W Peers; Peers makes another survey of hamlet; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 121 words

Vice Pres Agnew confs with Thailand Premier Thanom Kittikachorn; advises him not
to be concerned about criticism in US Cong or press over US involvement; reptdly
says 'some people back home are so anxious to make friends of our enemies that
sometimes they even make enemies of our friends'; Min Thanat Khoman repts Agnew
says there will be no change in Amer policy and no lessening in US commitment to
Thailand; reptdly said that any negotiated settlement of war in Vietnam must
include withdrawal of all N Vietnamese troops from Laos; says he assured Thais
that views expressed or statements made by Amer Cong circles as well as by mass
media were personal ones aimed at creating disunity between Thailand and US;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 57 words

US command repts significant increase in enemy activity in northernmost mil
region; 2 Amers killed, 18 wounded in 3 ground attacks; 12 civilians killed, 72
injured in enemy shelling of 2 refugee camps near Anhoa; US helicopter downed in
Mekong Delta, all 4 crewmen killed; activity in northernmost region discussed;
other action reptd; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 218 words

Sp/5 R Lawrence's statement widens controversy over censorship issue;
controversy flares within ranks of Amer mil spokesmen; US command begins
investigation into charges of censorship and distortion on mil radio and TV
network in Vietnam; Lawrence and Cpl T M Sinkovitz removed from their
assignments; Sen Fulbright charge that Pentagon's information program is 'pub
relations' effort to make mil look good noted; many young soldiers in
information offices charge they are permitted to write only favorable news
releases and have been reprimanded for volunteering unfavorable information to
civilian reporters; other charges noted; Sp 4 B O Hodierne and Sp 5 M Maxwell,
both of whom were removed from their information posts, comment; top information
officials contend they follow strictly policy of 'maximum disclosure with
minimum delay' in dealing with civilian newsmen; some senior officials label as
'baloney' censorship charges; some specific incidents that have occurred
recently and touch on censorship assertions noted; text of statement made by
Lawrence on the air; Lawrence and Sinkovitz controversey stems from fact that
Vietnam war is undeclared war and no formal censorship has been imposed various
instances of charges and reprisals involving Stars and Stripes and broadcast
network; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 2

LENGTH: 39 words

Ed on censorship issue; notes conflicting policies of Defense Dept and US Army
in Vietnam; says censorship of news involving mil operations is understandable
in war zone, but notes problem of keeping Amer troops out of 'news cocoon'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 66 words

Group of assocs and ex-campaign workers of Sen McCarthy, H H Humphrey and late R
F Kennedy form orgn called Referendum '70 to make '70 election referendum on
Vietnam war; they will use their expertise to elect Dem, Repub and ind
candidates who share their concern over war and other problems; Prof Galbraith
is hon chmn; other members include F G Dutton, R N Goodwin, Mayor C Evers, G
Steinem

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

CBS, NBC and ABC protest to Nixon Adm Communications Dir H Klein that their
camera crews were barred from covering parts of Vice Pres Agnew's visit to
Saigon; network coverage was ltd to 1 crew on pooled basis while USIA covered
whole visit with 4 camera crews; Klein aide blames 'army snafu'; network
spokesmen say Klein is apologetic

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 77 words

US Vice Pres Agnew leaves Thailand and arrives, Katmandu, on 22-hr visit;
greeted at airport by Premier Bista and Amb C L Bunker; expresses satisfaction
with Nepal's ability to live peacefully with Communist China and India; is
accompanied by 2 Apollo 10 astronauts, Col T P Stafford and Comdr E A Cernan,
who present moon rocks to King Mahendra; small demonstration against US
involvement in Vietnam staged at USIS office; Agnew leaves for Kabul,
Afghanistan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 62 words

US reconnaissance helicopter struck by enemy fire while flying over southern
edge of zone; returns safely to S Vietnam; US spokesman says US found 151
indications of enemy presence in zone in wk ending Jan 3; enemy soldiers kill 11
marines, wound 59, in attack on camp S of Danang; 5 enemy killed; map; Vietcong
announces 4-day cease-fire in Feb for lunar new yr (Tet)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 6 words

Group of S Vietnamese recruits illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

Some specific instances of Vietcong terrorism noted; Vietcong terrorists have
killed 32,000 S Vietnamese civilians in 9 yrs, have wounded 129,000 and
kidnapped 60,000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (AFP)

LENGTH: 11 words

Hanoi feels tremors; residents flee homes; Peking silent on quake

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 129 words

S Vietnamese Sen adopts resolution describing alleged massacre as 'isolated act'
by Amer unit and not US policy; declines to label incident as a massacre or even
a killing; refuses to assign ultimate responsibility for incident to Pres Nguyen
Van Thieu, as proposed by Sen Tran Van Don; calls on Govt to provide better
security for civilians living in insecure areas and to improve coordination
between S Vietnamese and Amer mil commands so that such incidents do not occur
again; resolution seen as victory for Nguyen Van Thieu; charges against Govt by
Tran Van Don noted; several Sens say they consider Tran Van Don's allegations
more of an effort to embarrass Nguyen Van Thieu than to shed light on incident;
some conclusions in rept made by com under Tran Van Don noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 3

LENGTH: 56 words

C L Sulzberger says greatest success of Nixon Adm at end of '69 may be defusing
of war; says Nixon Adm, by Vietnamization and other moves, appears to follow
less dangerous course; says prospects look assuring; says US prestige around
world begins to rise; notes relative speed with which 'storm' over Songmy
incident has started to fade

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 56 words

Enemy gunners down 3 Amer helicopters in new fighting near Danang; 45 enemy
killed in fighting, 18 Amers wounded; Amer officials reveal savage N Vietnamese
attack on heavily fortified USMC bn hq 26 mi S of Danang; 13 marines and 38
enemy killed, 63 marines wounded; 2 civilians reptd wounded in enemy shelling of
Danang air base; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 41 words

Defections by people with connections with Vietcong dropped sharply in Dec to
less than 1/2 number of those who switched sides in Oct; 47,023 persons reptdly
turned themselves over to S Vietnamese officials in '69; listed '68 number is
18,171

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 40 words

Nixon Adm Communications Dir Klein says network TV camera crews will get
priority over Govt camera teams in covering trips overseas by all Govt
officials, result of TV networks charges over coverage of Vice Pres Agnew visit
to S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 80 words

Vietnam Moratorium Com announces it will sponsor nationwide 'taxpayer rallies'
on April 15 and will start campaign service to help pol candidates opposed to
war; says it will concentrate for next 3 mos on attempts to convince Amers that
Pres Nixon policy will not end the war; focus on issue of mil spending as cause
of high taxes; says 15th of each mo will be designated as peace action day; says
it does not expect 'major events' in next 3 mos; student leader S Brown comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 39 words

Communist Chinese charge d'affaires Chen Chao-yuan charges USSR gives India econ
and mil aid at expense of Communist China, N Vietnam reception, New Delhi; USSR
Amb Pegov replies USSR wants India to be self-sufficient in both spheres

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 117 words

Allied officials estimate N Vietnamese infiltration into S Vietnam in '69
totaled 100,000 to 110,000 men, 30,000 to 40,000 fewer than in '68; say, as in
'68, infiltration rose toward end of yr; estimate there are 230,000 to 240,000
enemy soldiers and Communist party functionairies in S Vietnam, or ready to
enter; '68 figure was 290,000; authorities say significance of '69 enemy figures
as key to enemy intentions is difficult to assess; recent repts on infiltration
by Nixon and Secs Laird and Rogers noted; former infiltrator gives picture of
infiltration process; other former infiltrators tell of their experiences;
allied forces, excluding US and S Vietnam, total 68,900; US force totals 474,400

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 23 words

Bklyn Fed Dist Judge throws out suit by Walter G Pietsch, who sought to have
Vietnam war declared unconst; holds ct lacks jurisdiction

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 39 words

Lt Gen W Peers group leaves Vietnam after 12-day inquiry into Songmy incident;
says inquiry has uncovered some things that will have bearing on current
ct-martial proceedings; Peers says he will rept to Sec Resor and Gen
Westmoreland

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 35 words

Father of missing US pilot says that N Vietnamese Embassy in Moscow has agreed
to ask Hanoi whether his son was captured or killed; says he received
'unbelievably polite' treatment during meeting at embassy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 19 words

Saigon Govt announces firecrackers, banned since '68 Tet (Lunar New Yr)
offensive, will again be banned on new yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 53 words

New fighting reptd near Danang and Cambodian border; field repts say enemy tries
to maneuver into position for attacks on allied bases in new phase of
winter-spring offensive; 39 enemy killed near Tamky; 5 Amers killed, 16 wounded
in same battle; 2 more US helicopters downed; 32 enemy killed near Cambodian
border; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 44 words

State Dept says N Vietnamese infiltration into S Vietnam in '69 was less than
1/2 of '68 flow; dept spokesman repts infiltration in '69 estimated at 100,000
to 110,000, compared with 250,000 in '68; dept agrees with Saigon repts on
number of enemy in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 43 words

24-hr gen strike in Saigon by thousands of workers extended for another day to
back demands for pub bus service in city; labor union estimates 55,000 are on
strike, Govt says only 15,000 workers are on strike and there is little outward
effect on city life

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

C L Sulzberger sees pact as casualty in '70s; revs its history and objectives;
evaluates its success; details role of Sec Dulles; holding SEATO has never
worked, says it did enable US to aid S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 82 words

James Reston on continued indifference and feeling of helplessness about
problems and outrages despite all the 'noisy' indignation and defiance of
demonstrators, officials, preachers, judges, teachers and parents; Reston says
Vietnam war is longest in Amer history and has taken 40,044 Amer lives in 8 yrs;
wounded 263,003 in 8 yrs; notes rept that US casualties for wk are lowest in 3
yrs; J Reston notes State Dept rept on infiltration; notes Time (pub) poll on
Vietnam atrocity charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 4

LENGTH: 25 words

Reply to Dec 31 lr by Truong Dinh Dzu's son on recent spy trial and S Vietnam
Pres Nguyen Van Thieu regime says he confuses ambition with patriotism

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

John Hightower named Museum of Modern Art (NYC) dir; Hightower, who has been
exec dir of NYS Arts Council for last 6 yrs, seen having earned reputation as
skilled admr and sponsor of innovative programs, notably in area of ghetto arts
projects; he sees museum role to develop 'in broadest of all possible contexts
the sense of community,' int; illus; biog sketch; por; Art Workers Coalition
stages lie-in before Picasso's Guernica, Museum of Modern Art, NYC, to protest
what they charged was museum's failure to keep promise to collaborate with them
on poster protesting alleged massacre in Songmy, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 122 words

Ed Sanders, 'exuberant spokesman for cultural revolution,' and Donald Kalish,
middle-aged 'staid and serious' peace worker, testify for defense; they are
called examples of divergent wings of radical movement; Sanders is at odds with
Judge Hoffman from begining; refuses to be sworn, asking to affirm instead; Govt
agrees; he tells of meeting on Jan 4 '68 at Rubin's NYC home at 2 radicals,
reflecting diversity of movement, testify; Mr Sanders said he was asked to
coordinate rock groups for Yiopie 'Festival of Life' during conv; Kalish, who
also refuses to be sworn, testifies he was co-chmn of Mobilization Com to End
War in Vietnam and tells of his participation in Mobilization meetings leading
up to demonstrations during conv

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 166 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says it will be 'impossible and impractical' to withdraw
all Amer combat troops in '70, news conf; says further Amer withdrawals will
depend on 'crucial question' of whether US supplies S Vietnam with adequate
equipment and funds to modernize its armed forces; says he is drawing up list of
required aid; says he has been assured by Nixon Adm that necessary assistance
will be provided; speaks of troop withdrawals in terms of yrs; says he believes
peace will come in 2 or 3 yrs when communists are defeated; acknowledges no
progress has been made in Peace Talks, news conf; says S Vietnam will continue
to attend conf; says he believes enemy will not negotiate seriously in Paris as
long as it is in a weak battlefield position; says Communists will launch
another gen offensive in near future; paints rosy picture of '69, TV s; says 97%
of rural population lives in areas under relative control of Saigon Govt; warns
'70 will require further sacrifices by S Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

Vietnam Peace Talks session; acting chief of Amer delegation Philip C Habib
proposes 'restricted' sessions that would consist of discussion of concrete
proposals to alternate with formal sessions as 'way of ending sterile debate';
other side rejects proposal, counters with its standing proposal for private
US-NLF meetings; Habib reads statement saying US prefers to follow path of
negotiation; other details on session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

Prof T Taylor, in article on alleged Mylai massacre in Vietnam, discusses
question whether obedience to superior's order may be defense against criminal
charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 19 words

Sp/5 Lawrence and Cpl Sinkovitz transferred from US radio and TV network to
other duties within command in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 22 words

Sweden allocates $775,000 to IRC for humanitarian aid to Vietnam; orgn will
decide how sum is to be divided between N and S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 73 words

Reprs for New Mobilization Com to End War in Vietnam, SCLC and Black Panthers
announce plans to mark birthday of late Rev Dr King with protests in 24 cities
against policies of repression and genocide against blacks and other groups,
news conf, Washington; Panther repr says his orgn is preparing to charge US with
genocide before UN; is backed by SCLC official; Gov Curtis issues proclamation
setting 'Martin Luther King Junior Day' in Me

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 35 words

2 Army medics tell mil investigators that Amer troops fired into village for
target practice last June and killed S Vietnamese civilians; Army officials
acted after incident was disclosed by Repr Van Deerlin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 67 words

US troops, supported by tanks, arty and air strikes, kill 109 enemy in 2 days of
fighting near Tayninh; 2 Amers killed, 10 wounded; 1 US helicopter downed; US
marines kill 8 enemy in northernmost mil region; 2 more US helicopters downed; S
Vietnamese troops kill 19 enemy near Quangngai, kill 26 in Mekong Delta; US
repts enemy covered its retreat from position near Tayninh by using tear gas;
maps

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 99 words

Pres Nixon's 57th birthday; he, wife, daughter Patricia fly to Northampton Mass,
where they attend dinner for Nixon given by daughter Julie and son-in-law David
Eiwenhower at their apt; Eisenhowers unable to attend planned White House fete;
Nixon greeted by small crowd of townsfolk; illus; crowd hushes small group of
demonstrators; party returns to White House; earlier, Nixon got phone greeting
from Mrs D D Eisenhower and humorous present from White House staff; Press press
sec says Cardinal Cooke, recently back from Xmas visit to Vietnam, repts to
Nixon that troop morale is pretty high

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

Pathet Lao and N Vietnamese forces reptdly fire rockets into Pakse, 2d largest
city; kill 1 person, wound 2; strike US AID compound but cause no serious
damage; Premier Souvanna Phouma scores N Vietnam's role in war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 129 words

A T Rambo, former dir of private research project concerning refugees made by
Human Sciences Research Inc in '66, says his interviewers turned up evidence
that S Korean forces murdered 'hundreds' of S Vietnamese civilians while on
tactical duty in Phuyen Prov; says he was ordered by Amer Army officer to stop
making inquiries and not to mention allegations in rept; says his interviewers
were so angered that they wanted to mount protest, but he persuaded them that
matter should be handled 'through regular channels'; says he submitted rept, but
has heard nothing of it since; Pentagon spokesman confims Defense Dept
commissioned study, but says rept has not been rendered; Rambo says he has heard
that Rand Corp study confirms his own research; corp spokesman denies this

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 107 words

Rand Corp aide, who asks not to be identified, says that ints he conducted in
Vietnam in late '66 turned up 'hearsay evidence' of S Korean troop atrocities
against civilians; says allegations were made to Amer researchers who were under
US Govt contract to conduct study of war's progress; Cong source D S de Haan
says Sen subcom has been aware of Rambo rept for some time, but has not been
able to obtain copy; says rept is classified as 'secret' by Pentagon; Pentagon
spokesman says Pentagon is trying to 'put pieces together' and 'see if there is
a rept'; S Korean spokesman Col Kim Byung Kwon denies Korean soldiers committed
massacre

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 76, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

Sen E J McCarthy, visiting USSR, attends play at Taganka Theather based on poems
of A Voznesensky, Moscow; discusses writing and poetry with Voznesensky and
theater dir Y Lyubimov; Voznesensky says Russian poets have an advantage because
of country's cultural tradition; McCarthy sees performance of Antiworld; visits
N Vietnamese Embassy to talk about need for making known names of US prisoners

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 11 words

Comment on S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu statement on offensive

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Ed credits Vice Pres Agnew with having adhered more closely to Pres Nixon policy
formulations, in some instances, than did Nixon himself; sees Agnew tour raising
new questions on Adm determination to avoid future Vietnams

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Lr criticizes Vietnamization concept, urges US-N Vietnamese mil accord while US
announces all US troops will be withdrawn by '71

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 12; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

All industries, except defense industries, optimistic about outlook following
end of Vietnam war; defense industries concerned about conversion problem when
Vietnam war ends; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 12; Page 30, Column 7

LENGTH: 14 words

Aerospace indus officials hold peace in Vietnam would spur business throughout
'70s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 1; (GP)

LENGTH: 61 words

Gallup Poll finds Dems tend to favor withdrawal of Amer troops from Vietnam
immediately or by end of yr, while most Repubs favor withdrawal only when S
Vietnamese are able to handle war themselves; says views of Dems previously
paralleled those of Repubs; details from poll, which includes opinions gleaned
from subdivisions as to sex, educ level, age and region

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHS & CHARTS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 55 words

US spokesman says US war communiques no longer give distances of battles from
Saigon because US command is 'trying to eliminate the overemphasis' on their
closeness to city; says distances are now given from nearest town or village,
and from Saigon only when it is 'significant'; 6 Amers killed by Vietcong
grenades near Bencat

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 48 words

Enemy kills 4 Amers and wounds 79 in shellings of US units at arty base 300 mi
NE of Saigon and in other areas; details on attack on base; allied troops kill
33 enemy near Tayninh; US troops later rept discovery of bodies of additional 56
enemy soldiers; other action reptd; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 5

LENGTH: 12 words

Lr scores Vice Pres Agnew's 'patriotic pep talk' to US troops in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

Pro-Communist Laotian Patriotic Front opens information bur in Hanoi

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 78 words

Amer forces uncover major N Vietnamese communications center just N of Saigon
that intercepted at least 1,400 operational messages and presumably compromised
some field operations; 12 N Vietnamese soldiers trained to speak and write
English captured, another soldier killed when communications center was
discovered 3 wks ago; N Vietnamese were not able to break authorized Amer codes,
but many US troops had been using unauthorized codes, easily decipherable by
enemy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 148 words

Defence Sec M Laird says alleged atrocities by S Koreans are not responsibility
of US command, TV int; says matter should be handled by S Korean and S
Vietnamese Govts; concedes Defense Dept has received 'certain repts' of alleged
atrocities; says repts have been called to attention of S Vietnamese and S
Korean Govts; F West, researcher for Rand Corp project funded by Defense Dept,
says he received 'hearsay information' of S Korean brutality during several
trips to S Vietnam, telephone int; says he is 'pretty convinced' instances of
brutality did occur; says he presented his information in written rept to
'highest levels' at Defense and State Depts and Natl Security Council; says his
rept was made 'at direct urging' of Asst Defense Sec and an admiral; Pentagon
spokesman says there are repts and documents bearing on situation, but says he
is not familiar with West's rept; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 15 words

B-52s press raids on Ho Chi Minh Trail despite presence of enemy surface-to-air
missiles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

US troops continue to apply pressure in Tayninh Prov; 15 enemy killed in area;
61 were killed yesterday; map; 1 Amer and 4 S Koreans killed in helicopter crash
at Danang; 3 other Amers and 18 Koreans injured; Amer machine gunner taking aim
during battle at Nuibaden illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

2 teams of American & French scientists rept US defoliation efforst in Vietnam
Velasco regime is either oblivious or indifferent to; lauds journalists' fight
against decree

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 3

LENGTH: 44 words

Tom Wicker says Pres Nguyen Van Thieu is likely to cause more trouble for Pres
Nixon's Vietnamization plan than US war critics; comments on former Pres Johnson
confirmation that Nguyen Van Thieu, in fall of '68, delayed US bombing halt to
help Nixon defeat Humphrey

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 5

LENGTH: 26 words

Mrs L Hubner to be tried for flying US flag upside down as part of Nov '69
antiwar moratorium; is released in $500 bail; details on case; Mrs Hubner illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 5

LENGTH: 95 words

Rev M L King's birthday to be observed, NYC, with special programs and memorial
services by many orgns; city's pub and parochial schools to be closed; UFT has
provided special kits for ps students which are based on important events in
King's life; position of retail stores on marking birthday is unclear; Natl
Urban League dir Young urges Fed, state and local govts to observe Jan 15 as
official holiday; NY Vietnam Moratorium Com announces at joint news conf with
city com for observance of M L King Jr's birthday that Jan 15 will be official
moratorium day for Jan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

Defense witness M Simons testifies 2 Justice Dept reprs told him 2 wks before
conv that Daley was blocking permits for demonstrators to sleep in pks;
testimony is 1st directly tying Daley to decision on permits; Chicago officials
contend that Mayor has nothing to do with issuing permits and that that is
handled by depts concerned; defense contends that in practice Daley controls
issuance of major city permits; Judge Hoffman upholds Govt's objections to
defense's efforts to introduce documents showing Mobilization Com's 'peaceful
intent' in going to Chicago

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 21 words

Wives of 4 Amer pilots missing in Vietnam abandon attempt to enlist aid of USSR
officials in getting news of their husbands

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 16 words

Sen McCarthy confs in Paris with Philip Habib and Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh, Vietcong
delegation head

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 80 words

US mil command announces 1st Inf Div will be major combat element to leave
Vietnam in 3d phase of Pres Nixon's withdrawal program; other combat units
scheduled to be pulled out by April 15 listed; none of troops will leave before
early Feb; authorized US troops level will be 434,000 by April 15; some details
on combat role of units to be withdrawn; allied troops have killed 130 enemy
soldiers in last 2 days of fighting near Laotian border and Danang; 6 Amers
killed, 20 wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

Lr from W A Tidwell Jr sees Communists backing Amer opponents of Vietnam war to
make it difficult for US to intervene militarily on behalf of Israel holds
USSR's policy depends on continuation of US 'peace' campaign

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 29 words

Lr, noting assurances by Sen H Scott that all US combat troops will be removed
from Vietnam within a yr or 2, leaving only 200,000 support troops, urges
complete US withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (CP)

LENGTH: 24 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu scores advocates of coalition or neutralist
govt, s, Vungtau; says coalition is 'suicide and self-poisoning'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

Tex Ritter, former Western singing star and candidate for Repub nomination for
Sen from Tenn, says he backs Pres Nixon's Vietnam policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 52 words

US troops capture enemy base camp near Danang; 7 enemy killed in fighting;
Vietcong deserter leads Amer troops to enemy supply cache near Tamky; analysts
in Saigon say they do not expect enemy to mount major offensive during Tet;
expect upsurge in fighting; details on enemy strength in specific areas; map;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 79 words

2 teams of Amer and French scientists rept US defoliation efforts in Vietnam
have cut back Cambodian rubber production 10% with about 1/3 of all rubber trees
damaged and have injured various kinds of plant life; most trees expected to
recover rapidly but some damage might persist for over 20 yrs; 1 team of US
scientists visited in July after agreement between US and Cambodia stemming from
Cambodian protests; 2d team of 3 scientists visited at private inv of Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

Sen Eugene McCarthy confs with Xuan Thuy, N Vietnam's chief delegate to peace
talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

Thai Army Comdr repts 16 terrorists, believed to be N Vietnamese, attacked Ubol
air base at which Amer Air Force personnel is based, wounded 1 Amer airman; 6
terrorists killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Nassau County Exec Nickerson requests investigations by NYS Supreme Ct Appellate
Div and NYS Atty Gen into treatment of Mrs Hubner

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 3

LENGTH: 14 words

Lr says lesson of Songmy is that Vietnam war is too important to be left to gens

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 15 words

Col Dang Toa, chief of staff of N Vietnamese Army's 2d Div, defects to S
Vietnamese side

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 23 words

Sen Foreign Relations Com plans to open pub hearings on Vietnam on Feb 2; Sen
Fulbright reptdly plans to build hearings on 10 resolutions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

Army's investigation of Songmy incident widened to include 13 soldiers and 18
former soldiers, 5 more men than were previously known to be under scrutiny;
Mitchell to be ordered to face ct-martial on charge of committing assault with
intent to murder 8-yr-old Vietnamese male

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 37 words

Saigon police break up meeting in which militant Buddhist students called on
people to rise up in natl campaign for peace; Saigon Buddhist student leader
accuses US and S Korean troops of indiscriminately killing civilians

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

19 enemy killed in attack on allied base near Cambodian border; 8 enemy killed
trying to cross Saigon River

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 75 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says he expects to announce reorganization of S Vietnamese
armed forces later this yr, informal news conf marking S Vietnamese Govt's
declared victory over enemy forces around Special Forces camps of Buprang and
Duclap in '69; says move will involve territorial forces and redeployment of
some units; says increase in regional forces and provincial militia is planned;
links reorganization to expected change in enemy's strategy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 101 words

Defense Sec M Laird announces 1,250,000 mil and civilian workers will lose jobs
as result of cuts in mil spending already made or planned in fiscal '71 defense
budget, news conf; details cuts in defense spending; says driving force behind
cuts is concern over inflation and desire to provide more funds for domestic
programs; says even after US withdraws more substantial number of troops from
Vietnam and turns over major responsibility for fighting war to S Vietnamese,
roughly half remaining Amers will be combat troops, news conf; stresses their
mission will be to protect remaining US support forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 108 words

N Vietnamese negotiator Ha Van Lau says Pres Nixon's 3 criteria for withdrawal
of US forces can never be met, 50th session; criteria are progress in talks,
reduction of level of fighting in S Vietnam and evidence that S Vietnamese can
assume burden of natl defense; Ha Van Lau says Nixon's real policy is to prolong
indefinitely US mil occupation of S Vietnam; Habib scores Hanoi-Vietcong
position on peace; allied and foreign diplomats agree peace-making attempts are
near rock bottom; Hanoi and Vietcong ignore Amer proposal for private sessions;
Vietcong distributes what it says is list of victims of alleged massacre by US
soldiers at Songmy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 100 words

Sen Tran Van Don and 14 other S Vietnamese Sens announce formation of pol bloc
they say will become nucleus of wider opposition front; Tran Van Don says group
is dedicated to finding pol solution to reunification of N and S Vietnam under
non-Communist Govt, news conf; says group will seek supporters in all major pol
and religious groups and will decide by next yr whether to enter candidate in
Pres election in Nov '71; new group will be called People's Bloc; group issues
7-page manifesto charging Nguyen Van Thieu Govt has failed to cope with problems
facing country; agrees with Govt's war policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 44 words

Vietnam war foes in US form group called Com of Liaison With Families of
Servicemen Detained in N Vietnam to facilitate communication between POWs and
their relatives in US; say Hanoi has agreed to work with com; Mrs C Weiss is
co-chmn; explains what com will do

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 10 words

Vietnam's allied and enemy casualty figures for wk reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

Vietcong guerrillas kill 16 Vietnamese and wound 21 in attack on hamlet near
Songmy; 1 Amer killed, 1 wounded in assault

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

N Vietnamese bns overwhelm Govt force, capture strategic hill on Plaine des
Jarres

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 31 words

Amer Legion members begin natl fund-raising drive to collect $200,000 for legal
defense fund for Lt W L Calley; Dr G T Beck is drive chmn; Calley hearing set on
Vietnam atrocity charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

S Vietnamese student says in '66 he interviewed at least 100 refugees who told
him stories of indiscriminate killings and destruction by S Vietnamese soldiers
in Phuyen Prov; says he and 7 other students were hired by Rambo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 31 words

Vice Pres Agnew, in Auckland, NZ, says allies must stand firm on Vietnam war and
not be swayed by antiwar factions; antiwar demonstrations staged; he prepares to
leave for Honolulu

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 51, Column 1; (GP)

LENGTH: 94 words

Gallup poll finds Pres Nixon is backed by 61% of Amers on eve of 1st anniv in
office, disapproved by 22%; 17% have no opinion; Gallup orgn calls popularity
during 1st yr remarkably stable; Nixon's high point was 68% following Nov 3
Vietnam s; low point was 56%, recorded in Oct during period of deep depression
over war; his 12-mo avg is 62%, based on 19 nationwide Gallup polls; 1st-yr avg
is well below that for last 3 Dem Pres; unusual number of persons withheld
judgment about Nixon during 1st yr; tables show latest results and trend since
he took office; gph

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHS & CHARTS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 58, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Dr Howard Rusk on development of prosthesis (body parts) mfg facilities in
Africa, Latin Amer and Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 14 words

Comment on possibility that enemy will launch offensive in Feb at Tet, Vietnam;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Comment on recent Ha Van Lau statements and N Vietnamese stand; lr suggests more
democracy and other reforms as antidote to violence

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 97 words

Article on workload facing Cong; Dems seen suddenly bereft of issues at time
when they seek issues for Cong elections; pol balance and control of legis
course seen having passed from Cong to White House; 5 issues examined as example
of how Adm has seized initiative; comment on neutralization of Vietnam issue
which has been brought about by Pres Nixon's Vietnamization program; Dems now
applaud Nixon's peace efforts; Adm charges of Cong inaction on its crime pkg
noted; comment on pollution issue; Nixon welfare reform plan seen taking welfare
issue away from Dems in '70 elections

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

Lr on US involvement in Vietnam stresses world yearning for peace; deplores L B
Johnson's disclosure (in Dec 27,1:6 TV int) that he did not want to run for Pres
in '64 but was persuaded to do so by wife

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 49, Column 1

LENGTH: 137 words

Forum held, Syracuse U; NYS Gov, Sen, Atty Gen aspirants attend; Dem Sen
aspirant O'Dwyer charges Gov Rockefeller's series of Latin-Amer fact-finding
missions for Pres Nixon produced little more than 'greetings from dictators',
lauds Goodell for Vietnam antiwar efforts; W S Greenwalt, who seeks to unseat
NYS Atty Gen Lefkowitz, charges Lefkowitz's reputation as friend of consumer is
founded mainly on pub relations; Dem gubernatorial aspirant County Exec
Nickerson scores S Mall project as wasteful; Dem gubernatorial aspirant H J
Samuels scores Legis operation as 'disaster,' charging there is frequent
conflict of interest, inefficient staff operations by pol appointees; urges
unicameral system for longer terms; opponent Dean A K Campbell disagrees;
William vanden Heuvel, Dean A K Campbell participate in forum

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

United Ch of Christ pres Rev R V Moss repts he will spend Easter Holiday in
Vietnam to min to combat troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 57 words

US command repts finding bodies of 2 Amers (Capt D R Devers and M Sgt J H
O'Neill) who were captured by Vietcong, put on exhibition and shot to death in
'66 near Hue; bodies of 3 S Vietnamese soldiers also found in grave; US
spokesman says there are other repts of Amer POWs being executed by Vietcong; 42
enemy killed in scattered action map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

Wives of 4 missing Amer fliers fly to Laos to seek assistance of N Vietnamese
and Pathet Lao officials in obtaining information; Moscow radio says broadcasts
to US will include messages from POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

Richard Hughes, Amer, turns over to Vietnamese operation of Saigon home for boys
he founded in '68 and has run for 20 mos; comments; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 108 words

S Vietnam mil hq announces replacement of Brig Gen Nguyen Thanh Hoang as comdr
of 7th Div by Col Nguyen Khoa Nam, and replacement of Brig Gen Pham Van Phu, who
is promoted to comdr of S Vietnamese Special Forces, as 44th Special Tactical
Zone comdr by Col Vo Huu Hanh; move reptdly is designed to improve mil
leadership; shifts described as beginning of major shake-up in S Vietnamese
Army; sources say Amer advisers were not happy with performance of 7th Div;
changes seen as victory for Amer advisers; Pham Van Phu replaces Brig Gen Lam
Son; S Vietnamese mil hq also announces replacement of 14 prov chiefs in move to
make Govt adm more efficient

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 62, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

S Vietnam's '69 econ revd; econ, at end of yr, said to be still trying to adapt
to austerity measures imposed in Oct by Nguyen Van Thieu; bumper rice crop
noted; '69-70 S Vietnamese crop put at 5-million metric tons, 17% above '68-69
level; Govt officials see nation achieving self-sufficiency this yr; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 62, Column 5

LENGTH: 52 words

S Vietnamese output rise attributed partly to increasing use of high-yield,
'miracle' rice IR 8-5, which was grown on 6% of rice land in '69; Pres Nguyen
Van Thieu land reform bill expected to become law in '70; under bill, farmers
would become owners of land they now till; landlords currently own 75% of farms

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 63, Column 2

LENGTH: 32 words

Article on S Vietnam's urgent need for foreign investment; some Amer cos have
unsuccessfully tried to take advantage of investment opportunities, 1 co's
investment has come to fruition; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

Pres Nixon's Nov 3 Vietnam s in which he asked for support of 'silent majority'
for his policy was largely passed over in assessments of Nixon's 1st yr but
aides say it represented his greatest gamble and greatest triumph of yr; s seen
indicating that on major occasions he is likely to disregard advice of staff in
favor of own instincts and judgments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 45 words

POW liaison com opens NYC office; Mrs Cora Weiss says numerous families of POWs
have been contacted; Peace with Hon Com begins drive to collect million
signatures on lrs asking N Vietnam to pub list of Amer POWs and allow inspection
of prison camps by Internatl Red Cross

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 72 words

3 US helicopters downed; ground action continues light; 77 enemy killed in
scattered clashes; 11 civilians and 1 S Vietnamese Govt worker killed in enemy
attack on Cambodian border outpost; 6 workers wounded; 6,333 US aircraft have
been downed in war, 3,342 of them helicopters, at cost of more than $6-billion;
Saigon lawyer calls on all sides to observe truce from Jan 30 to Feb 12 in hon
of Tet; Vietcong has announced 4-day truce

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

S Vietnam Govt stages 500-mi, 6-day bicycle race to emphasize its assertion it
exercises virtually complete control over countryside and that road security is
greater now than it has been in yrs; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 36 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu orders shifting of 3 more S Vietnamese gens; 10 cols will
be promoted to brig gen soon; studies plan to divide S Vietnam's 4 mil zones
into 6 zones, thereby reducing power of gen of each zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Gen ct-martial acquits Capt R W Poolaw of murder of N Vietnamese POW; another
ct-martial opens to try Lt F B Bonvillian on similar charge; judge postpones
argument of case until March 2; no plea entered, but defendant's atty says
Bonvillian will plead not guilty; details on both cases; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

S Vietnamese mil spokesmen rept about 18 persons, including 16 S Vietnamese
officer cadets and their instructors, killed when mines planted by Vietcong
explode in training area near Saigon; 33 wounded; 27 Amers wounded in shellings
of base at Nhatrang; 30 enemy shellings reptd; other action reptd; increasing
number of Amer mil planners are coming to believe enemy builds toward major
offensive next summer, rather than next mo, as previously thought

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 110 words

US Sup Ct rules Selective Service System lacks authority to accelerate induction
of men who turn in draft cards to protest Vietnam war; overturns '67 conviction
of D E Gutknecht who rejected order to rept for induction 5 days after he threw
draft card at feet of Fed marshal during antiwar protest, Minneapolis; opinion
holds system of 'delinquency' regulations used by Selective Service System since
World War I was not authorized by Selective Service Law; Ct did not specifically
rule on draft bds' power to take away deferments from those turning in cards and
to classify them 1-A; Gutnecht calls decision 'ltd victory for draft resistance
movement'; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Col J M Jennings killed by Vietcong sharpshooter while flying in observation
helicopter in Quangtri Prov

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 211 words

Justice Dept ex-aide W A Pomeroy testifies that dept made unsuccessful efforts
to get Chicago officials to negotiate with demonstrators prior to conv; says he
and another Justice Dept official, R Wilkins, went to Chicago in July '68 to
meet with Mayor Daley; Judge Hoffman does not let Pomeroy tell of substance of
their talks with Daley; Pomeroy allowed to describe talk he and Wilkins had
later that day with defendant Davis; says Wilkins told Davis that they were
trying to get Chicago to open lines of communications with Mobilization Com to
End War in Vietnam; says US Atty Foran was also present at meeting; says Davis
stressed Mobilization Com wanted peaceful demonstrations and welcomed Fed
efforts to get talks started with city; says R Clark, then Atty Gen, apptd him
to coordinate Fed, state and local security at conv; Govt objects to
introduction of memo he submitted to Clark July 23; Hoffman rules memo
'irrelevant and immaterial'; Pomeroy, at later press conf, reads parts of memo
defense considers irrelevant; 1 sec says that main problem seemed to be
unwillingness of Chicago to negotiate; Pomeroy says Daley was responsible for
disorders; Hoffman orders trial to meet 7 days a wk from now on after Kunstler
protests his order to hold Sat sessions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 3

LENGTH: 6 words

Lr on 'illegality' of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 118 words

Many Congressmen, returning to Washington for 91st Cong 2d session, rept
inflation is voters chief concern; Sens E Kennedy, Cook, Hughes and Repr
Galifianakis comment; econ dissatisfaction replaces Vietnam war as principal
complaint of voters, foreshadowing '70 Cong election keyed to inflation and
recession; Dems said to be in basic grudging agreement that Nixon has succeeded
in easing pub concern over war during his 1st yr in office; Reprs and Sens rept
their constituents are not concerned that econ slowdown will cause sharp
unemployment rise; Sens Eagleton and Saxe see crime as major domestic problem;
Sens Percy and Nelson rept environmental improvement is most important issue to
their constituents

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 2

LENGTH: 49 words

Ed, saying shifts in S Vietnamese Army personnel by Pres Nguyen Van Thieu bring
critically needed changes, says success of Vietnamization hinges on efficiency
of S Vietnamese armed forces more than any other single factor; says replacement
of some prov chiefs indicates consolidation of power

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 94, Column 7

LENGTH: 21 words

Army tells Repr L Van Deerlin it is investigating charges that US inf co used S
Vietnamese village for 'target practice'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Defense wins 6-wk delay in ct-martial of Sgt B A Knerr, charged with murdering S
Vietnamese man last Sept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 53 words

US forces kill 54 enemy troops in 3 sharp clashes N and NW of Saigon; N
Vietnamese press agency charges that 285,000 S Vietnamese have been contaminated
and that more than 2.25-million acres of land have been destroyed by US toxic
chems, gases, napalm and other bombs; says Nixon Adm has intensified use of
weapons; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Sec Gen Thant discusses war with French Pres G Pompidou; says S Vietnam's top
priority is 'broad-based govt'; S Vietnamese delegation to peace talks says
present Govt represents will of great majority of S Vietnamese; Sec Gen Thant
ends African tour; in NYC

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Mil investigators; in answer to charges that Amer Forces Vietnam Network censors
news, say Army network has not violated Defense Dept policies; US command says
conclusion was made in rept forwarded to Washington after 2-wk study; says
Lawrence is being transferred to advisory group in Kontum; says network
exercises editorial judgment; newcaster Sp 4 L Packer, who has complained about
censorship, says he has been ordered transferred to paratrooper div

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 2

LENGTH: 86 words

Albanian Govt announces signing of new trade accord with Communist China under
which China will extend new credits to Albania and both countries will expand
trade; Albanian trade with China is estimated at 70% of its total vol, about
$200-million; Albanian party head E Hoxha and Premier M Shehu attend dinner
marking signing of accord; Albania accuses Nixon of trying to turn Asians
against each other; says he orders increased mil involvement in some Asian
nations while speaking of withdrawing troops from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

S Vietnam gets $50-million from US to aid in financing imports bringing total
funds to $130-million for current fiscal yr and $900-million since mid-'65

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 4

LENGTH: 105 words

Dem Party Minn; youthful supporters of Sen McCarthy who won control of party
apparatus in Minneapolis-St Paul in '68 seen weak and disorganized now; purge of
anti-McCarthy and pro-Vietnam war elements deprived party of experienced
organizers, is linked to '69 election losses and problems of '70 local
cmapaigns; '69 mayoral election defeat of Dem incumbent Hegstrom recalled,
linked to party loss of experienced organizers and split with labor in wake of
purge by Sen McCarthy supporters who won control in '68; supporters back R North
for Mayor; face counteroffensive by Mayor Byrne, other supporters of ex-Vice
Pres Humphrey

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 40 words

Sen E J McCarthy campaign aide Samuel W Brown testifies that his staff and
antiwar protest leaders discussed possibility of calling off demonstrations if
on Mon or Tues of conv wk McCarthy appeared to have good chance of defeating
Humphrey

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 27 words

7-man S Vietnamese delegation, led by Sen Tran Van Don, arrives in Israel to
study tech aspects of Israeli defense forces; Tran Van Don stresses mission is
private

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 16 words

Vietcong attack on S Vietnamese troops delays bicycle race being staged by S
Vietnamese Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

Len Ackland, in rept on refugees made for Rand Corp and compiled in '68, says
some S Vietnamese were made hostile to S Vietnamese Govt by 'excessive and
misdirected' allied bombing and shelling; says refugees, who converged on Saigon
during Tet offensive, claimed S Vietnamese soldiers stole their possessions;
details on rept; some corp officials comment; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 65 words

N Vietnamese aide in Laos Vu Tien says N Vietnam will not pub list of Amer
pilots it holds; says pilots are not considered POWs, but criminals; meets with
wives of 3 pilots; says US POWs are being treated humanely; scores Nixon Adm for
raising POW question 'in order to confuse world opinion'; US official says
families of 70 Amer prisoners, during last 4 wks, have received lrs from them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 1

LENGTH: 144 words

Ed lauding Pres Nixon statement, in State of Union Message, that there should be
no contradiction between prosperity and a healthy environment and quality of
life but holding unless program is combined with effective legis to curb private
indus polluters, it may fall short of objective; criticizes Nixon for limiting
his prescription against inflation to cut in Fed expenditures to balance budget;
holds Nixon 'exuberant happiness' in State of Union Message with what he has
achieved abroad does not make for confidence when his record is so mixed and in
so many ways discouraging; questions Pres Nixon's claim that his policies have
given US 'best chance since World War II' for peace; says there have been more
signs of slowdown in Vietnam peace talks than of speed-up during Nixon Adm; says
Nixon has produced more 'motion than movement' in foreign affairs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 38 words

Business Execs Move for Vietnam Peace charges rejection of its antiwar messages
either as pvt service messages or paid ad by WTOP is denial of free speech and
violation of FCC fairness doctrine; files formal complaint with FCC

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 50 words

72 enemy killed in attack on S Vietnamese Marine brigade command post in Mekong
Delta; 15 S Vietnamese killed, 41 wounded; 13 US soldiers killed, 3 wounded in
ammunition explosion at arty base 55 mi N of Saigon; S Vietnamese pilot escapes
after his jet blows tire while taking off from Bienhoa airport

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 18 words

S Vietnam Govt bans Jan 19 issue of Life, says article on alleged Songmy
massacre included violent pictures

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7; (UPI)

LENGTH: 23 words

Sen J Javits arrives in S Vietnam on his 1st visit in 4 yrs; says he plans to
study Vietnamization program and other aspects of US policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 24 words

US Embassy, Saigon, announces TN-20, new strain of 'miracle' rice that combines
high yields with better taste, is being introduced in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 53 words

51st session Vietnam Peace Talks; Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh accuses S Korean and S
Vietnamese troops of massacring more than 700 villagers last Nov in pacification
sweep commanded by Amers; Habib and Pham Dang Lam reject allegation as
propaganda; each side repeats its long-standing position on conditions for
settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Article on effects of stepped-up enemy activity in Mekong Delta; pacification
has been slowed; US mil official estimates 8,000 of enemy have made their way
into delta in last 8 mos; casualties among S Vietnamese troops in area have
risen sharply; some allied moves against enemy effort noted; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 131 words

Pres Nixon commits self and challenges nation to rescue environment from yrs of
indifference and to display, in '70s, deeper concern for quality of Amer life,
1st message which he delivers before joint Cong session; places 1st priority on
world peace and just Vietnam settlement; major preoccupation is with domestic
rather than foreign affairs; central theme is appeal to match resources of 1970s
with vision of 1770s; sketches por of nation rich in resources but confused in
purpose and concerned about forces seemingly beyond its control; gen proposals
he offers to achieve his goals for '70s outlined; reptdly composed most of s
himself; interrupted by applause 26 times; wife and family watch from galleries;
philosophical tone of s noted; Nixon illus being greeted in HR chamber

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 24, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 7 words

B-52s raid in Mekong Delta and near Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 24, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 78 words

State Dept officials rept N Vietnam continues mil build-up on edge of Plaine des
Jarres, has about 15,000 soldiers apparently ready to attack forces of Maj Gen
Vang Pao, leader of clandestine army trained and supplied by US; transcript of
Dec 15 exec session indicates that US is spending about $190-million in mil and
econ aid to Laos in '70; N Vietnam and Pathet Lao soldiers reptdly gain ground
against Laotian defenders in 3-pronged drive to take Plaine des Jarres

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 24, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

Bui Hoang wins; about 60 cyclists finish race without harm from Vietcong; S
Vietnamese soldier guarding route killed in skirmish; race ends with no
casualties

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 5

LENGTH: 81 words

Grace Glueck comment on Art Workers' Coalition and Guerilla Art Action Group
demonstrations at Museum of Modern Art to back demands ranging from free
admission at all times to estab of sec devoted to work of Negro and Puerto Rican
artists; museum staff members have been meeting informally with coalition reprs
since last spring; 3 recent coalition actions protested museum staff's failure
to keep pledge to help coalition produce poster on alleged Songmy massacre in
Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 94, Column 0

LENGTH: 18 words

W Goodman lr says 3 captions in layout of his Nov 30 article on New Mobilization
Com are not quite correct

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnam protests to Internatl Control Comm that 4,619 civilians were killed
and 14,412 were injured by enemy terrorist acts in '69; charges 1,879 were
kidnapped

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 140 words

Amer officials in Bangkok follow up Agnew's visit with renewed assurances to
Thai leaders on high US esteem; Thais welcomed Agnew's comment on Amer critics
of US involvement, presumed his targets were Sen Fulbright, Washington Post and
NY Times; Amb Unger, in much publicized s, criticized Amer press and pleased
most Thais; Foreign Min official resents Unger's interference in internal
affairs by voicing hope that Thai Govt would soften new curbs on Amer
businessmen and visitors; Amer business confused and irked by new visa
requirements; view them as indicating more assertive nationalistic attitude in
dealings with US; That Govt angered by Dec 1 (1:8) article on high cost to US of
maintaining Thai troops in Vietnam; Thai officials assume Vice Pres Agnew
referred to Times when he commented on critics of US involvement in SE Asia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 17 words

Saigon mil ct sentences young S Vietnamese musician to 5 yrs at hard labor for
composing antiwar songs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 37 words

US command repts 22 enemy killed in clash near Tayninh, S Vietnamese hq lists 21
enemy killed in scattered fighting; other action reptd; map; attack suspected
enemy bases along Cambodian and Laotian borders NW of Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 42 words

Brit Prime Min Wilson in Ottawa on way to NYC and Washington; illus saying
goodbye to wife at London airport; 3 policemen injured, 10 persons arrested
outside 10 Downing St in demonstration against visit by Vietnam war protesters;
NYC itinerary; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 24 words

US planes attack N Vietnamese supply truck convoy in Ashau Valley; 5 Amers
killed, 4 wounded in battle 300 mi NE of Saigon; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 85 words

Sen J Javits leaves Vietnam; says visit confirms his view that US should
withdraw its troops at earliest possible date, news conf; says conversation with
Nguyen Van Thieu persuades him Nguyen Van Thieu understands need for Amer
disengagement; concedes Nguyen Van Thieu prefers slower timetable than 1 he
advocates; meets with members of non-communist pol opposition; says he finds
their views interesting, but makes clear he sees little prospect of broadened
pol representation in Govt in near future; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

Statistics on US war spending show conflict provides significant benefits for
economies of S Korea and Philippines, as well as helping to shore up their mil
establishments; details; econ benefits from presence of Philippine troops in
Vietnam; estimated econ gains put at $40- to $50-million; earnings represent
remittances from troops; show S Korean econ and mil benefit from dollar earnings
remitted by S Korean troops in Vietnam; '68 dollar earnings put at $171-million,
'69 projected at $200-million

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 58 words

Sec G W Romney disclaims ambition to make US Sen race but says he or wife might
run if Repubs cannot agree on 'consensus' candidate to oppose Sen Hart; party
leaders to meet; says his remark about having been 'brainwashed' on Vietnam war,
believed by some politicians to have killed his chances of winning Repub
nomination, was service to nation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 2

LENGTH: 120 words

Howard Samuels announces candidacy for NYS Dem gubernatorial nomination, news
conf; illus with family; plans $1.4-million primary campaign, noting opportunity
is 1st he has had to appeal directly to voters; has twice lost bids in party
convs; assets, liabilities discussed; latter include coolness of county leaders,
resentment of some liberals for past support of Johnson Adm Vietnam policies;
Samuels rejects Nixon Adm plan for Vietnam withdrawal, says he erred in not
voting for peace plank at Dem natl conv in '68; vows to remain in race even
without endorsement of State Dem Com or New Dem Coalition; develops heavy TV
drive, aided by J Napolitan; he, Nickerson, Mackell, vanden Heuvel s, Village
Ind Dem (NYC) forum

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

Wives of 4 US airmen shot down over N Vietnam visit mil hosp in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 42 words

US command repts increased action by both sides in all 4 mil zones; enemy shells
29 targets; 175 enemy killed in various actions; 9 Amers killed, 5 wounded; 7 S
Vietnamese wounded; some details on action; B-52s raid N Vietnamese supply
depots in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 11 words

US officials debate impact of Vietnamization on S Vietnamese econ

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 13 words

Beach at Vungtau, S Vietnam, untouched by war, is haven for many people; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 104 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, who was elected in '67 with only 37% of vote, proposes
run-off elections be held if no Pres candidate wins majority on 1st ballot in
future elections, s, Saigon; argues neutralism is perilous policy for S Vietnam
at present and that expanded pol representation in his Govt would not be
meaningful until pol parties have matured and won larger followings; replies to
critics who charge his Govt does not represent majority of people; insists S
Vietnam has not compromised its independence by alliance with US; seeks to
explain his opposition to proposals that S Vietnam adopt nonaligned foreign
policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 2

LENGTH: 197 words

26 NYS Assembly Dems introduce resolution urging immediate withdrawal of US
troops from Vietnam; Assembly recessed minutes after Assemblyman Leichter
introduced bill; Assemblyman Lerner urges ban on sale of candy cigarettes to
'deglamorize smoking in the eyes of children'; Assemblyman Russo succeeds in
restoring to calendar complicated bill that would change law governing
investments by assns in trust cos; NYS Sen approves bill to raise maximum
interest rate for borrowing on life ins from 4.8% to 5.7%; approves proposal to
let policeman making misdemeanor arrests skip initial personal appearance in ct;
approves bill to require restaurants that are sold to notify creditors; Sen
Lentol proposes minimum penalty for sniper-wounding of policemen be 15 instead
of presetn 3 yrs; Sen Lewis accuses NYCTA of 'gross negligence' in Dec 29 subway
derailment, Bronx; C F Stockmeister apptmt confirmed by Sen; Sen Ohrenstein
restates '69 Dem charge that apptmt was Gov Rockefeller payoff to Stockmeister
for supporting fiscal legis; Sen approves proposal to eliminate need for
competitive bidding on pub works contracts of less than $3,500 and on purchase
contracts of less than $2,500

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 4

LENGTH: 8 words

Replies to Jan 22 lr on Vietnam atrocity charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 11 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu plans to order cease-fire for Tet

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 68 words

US Gen Acctg Office finds US makes payments to other govts on US defense
activities overseas through property, local or munic, business, trade, excise
and import taxes; cites payment of some $28- to $34-million in S Vietnam and
$4-million in Thailand, fiscal '67-68; calls for new systems for adm of such tax
matters; State Dept agrees US spending for common defense should not be subject
to foreign taxation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

Allied hq repts half dozen clashes ranging from Mekong Delta to areas near
Cambodian border; 59 enemy killed, 3 Amers and 5 S Vietnamese killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Testimony in '68 murder trial of Capt J J McCarthy Jr, who was convicted of
killing S Vietnamese natl, says US used Cambodian sect dedicated to overthrow of
Cambodian Govt for covert missions in Cambodia in '67; McCarthy lawyers file
motions with mil rev ct charging Army deliberately ordered 1 prospective witness
not to show up at trial and failed to compel appearance of 2 others; make other
charges; McCarthy illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 2

LENGTH: 25 words

Capacity crowd attends Madison Sq Garden benefit for Vietnam Moratorium Com;
Harry Belafonte, Richie Havens, D Brubeck, Judy Collins and others perform

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2; (GP)

LENGTH: 65 words

Gallup Poll repts 65% of Amers approve way Pres Nixon handles war; 24%
disapprove; high vote of approval said to not necessarily represent total
endorsement of Nixon policy; recent poll showed 41% in favor of immediate
withdrawal of all troops or their withdrawal by end of yr; 40% favor withdrawing
troops at rate commensurate with S Vietnam's ability to take over fighting;
other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 41 words

Sec R C Seamans discloses plans to double combat strength of S Vietnamese Air
Force in less than 2 yrs; lauds quality of S Vietnamese airmen and gives most
explicit account to date of air force's role in program to Vietnamize war; plans
detailed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 113 words

Amer officials say 2 US Govt agents were infiltrated into Saigon press corps but
were later withdrawn after their identities were exposed; high-ranking official
says 'someone goofed'; there is no official word on why agents masqueraded as
newsmen or who ordered the operation; agents seen trying to uncover news
sources; agents H Hethcox and W T Tucker identified by Defense Dept as lt and
sgt in Army's Criminal Investigation Division; Asst Sec Henkin says press
accreditation of 2 agents was inadvertent; House subcom says it will send formal
lr to Sec Laird asking for explanation of incident; Amer Univ Press Services,
with which agents indicated a connection, disavows role

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 54 words

US command, after investigation of Robert Lawrence's charges, denies censorship
of unfavorable news by Armed Forces Vietnam Network; says only repts prohibited
are those giving valuable information to enemy or offending S Vietnamese Govt;
says prohibition does not preclude some items offending S Vietnam, US and armed
forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

US troops uncover big enemy arms cache in jungles NW of Saigon; B-52s raid; 1st
US troops to leave Vietnam under Pres Nixon's 3d-phase cutback leave Danang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

Student Mobilization Com to End the War in Vietnam announces plans for conf in
Cleveland, Feb 14-15, to discuss ways to drive ROTC off every campus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 72 words

Official sources concede 4, not 2, agents were infiltrated into Saigon press
corps to spy on newsmen; say credentials have been withdrawn and those who
issued them have been disciplined; statement issued in Washington indicates all
they got was verbal admonition; all 4 agents, 2 of whom were Vietnamese, said
they represented Amer Univ Press; House subcom calls in lr to Defense Sec Laird
for 'complete high-level rev' of incident

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Amb E Bunker describes '69 as yr of meaningful progress in S Vietnam, but
concedes enemy 'is still a mil force to be reckoned with', s, Saigon; says there
are indications enemy plans another offensive; summarizes allied mil and pol
achievements during yr; speaks of limited US objectives; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 167 words

US command announces US fighter-bomber attacks AA missile base 90 mi inside N
Vietnam after unarmed Amer reconnaissance plane is fired upon by missiles;
reconnaissance missions have been conducted daily since Nov '68 bombing halt;
details on incident; White House denies incident signals change in US policy;
Sec Rogers says bombing has not been resumed; US, in session of Paris talks,
affirms it sends reconnaissance planes over N Vietnam with fighter escorts, but
denies this violates bombing halt understanding; N Vietnamese delegate charges
US planes bombed and strafed several populated areas; says reconnaissance
flights violage bombing halt agreement; map; Peace talks, 52d session; Ha Van
Lau charges US planes bombed and strafed several populated areas in N Vietnam;
Habib reaffirms US sends reconnaissance planes over N Vietnam with fighter
escorts, but denies this violates Nov '68 bombing halt understanding; N
Vietnamese spokesman says reconnaissance flights violate bombing halt agreement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 31, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 82 words

US command acknowledges there have been periodic air-to-ground engagements in N
Vietnam since bombing halt that were not made pub because they were considered
'insignificant'; spokesman says such strikes were made 'from time to time' and
were in response to N Vietnamese AA fire or missiles; source says search for 8
downed airmen has been abandoned; former Sec Clifford says N Vietnamese
officials were believed to have understood that bombing pause would not halt
reconnaissance flights

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 31, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 368 words

Pres Nixon says he will decide within a mo how many more arms to sell Israel,
news conf; says he will weigh arms request against threat to Israel from
neighboring Arab states; denies US is pro-Israel or pro-Arab; is expected to
meet at least part of Israel's request for 100 more Skyhawk jets and 50 more
Phantom jets; seen not convinced that Israel needs as much econ help to make
purchases as has been asked; Pres Nixon says sale by Pompidou has aggravated his
concern about mil build-up in Middle East, news conf; says he will discuss his
objections with Pompidou during Feb meetings in Washington; Nixon says
infiltration of N Vietnamese into S Vietnam increased again in Jan, but not in
proportions that indicate long and uncontainable enemy offensive, news conf;
says his plan to withdraw all Amer combat troops is irreversible, even without
progress in Paris talks; says he hopes withdrawal can be completed by end of yr;
warns N Vietnamese that he will react, and even more strongly than in past, to
any effort to take advantage of Amer withdrawals; says he still hopes to match
withdrawal timetable suggested last yr by former Sec Clifford; makes other
comments; Nixon, in news conf statement on plans to expand US ABM system, says
he does not expect any attack by China and will, in fact, continue to try to
improve relations; stresses, however, that over period of 10 yrs US must acquire
defense against China and possibly others if its policy in Pacific is to be
'credible' and secure against 'nuclear blackmail'; Nixon confirms he has decided
to proceed to 2d phase of Safeguard system; program will include 2 types of
defense, the close-in type for US ICBMs and area defense to protect cities
against weaker nuclear powers such as Communist China; declines to go beyond
earlier statements on US activities in Laos; Nixon says US is seeking to
persuade Nigerian Govt to permit increased relief shipments to Biafran region
without involving US in pol dispute over who is to blame for delaying aid; Pres
Nixon says decision will be made within 30 days on Israel's request for 150
fighter craft; Nixon says greater support given his policy has not persuaded N
Vietnam to negotiate in good faith

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 220 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 31, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 36 words

Le Duc Tho returns from consultations in Hanoi and says N Vietnam is ready for
serious negotiations; says no concessions will be made at negotiating table
under US mil pressure; says Nixon pursues double-faced policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
