
                               1 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 1, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Section 21; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

Article on efforts of Fed and NYS inspectors to find herbicides and pesticides
being sold in Long Island, NY, stores as result of Mar 1 EPA emergency ban on
Agent Orange.  Ban was brought about because of class-action suit filed on
behalf of 7 LI Vietnam war veterans who were exposed to chem when it was sprayed
by US Air Force over Vietnamese jungles (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 91-5-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 1, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 6

LENGTH: 43 words

Dermot G Foley, lawyer for Vietnam war POW PFC Robert Russell Garwood, says
Garwood will fight charges of desertion and collaborating with enemy by showing
that he was shot in his capture and 'surrounded by death' during nearly 14 yrs
in prison camps (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 91-4-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 1, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 32 words

China accuses Vietnam of lying about Chinese troops withdrawal to block peace
negotiations.  Note from Peking's Foreign Min says Deputy Foreign Min Han
Nianlong is ready to negotiate (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 91-4-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 1, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY STEVEN V ROBERTS

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 96 words

Generation gap in Cong is expected to influence future direction of public
policy.  Older members, reared in Depression, seek new and better ways to help
more people, while younger members, who grew up in Vietnam-Watergate era, have
less confidence in ability of govt to improve people's lives and seek ways to
limit Fed spending.  16-term Repr Carl D Perkins and 3-term Repr Timothy E
Wirth, both moderate Dems, seen typifying split along generation lines within
Cong.  Their illus.  Views of Speaker O'Neill, Reprs James J Blanchard and
Norman Y Mineta also noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 91-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 150 words

Sen Edward Kennedy calls for internatl conf on Indochina to arrange cease-fire
in Cambodia and to deal with plight of Indochinese refugees, speech, Council on
Foreign Relations, NY.  Says long-term priority should be to establish peace,
neutrality and independence for Cambodia and Laos and consider appropriate
internatl guarantees.  Carter Adm officials say Adm has publicly supported such
a conf.  Kennedy says US should increase efforts to persuade Vietnam to begin
withdrawing forces from Cambodia and Laos.  Seems to endorse Carter policy of
evenhandedness toward China and USSR.  Says US should grant nondiscriminatory
tariffs, most-favored-nation status, to both at same time.  Says both should
give US assurances that they have liberal emigration policies in order to
receive trade concessions under current legis.  Says concessions should be
considered after SALT treaty is ratified (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 93-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Vietnam News Agency repts mass graves containing remains of hundreds of
Cambodians have been found in northeastern town of Stung Treng (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 93-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 4, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY MARJORIE CHAMBERLAIN

SECTION: Page 26, Column 6

LENGTH: 25 words

Marjorie Chamberlain lr urges that Vietnam war POW PFC Robert Russell Garwood be
forgiven for his actions during war and not be made 'scapegoat' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 94

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 4, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 6

LENGTH: 30 words

Japanese Foreign Min says country will permit 500 Indochinese refugees to settle
permanently.  Says it will continue to ask Vietnam to take measures to stem flow
of refugees (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 94-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 4, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 8, Column 2

LENGTH: 146 words

Article on econ impact new Communist regime has had in Laos.  Notes UN officials
have proclaimed Laos as poorest nation, with per-capita gross natl product of
$90 annually.  Notes regime is relying heavily on Vietnam and USSR for support
and has swept aside former Amer-supported Govt, yet dollar appears to be only
money Govt recognizes, with kip no longer accepted as currency.  Confidential
rept made by Internatl Monetary Fund and unpublished rept by UN's FAO emphasize
severe problems caused by attempt to turn one of world's least developed nations
into modern Communist state.  Failure of Govt's self-imposed task of handling
all aspects of raising, collecting and distributing rice noted.  Rice grown in
Laos stays mainly on farm or is distributed privately, while rice provided by
internatl aid and imports feeds urban people, army and civil servants.  Illus
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 94-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 5, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 114 words

Vietnam calls on China to begin negotiations in Hanoi next wk on restoration of
normal relations.  Does so without insisting on earlier condition that all
Chinese troops 1st withdraw from Vietnamese territory.  Deputy Foreign Min Phan
Hien says Chinese delegation has only to apply for its entry visas, press conf.
Vietnam repeats contention that Chinese troops remain in Vietnamese territory.
Laotian Prime Min Kaysone Phomvihan and Thai Prime Min Kriangsak Chamanand issue
communique pledging to make common border one of peace and friendship.  Promise
to work together to eliminate guerrilla bases on border.  Communique issued at
end of 4-day visit by Kaysone to Thailand (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 95-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 7, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 75 words

China says it will start peace talks with Vietnam next week, provided that 'no
further complication' is created by Vietnam.  Says Chinese delegation led by
Deputy Foreign Min Han Nianlong plans to arrive in Hanoi on Apr 14.  Problems to
be discussed include alignment of disputed frontier.  China again denies
Vietnamese charges that Chinese troops are still in Vietnam.  Says troops are in
areas that had always been under Chinese jurisdiction (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 97-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 7, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 144 words

Analysts conclude that major Vietnamese offensive in western Cambodia has
seriously disrupted continued resistance to Vietnamese occupation by Pol Pot
loyalists.  Do not believe offensive will eliminate resistance.  Say loyalists
are withdrawing deeper into jungles and mt regions and avoiding major
confrontation.  Say Soviet planes are still being used to ferry Vietnamese
troops into battle areas.  Presume that Vietnam wants to secure full length of
coastline to prevent resupply of Pol Pot forces from Chinese ships.  Confirm
Vietnamese assertions that they occupied major command hq south of Battambang,
but do not believe Pol Pot was at base.  Assume he continues to command
guerrilla operations from Cardamom Mt post.  Believe principal reason for
offensive is to break Pol Pot's control of major sections of Cambodian
population.Illus.  Pol Pot por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 97-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 8, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOHN W FINNEY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 186 words

Article on US Cong reassertion of authority over foreign policy since '69, and
sings that pendulum appears to be swinging back.  Notes passage of Natl
Commitments Resolution and War Powers Act calling upon Pres not to commit troops
or financial resources to foreign countries without express approval of Cong.
Discusses Cong muteness over Pres Carter's decision to bypass Congress and
commit troops and military advisers to Yemen.  Attributes situation to fading of
Cong assertiveness as memories of Vietnam recede, and to situation in Middle
East where Israel commands special place in Amer foreign policy that can lead to
'peculiar role reversals'.  Cites disappearance from Cong of senators who gave
moral backbone to earlier protests.  Notes once-outspoken liberal senators face
tough re-elections in '80 since many are hearing from constituents that US has
been pushed around for too long and that it is time to be more assrrtive.  Says
current situation is exploding myth that US, in post-Vietnam paralysis, is
incapable of projecting its power to protect its interests or those of its
allies.  Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 98-0-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 8, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 24 words

Elizabeth Swados, whose musical Dispatches, based on Michael Herr book about
Vietnam, is in rehearsal at NY Shakespeare Festival, int.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 98-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY EUGENE V ROSTOW

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 25 words

Yale Univ Prof Eugene V Rostow lr replies to Prof Alfred R Rubin's Mar 20 lr in
response to Rostow's Mar 7 lr on Chinese invasion of Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 10

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 5

LENGTH: 16 words

Illus of former Vietnam war POW PFC Robert Russell Garwood and father at home in
Adams, Ind.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 100-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 11, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section 3; Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

Comment on 2 films about Vietnam that won Academy Awards--The Deer Hunter and
Coming Home.  Allan Carr, marketing chief for The Deer Hunter, and Bruce
Gilbert, assoc producer for Coming Home, comment.  Other winners listed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 101-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 11, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY GEORGE W BALL

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 81 words

Article by former US Under Sec of State George Ball disputing contentions that
Amer foreign influence and power are on decline.  Holds facts do not support
such gloomy assessment.  Says most valid basis for accusations of disarray is
'scandalous' Amer handling of energy issue.  Says Amers will outgrow current
'orgy' of self-depreciation with adoption of effective energy policy and
subsequent strenghtening of dollar.  Discusses gains and losses in Amer
diplomacy since Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 10

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 12, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Former Vietnam war POW PFC Robert Russell Garwood recounts how he asked foreign
traveler to smuggle out of Vietnam note that led to his return home, int,
Greensburg Daily News (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 102-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 12, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Soviet Govt newspaper Izvestia accuses Hollywood film indus of 'extending
helping hand to the Pentagon' by presenting Oscar for best picture to film The
Deer Hunter.  Says film gives distorted picture of US involvement in Vietnam
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 102-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 13, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY FRED M HECHINGER

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Topics editorial comments on 'satisfyingly simple' image of US and its role in
the world that emerged after World War II.  Notes some post-World War II
conflicts, notably Vietnam, placed Amer image in different perspective and
transmitted message that war is grim and has few redeeming features.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 10

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 14, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 19 words

China accuses Vietnam of sending armed vessels to disputed Paracel Islands,
which are now occupied by China (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 104-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 15, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT REINHOLD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 145 words

Substantial minority of Vietnam veterans, particularly those who saw heavy
combat, are thought to be suffering from severe emotional difficulties yrs after
end of war.  Are seen to have delayed reaction to stress in form of guilt
feelings, instability, sleeplessness, irritability and sometimes violent
tendencies.  VA psychiatrist Dr Jack Ewalt claims 20% of Vietnam veterans are so
afflicted.  Drs and mil men trace much of trouble to rotation system used to
assign troops in Vietnam, in which makeup of cos and platoons changed
constantly, depriving soldiers of emotional support of close companionship.
Note also the suddenness of return home by plane, without time to decompress
that soldiers in previous wars had, the readily available relief in form of
marijuana and heroin, and the general hostility they found from those at home
who opposed war.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 105-2

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 15, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD A GABRIEL

SECTION: Section 3; Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 110 words

Richard A Gabriel article on US Army's largely unsuccessful and, in some cases
nearly disastrous efforts to incorporate number of techniques and practices
developed by US business.  Notes efforts during Vietnam war to provide all
officers with command opportunities cut officers combat time by 50% and led to
estimated 1,000 officer assassinations by own troops.  Says business-oriented
program of replacement by individual rather than by unit, greatly increased
number of mutinies and combat refusals.  Cites other examples.  Concludes that
by and large, business techniques and organizational concepts are incompatible
with combat mission.  Drawing (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 105-2

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 15, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD A GABRIEL

SECTION: Section 3; Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 110 words

Richard A Gabriel article on US Army's largely unsuccessful and, in some cases
nearly disastrous efforts to incorporate number of techniques and practices
developed by US business.  Notes efforts during Vietnam war to provide all
officers with command opportunities cut officers combat time by 50% and led to
estimated 1,000 officer assassinations by own troops.  Says business-oriented
program of replacement by individual rather than by unit, greatly increased
number of mutinies and combat refusals.  Cites other examples.  Concludes that
by and large, business techniques and organizational concepts are incompatible
with combat mission.  Drawing (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 105-2

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 15, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

11-member negotiating team from China arrives in Vietnam to begin peace talks.
History of dispute noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 105-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY IVER PETERSON

SECTION: Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 43 words

PFC Robert R Garwood shows bitterness toward North Vietnamese and claims he
risked his life to get word of his existence to US and to force his release from
Vietnam.  Desertion and other charges he faces recalled.  Illus with stepfather
Kenn McMillan (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 107-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 18, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

China and Vietnam begin peace talks, Hanoi, despite angry exchanges of charges
by each country's media.  Vietnam calls for full pol and mil mobilization.
Charges that crash of Chinese warplane 40 mi inside Vietnam might delay
negotiations.  Chinese Foreign Min says craft was on training flight and lost
control (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 108-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 19, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min Phan Hien opens peace conf with China with 3-point
peace proposal and angry attack.  Urges permanent settlement of all border and
territorial problems on basis of agreements reached in 1887 and 1895 between
French colonial regime and China.  Chinese Deputy Foreign Min Han Nianlong says
that if Vietnam is earnest about talks, settlement of dispute will not be
difficult (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 109-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 20, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY EDMUND OSYSKO

SECTION: Page 30, Column 6

LENGTH: 36 words

Edmund Osysko letter decries 'logical contradictions' that abound within UN.
Contrasts sympathetic response of Security Council to Cambodia's invasion by
Vietnam with its ignoring of invasion of Uganda by Tanzania.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 11

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 20, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY SCOTT STOKES

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 73 words

Japanese Prime Min Masayoshi Ohira voices concern over aggressive Soviet moves
in far East, interview, Tokyo.  Says he favors stronger Japanese defense effort,
closer military cooperation with US and tough attitude toward Vietnam--USSR's
only ally is Southeast Asia.  Says he does not favor larger Japanese defense
forces, but wants to modernize nation's arms and equipment, on which only 20% of
$9.7-billion budget is spent.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 110-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 20, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 114 words

Yugoslavia's Pres Tito says he tried unsuccessfully to resolve recent conflicts
in Southeast Asia and Uganda.  Says his attempts were made in effort to prevent
further divisions among nonaligned nations that threatened to destroy their
movement.  Yugoslav officials have expressed growing concern that interference
by Soviet Union may seriously disrupt meeting of nonaligned nations scheduled
for Sept in Havana.  Tito, in addresses to special session of Central Com
marking 60th anniversary of Yugoslav Communist Party, says he sent letters to
Chinese party chmn Hua Guofeng, to leaders of Vietnam and Cambodia, to Uganda's
Pres Idi Amin and Tanzania's Pres Julius K Nyerere (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 110-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY BARBARA GAMAREKIAN

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

Int with Carol Burnett on her role in Friendly Fire, ABC-TV movie based on true
story of Peg and Gene Mullen, whose son was killed in Vietnam by US artillery
fire.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 11

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 22, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOHN J O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 2; Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

John J O'Connor revs Friendly Fire, ABC-TV movie based on C D Bryan book on true
story of Peg and Gene Mullen, Iowa parents whose son Michael was killed in
Vietnam by US artillery fire.  Movie stars Carol Burnett and Ned Beatty.  Other
program personnel noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 11

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 22, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 59, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

Gen William C Westmoreland, retired Army comdr who led US forces in Vietnam war,
has written foreword for book The Vietnam War and is expected to help publicize
it in US.  Book gives revisionist interpretation of Amer involvement in war.
Editor Ray Bonds says book has already been published in England and will be
published in US by Crown (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 112-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 22, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 162 words

Article on UN Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim's 10-nation Asian tour, which includes North
and South Korea, China and Vietnam.  Itinerary seen suggesting that countries
are willing at least to give impression that they are accepting outside
mediation in their disputes.  Discusses Waldheim's efforts to facilitate talks
between North and South Korea aimed at reunification.  Notes both continue to
view UN actions with ambivalence and oppose agency's advocacy of UN membership
for both.  Notes both nations keep large contingencies of observers at UN and
lobby actively, seeking to line up support for third world members.  Notes
Korean issue, formerly dbated each year in Gen Assembly, has not been on UN
agenda in recent years.  Waldheim's visit to Hanoi is strongly supported by
members of ASEAN, who are optimistic visit can promote better relations between
China and Vietnam.  Waldheim is expected to discuss Vietnamese efforts to obtain
foreign aid for reconstruction (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 112-5

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 175 words

NATO Supreme Comdr Gen Alexander M Haig Jr says US must provide 'a new kind of
leadership' to challenge Soviet intervention in the Third World, speech,
Associated Press-American Newspaper Publishers Assn luncheon, NYC.  Says Soviet
bases in Afghanistan, Middle east and along East African coast gives USSR
ability to 'snuff out' oil lifelines leading from Persian Gulf to West.  Says US
should recognize that Vietnam War is over and that experiences of war should not
determine policy.  Says any new leadership must avoid hyperactivity that
characterized American policy immediately after World War II.  Says West cannot
hope that under detente it can simply ignore 'blatant' Soviet intervention in
Third World.  Cites military expansion of Soviet Union over past 15 years.  Says
allies must display consistent policy of unity.  Says Soviet military-industrial
complex has carried out yearly increases in military spending of 4- to 5%,
allocating 11- to 13% of GNP to such purposes.  Is encouraged by gradual revival
of NATO's strength.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 114-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

Henry Kamm analysis of delicate problem to Thailand posed by Cambodian soliders
and civilians trying to cross border into Thailand.  Notes Thai regime is
officially neutral, but because it fears Vietnam's striving for regional
superiority, the cruelty of former Pol Pot regime seems a lesser evil.  Says
Thailand wants Pol Pot troops to return to Cambodia to continue the fight, and
wants civilians to return lest they become an obstacle to good relations with
Cambodians resisting Veitnam-dominated regime of Heng Samrin (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 11

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 26, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section 3; Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 105 words

Film The Deer Hunter has gradually become center of controversy over whether
film's story accurately depicted events in Vietnam War and whether it should
have to.  Articles in Harper's, Los Angeles Times, Seven Days and L.A. Weekly
have called film 'a lie,' 'criminal violation of the truth' and 'horrific
history'.  Izvestia, Soviet Government newspaper, responded to film's Academy
Award by accusing it of portraying war in which 'agressors and the victims
changed places'.  Film's director Michael Cimino comments on controversy.
Others commenting include anti-war activist Linda Garrett and Prof Edward
Kaufman.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 116-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 26, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE HABERMAN and LAURIE JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 32 words

'lessons of Vietnam' are interpreted differently in talks by Jerry Rubin,
antiwar demonstrator, before Univ of NH audience, and by Gen William C
Westmoreland, who spoke at Dartmouth Coll (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 116-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 26, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JOHN PILGER

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

Article by John Pilger of Daily Mirror of London on current Amer debate about
Vietnam war triggered by movie The Deer Hunter.  Calls film cheap money-spinning
travesty which presents Vietnamese as Oriental brutes.  Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 11

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 26, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim prepares for trip to Vietnam and China.
Hopes to be accepted as mediator in dispute between 2 countries at time of
increased tension along border and new flurry of accusations (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 116-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 27, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 185 words

UN Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim arrives, Hanoi, to begin UN initiative to end
hostilities between Vietnam and China.  Is received at airport by Foreign Min
Nugyen Duy Trinh.  Is accompanied by group of 9 UN correspondents representing
Amer, GB, W Ger and Yugoslav news orgns.  Waldheim will meet with Vietnamese
Premier Pham Van Dong and other officials and correspondents will be taken to
region near Chinese border where Peking forces carried out invasion.  Tension
between Vietnam and China reptdly is running high amid conflicting charges of
changes in border markers.  Peace talks currently are deadlocked.  Scene in
Hanoi described.  Trinh says his Govt was not aware of proposal by several SE
Asian nations that 2 Indonesian islands be used as resettlement camps for
refugees.  Says Vietnamese, except for criminals, security risks and people
occupying important posts, are free to leave country.  Reiterates Vietnamese
contention that Vietnam intervened in Cambodia only after latter's forces
repeatedly attacked Vietnam.  Denies that former Amer naval base at Cam Ranh Bay
is being used as Soviet base (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 117-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 27, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 135 words

Chinese Deputy Foreign Min Han Nianlong, chief delegate to Hanoi-Peking peace
negotiations, indirectly rejects Vietnamese proposal for creating demilitarized
zone between 2 countries.  Calls for Vietnam to withdraw troops from Laos and
Cambodia.  Proposes that Hanoi pull small garrison out of Spratly Islands in S
China Sea and give up its claim to Paracel Islands, which are occupied by
Chinese forces.  Proposes that Vietnam pledge not to provide mil bases for USSR.
Han's strongly worded response suggests that little progress is likely to be
made soon.  Han accuses Vietnam of continuing 'armed provocations' along
frontier.  Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min Pham Hien accuses China of violating
Vietnamese airspace and land and sea rights.  Reiterates charges that Chinese
troops remain in country (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 117-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 28, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Editorial holds inadequate response to needs of Vietnam veterans can only
'compound nation's agony'.  Notes Congressional rejection of $12-million
counseling program to help Vietnam veterans with readjustment problems.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 11

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 28, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BIRD and CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5

LENGTH: 46 words

Jockey Ron Turcotte, paralyzed in accident at Belmont Pk last July, to attend
special riding demonstration for handicapped sponsored by Amer Horse Council and
North American Riding for the Handicapped.  Rider will be Jim Brunotte, who lost
both legs and 1 arm in Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 118-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 29, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 82 words

Vietnamese mil officials say border war with China was ignited 2 mos ago by
rock-throwing incidents that grew into full-scale combat.  Vietnam continues to
fear another Chinese attack.  Internationally, there are fears that new outbreak
of fighting could involve USSR, precipitating confrontation between China and
Soviet Union.  Group of Western correspondents tours provincial capital of Lang
Son and villages of Ki Lua and Dong Dang, which they describe as devastated.
Illus.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 119-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim, in Peking, hears Foreign Min Huang Hua
launch sharp attack on Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 120-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 47 words

Dick Clark, US Refugee Affairs Coordinator, says after 3-week tour of refugee
camps in Southeast Asia that there is continuing 'systematic persecution' of
people in Communist Indochina, particularly of ethnic Chinese and people once
connected with US Govt in South Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 120-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 136 words

Article on stark changes that have taken place in Ho Chi Minh City (formerly
Saigon), Vietnam, in 4 yrs since April 30 '75 Communist takeover.  Western
reporters are touring country with UN Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim.  Absence of variety
and color that once made Saigon one of most fascinating cities of world noted.
Changes, including fact that young people are more disciplined and are studying
Russian language, public parks are clean and well kept, but there is pervading
aura of poverty among people and private cars have disappeared as result of high
price of gasoline noted.  Many of changes have pronounced N Vietnamese flavor.
Most of shops, restaurants and small businesses in Chinese dist are closed and
commercial activity seems to reflect exodus of Chinese families who have fled by
boat.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 120-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 59 words

UN Sec Waldheim begins talks with Chinese leaders as part of personal initiative
to reduce tensions between China and Vietnam.  Is touring Asia because of
personal fears that fighting on several borders could suddenly turn into major
war involving China and USSR.  UN spokesman says Chinese Foreign Min Huang Hua
has praised Waldheim's efforts (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 121-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 108 words

Vietnam War veterans, angered at Carter Adm's policies toward them, form Vietnam
Veterans of America to spur employment, educational benefits and health care.
New organization will work closely with recently formed Vietnam Era Veterans in
Congress, comprised of 19 senators and representatives who served in armed
forces during Vietnam War.  Group, headed by Repr David E Bonior, has sharply
criticized Carter Adm for allegedly 'meager' effort on behalf of Vietnam
veterans.  Vietnam Veterans of America is specifically asking Adm to hire more
veterans for key policy jobs.  Founder Robert Muller and former veteran Joseph C
Zengerle comment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 122-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 162 words

Chinese leaders reptdly tell UN Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim that China will carry out
another mil strike against Vietnam if it 'continues its provocations'.  Deputy
Prime Min Deng Xiaoping says China 'reserves the right' to act and will 'teach
them another lesson' if actions continue.  Waldheim is received by Chmn Hua
Guofeng and Deng.  Both assure him that his contribution in trying to bring both
sides together is useful, but no immediate role for UN or personal initiatives
by Waldheim have been proposed.  Waldheim says Chinese stress suspicion that
Vietnam intends to create by force new Indochina federation including Laos and
Cambodia.  Waldheim and party tour Forbidden City and other tourist attractions.
Attend performance of Chinese opera at Great Hall of the People.  Waldheim will
meet with N and S Korean officials to discuss stalemated reunification talks.
Chinese leaders reiterate stand that country will oppose UN membership until
Korea is united (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 122-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 3, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 199 words

Refugees from Vietnam are arriving on SE Asian shores in record numbers.  Ethnic
Chinese are estimated to make up 2/3 to 3/4 of total despite repeated denials by
Vietnamese Govt that it is abetting their departure.  More than 2,000 Vietnamese
boat people reached Thailand in Apr, largest monthly total ever.  Malaysia repts
more than 10,000 arrived, reversing 3-month decline.  About 100,000 Vietnamese
are now in limbo--on land and on ships that no one will let dock.  In addition,
more than 150,000 Laotian and Cambodian refugees are in Thailand and about 6,000
arrive each month.  Great majority of refugees from Vietnam head for Malaysia,
under false assumption that they will be placed in host countries quicker.  Most
politically sophisticated refugees say Vietnam helps ethnic Chinese leave both
to acquire their gold and foreign currency holdings and to relieve country of
econ class for which there is no further use.  Refugees in Thailand say refugee
flow will continue at high rate, that Hanoi will continue to abet flow of
Chinese and that ethnic Vietnamese will continue to make escapes only at great
risk and in defiance of Govt.  Illus of Cambodian refugees in Thailand (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 123-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 3, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 99 words

China says army suffered 20,000 killed and wounded in Feb-Mar war with Vietnam.
Deputy Chief of Staff Gen Wu Xiuquan says 50,000 Vietnamese were killed and
wounded in invasion.  US Defense Dept officials express surprise at extent of
Chinese casualties.  Wu repts 200,000 Chinese troops were deployed against
Vietnamese force estimated at 100,000.  Comparatively high Chinese casualty rate
may be ascribed to its army's doctrine of engaging enemy as soon as possible.
Amer mil sources cite shortage of modern arms and equipment.  Wu notes army is
15 yrs behind Western armed forces (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 12

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 6, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KAREN DE WITT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 216 words

Article on controversy surrounding future direction of US Peace Corps.  Sen
Foreign Relations Com decision to postpone ruling on whether corps should remain
in ACTION, umbrella agency, or become independent again noted.  HR vote to
separate corps from agency, despite Carter Adm's commitment to leave it under
ACTION noted.  Debate has intensified amid suspicions that ACTION head Samuel W
Brown Jr is desirous of changing corps' direction.  Brown feels corps, to be
effective, must strike out in new directions, and that efforts to remake it in
its old guise are nostalgic.  Wants to recruit volunteers that more
realistically reflect American diversity.  Wants corps to concentrate on
countries with which US has political and philosophical differences, such as
Cuba and Vietnam, in part to develop technologies that are appropriate to their
needs, and in part to demonstrate American sincerity.  Brown's conflicts with
Capitol Hill discussed.  Many Congressmen are skeptical that corps'
director-designate Richard Celestste will have autonomy in light of power
struggle for control of agency.  Article notes Celeste, Brown and ACTION deputy
director Mary King all have their political roots 'deep in the White House'.
Focus seen centering on how corps is to function in future.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 126-5

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 6, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 80 words

There has been muted reaction on college campuses and in high schools to
possibility that military registration for 18-year-olds may be revived.
However, activists of Vietnam era have begun to re-form their ranks, feeling
that proposed registration would be first step toward reestablishment of draft
and toward future military entanglements by US.  Notes 27 organizations around
country have formed Committee Against Registration and the Draft to coordinate
opposition (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 126-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 6, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

Article notes there has been muted reaction on college campuses and in high
schools to possibility that military registration for 18-year-olds may be
revived.  Notes, however, that activists of Vietnam aer have begun to re-form
their ranks, feeling that proposed registration would be first step to
reestablish draft and toward future military entanglements by US.  Notes 27
organizations around country have formed Committee Against Registration and the
Draft to coordinate opposition (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 126-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 6, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 74 words

Vietnamese Dr Tong That Tung links recent 'explosion' in liver cancer incidence
in south Vietnam to US use of defoliant Agent Orange (dioxin) during Vietnam
war, int, Berkeley, Calif.  Says Amer Friends Service Com arranged his visit to
persuade US to study dioxin effects.  Repts liver cancer accts for 10% of
Vietnamese cancers now, compared with 2.9% before defoliation.  Cites research
by Prof James Allen and Swedish Prof Lars Gunnar (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 126-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 6, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

China accuses Vietnam of continued armed intrusions and says that several
Chinese soldiers have been killed and wounded in Guangxi Prov (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 126-5

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DOUGLAS E KNEELAND

SECTION: Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 55 words

Article on Iowa's Indochinese Refugee Resettlement Program, which has resettled
more than 3,000 of 200,000 Vietnam war refugees.  Notes Iowa is only state still
resettling refugees under its own program.  Refugees comment.  Colleen Shearer,
dir of Job Service of Iowa and state's Refugee Service Center, comments.  Illus
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 128-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 9, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

Editorial on differences between antinuclear demonstration in Washington on May
6 and antiwar demonstrations of Vietnam era.  Is cheered by faith in US
political system shown by today's demonstrators.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 12

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 10, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

Vietnam accuses China of sending troops and aircraft into Vietnamese border
provinces (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 130-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE HABERMAN and ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

Faculty members of Univ of Chicago voice displeasure over university's award of
$25,000 Albert Pick Jr award to World Bank president Robert S McNamara for
'outstanding contributions to international understanding'.  Cite McNamara's
role in shaping Vietnam War policies during tenure as Secretary of Defense.
Faculty council has suggested that new committee be formed to review procedures
for issuing such awards.  McNamara portrait (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 131-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 32 words

Dr Charles Frankel, 61, was one of 4 persons murdered in Westchester County
community of Bedford Hills.  Was Assistant Secretary of State who resigned in
protest against Vietnam War (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 13

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Vietnam agrees to China's call for exchange of prisoners captured during war.
Chinese Deputy Foreign Min Zhong Xidong says it has proposed, during peace
talks, that Vietnam free about 200 Chinese soldiers.  Proposes that initial
exchange take place May 21 rather than May 19 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 131-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 12, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 118 words

Discriminatory measures against Chinese minority in north Vietnam reptdly have
dramatically increased flow of refugees to Hong Kong, making it principal port
of asylum for those fleeing Indochina.  Current total of 'boat people' in Hong
Kong is 25,000, compared to 241 yr ago, with 10,000 more expected to reach
country monthly until Sept.  Philip Haddon-Cave, during annual Asian Development
Bank Govs Bd meeting in Apr, stressed that Hong Kong's development programs are
endangered by population growth rate in which refugees much more than offset
family-planning successes in reducing birth rate.  Safety and human dignity
afforded refugees who reach Hong Kong cited as reasons for its popularity (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 132-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 13, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY SUSAN J SCHLIENZ and ALEC SIRKEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

Letters from Susan J Schlienz and Alec Sirken on John Pilger Apr 26 article on
The Deer Hunter, movie about Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 13

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

China charges Vietnam is trying to alter common border and that Vietnamese
troops killed more than 100 Chinese civilians along frontier in 6 wks preceding
outbreak of hostilities in Feb.  Vietnam charges China continues to have troops
inside Vietnam and large force inside China poised for another incursion (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 134-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Large numbers of refugees are pouring out of northern Vietnam, which until last
year kept its citizens from leaving.  Most are members of Chinese ethnic
minority, and make their way to Hong Kong by boat.  Most have no desire to go to
China, noting it is Communist country (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 134-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 14, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY IVER PETERSON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 136 words

Article outlines charges against Vietnam war POW and accused deserter Marine PFC
Robert R Garwood and notes reactions expressed by his accusers and other POWs
who either were in prison camps with him or heard second-hand about his alleged
activities.  Notes Garwood is scheduled to end medical leave May 14 and begin
series of tests to determine his mental and physical fitness.  Will be
transferred to Camp Lejeune, NC, where camp Comdr Brig Gen David Barker will
determine whether evidence exists to sustain all or some of charges, or
additional charges, or to dismiss charges entirely.  Recent interviews with
former POWs suggest that most, if not all, violated US Code of Conduct.  Ways in
which Garwood is believed to have gone beyond what other prisoners did to
protect their lives noted.  Garwood por (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 134-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 16, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 37 words

PFC Robert R Garwood, who returned to US after 14 years in Vietnam, is assigned
job as clerk until authorities decide whether he should be court-martialed for
allegedly collaborating with North Vietnamese.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 136-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 16, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 84 words

Representatives of 24 nations meet in Jakarta, Indonesia, to discuss plight of
estimated 300,000 Indochinese refugees in transit camps throughout Southeast
Asia.  Indonesia has offered to provide small island to serve as processing
station for refugees who have been accepted by 3d countries.  Representatives of
Vietnam, country with largest out-migration, also attend.  Delegates are
convinced that majority of refugees from Vietnam are ethnic Chinese who leave
under intense pressure from Govt (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 136-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 17, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 86 words

Vu Hoang, ranking Vietnamese diplomat attending meeting in Indonesia to discuss
plight of refugees, says up to 600,000 people want to leave southern Vietnam,
but will not be allowed to do so until other countries offer them asylum.
Statement is 1st time Vietnamese official has conceded magnitude of potential
refugee outflow.  Hoang denies that his Government is abetting flight of
refugees, claiming exodus has painfully affected life of those remaining.
Western officials attending meeting are skeptical (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 137-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 17, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

Vietnam says it will withdraw its troops from Cambodia if China cuts off its aid
to guerrilla forces of ousted Prime Min Pol Pot (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 137-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 19, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

China and Vietnam blame each other for lack of progress in peace talks.  Both
sides leave way open for another round of talks in Peking.  Chinese Deputy
Foreign Min Han Nianlong and Vietnamese Deputy Min Phan Hien comment (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 139-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 20, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 112 words

Vietnam, replying to thinly veiled appeals of other SE Asian nations attending
conf in Indonesia, says it is ready to allow 600,000 citizens to go to Western
countries if nations guarantee asylum.  Participants take offer as threat rather
than statement of liberal emigration policy.  Conf approves principle of
establishing refugee processing center on Indonesian island.  Indonesian Foreign
Min Mochtar Kusumaatmadja appeals to participants not to use meeting to confront
Vietnam with evidence proving that about half of exodus of '78 consisted of
Chinese.  Vietnam denies all charges of abetting refugee flow and expresses
sympathy for those refugees who drown (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 140-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ALAN RICHMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 92 words

Int with McGeorge Bundy, adviser to Presidents, leader of Ford Foundation and
soon to be History Prof at NYU.  Notes his ability to write influentially on
topics as diverse as civil rights and arms control, and his refusal through the
years to justify or defend his actions.  Says he was reared to do service to his
country.  Recalls his role in Vietnam war as adviser to Presidents Kennedy and
Johnson, his controversial 13-year tenure as head of Ford Foundation, and
resulting objection to his NYU appointment by many now on faculty.  His illus
(L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 14

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 23, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY NATHANIEL SHEPPARD JR

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

Former US Defense Sec Robert McNamara assails heavy military spending by
industrialized nations, speech, University of Chicago.  Says situation is
harmful to global security.  Appearance touches off demonstration and arrest of
25 persons protesting his selection as recipient of Albert Pick Award for
international understanding.  McNamara's role in Vietnam War while Defense Sec
recalled (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 143-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 23, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Illus of prisoner exchange between Vietnam and China at Friendship Pass border
point.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 143-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 23, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 109 words

China and USSR appear to be moving cautiously toward new talks in move to
improve strained relations.  Move seen aimed at establishing new framework
within which to deal with each other in light of China's decision not to renew
30-year friendship treaty after expiration in '80.  Recent statements by Chinese
Deputy Prime Min Deng Xiaoping, downplaying possible improvements in relations
until USSR gives up 'hegemonism and social imperialism,' noted.  Analysts
believe Chinese leaders wish to lessen tensions along border with USSR in
keeping with push toward economic modernization, and may be eager to slow
rapprochement between USSR and Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 143-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 25, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY IVER PETERSON

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 139 words

Unexpected return of Marine PFC Robert Garwood touches off hopes among families
of some others still unaccounted for in SE Asia that they may still be alive.
Garwood has hinted to Cong inquirers that there may be other Amers left behind
from Vietnam war.  Defense Dept says that beyond one known Army deserter who is
believed to be still in area and possibly 2 more unidentified Amer soldiers,
there is 'no creditable evidence' that any Amers are in Vietnam.  Dept continues
to carry names of 120 servicemen as 'missing in action' and pays millions of
dollars in salaries and benefits on behalf of them to their families.  Repr
Thomas M Hagedorn notes that while there are more than 2,000 soldiers listed as
'presumed dead,' State Dept computer lists somewhat fewer than 100 names of
persons described as 'detainees' in area (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 145-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 25, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 84 words

Chinese Deputy Prime Min Deng Xiaoping, apparently under criticism in recent
weeks for troublesome wall poster movement and other difficulties, launches
vigorous counterattack.  Deng's supporters, in series of articles in Chinese
press, assert that Communist Party can achieve unity only if their pragmatic
policies are adopted and their opponents abandon their adherence to whatever Mao
Zedong used to say.  Criticism over Deng's economic policies and his handling of
war with Vietnam discussed (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 145-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 27, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30

LENGTH: 43 words

Article on growing number of Vietnam war veterans organizing to demand rights
and better treatment from US Govt, cites efforts of paraplegic marine
ex-lieutenant Robert Muller, West Point graduate Joseph C Zengerle and David A
Christian.  Their pors (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 147-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 27, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ELEANOR CHARLES

SECTION: Section 23; Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

Article on apparent ambivalence of many Conn residents toward Memorial Day
observances since Vietnam war.  Notes Pres Carter has proclaimed week of May 28
as Vietnam Veteran's Week (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 147-4

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 27, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HANS KONING

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 40 words

Hans Koning article on recent films, plays, novels and TV movies that deal with
Vietnam War.  Films are Coming Home and The Deer Hunter, plays Dispatches and G
R Point, and book Going After Cacciato and TV movie Friendly Fire.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 147-3

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 27, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

About 1,400 Vietnamese refugees aboard small Panamanian-registered freighter
force their way into Hong Kong waters by beaching ship on outlying island after
crew disappears.  Arrival brings number of refugees from Vietnam in Hong Kong to
over 35,000.  Hong Kong officials reptdly believe landing is part of organized
attempt to evade Govt's efforts to limit refugee arrivals (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 147-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 27, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 25 words

China to release 1,518 Vietnamese prisoners of war and Vietnam will release 240
Chinese.  Exchanges will be made between May 28 and June 22 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 147-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 27, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 140 words

1st of 3 articles on herbicides.  Discusses effects of exposure to Agent Orange
on lives of Bob Ralston, a former cattle rancher in Arkansas, and Julio
Martinez, a former Marine in Vietnam.  Agent Orange was code name used in
Vietnam.  Civilians use terms 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T, 2 phenoxy herbicides which are
components of Agent Orange.  Both men have said that herbicide has made them
sick and changed their lives.  Fear that it will make them sick again and
perhaps even kill them.  Martinez was exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam.
Ralston was exposed when ranch was accidently sprayed with herbicide.  Pilot,
who sprayed property, was supposed to have sprayed adjacent area.  Martinez, now
living in Wheeling, Ill, shares many of feelings, as well as symptoms, of
Ralston.  Martinez and Ralston comment.  Ralston illus.  Martinez por (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 147-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 90 words

NY Times interviews 18 Vietnam veterans in effort to learn more about charges
being made about Agent Orange and other herbicides.  Names of veterans were
supplied by activist groups in NYC and Chicago.  2 veterans had rare forms of
cancer.  13 veterans were married but only 2 had normal children.  There were 5
deformed children and 8 stillbirths in group.  Most of veterans said they could
no longer consume alcoholic beverages.  Brief sketches on veterans Dave Trotter,
Michael Bennett, John Gill, Paul Merrell and Archie Gillman (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 148-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY JOHN P WILSON

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 31 words

John P Wilson article on various mental or emotional problems suffered by
Vietnam war veterans.  Discusses delayed-stress syndrome which may occur years
after their return home (M)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 14

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 29 words

Jan Scruggs, founder and chairman of Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, opens drive
to raise $1 million for Washington, DC, monument to US servicemen killed in
Vietnam war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 148-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 47 words

More than 1,200 Vietnamese refugees arrive, Hong Kong, aboard 15 fishing boats
as officials question 1,400 others who beached Panamanian freighter on May 26.
Freighter passengers say they paid $4,000 each to leave Vietnam.  Police suspect
a syndicate was involved in voyage (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 148-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 150 words

2d article in series on Agent Orange notes that thousands of Vietnam veterans
suspect that their strange variety of illnesses were caused by exposure to Agent
Orange and other herbicides used by US during war.  None of 500 veterans who
have filed claims with Veterans Adm citing Agent Orange has been classified as
herbicide victim because officially Agent Orange poisoning does not exist.
Medical studies on possible dangers of Agent Orange have never been conducted.
VA Admr Max Cleland says Govt probe will be undertaken shortly.  Victor
Yannacone, lawyer representing group of veterans in class action against 6
chemical companies who made Agent Orange, Dr Gilbert Bogen, Dr Paul A L Haber,
Agent Orange Victims International pres Frank McCarthy and others comment.
Illus of Vietnam veteran Kenneth Pullen, who suspects that his medical problems
are result of exposure to Agent Orange (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 148-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 28, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 106 words

Article on difficulties State Dept is having in trying to maintain program for
resettling thousands of refugees from Indochina and Soviet Union while awaiting
replenishment of funds from Cong.  Notes problem has been greatly intensified
because of dramatic increase in refugee flow and by decision of many Soviet Jews
to emigrate to US rather than to Israel.Dept has been forced to cut back flow of
refugees, mainly 'boat people' from Vietnam, from official target of 7,000
monthly to about 5,000 each for months of April and May.  Dept's juggling of
funds to continue refugee programs detailed.  Illus of refugees in Hong Kong
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 148-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 29, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 2

LENGTH: 26 words

Funeral services held for Idaho State Senator Gerald Blackbird who died in
helicopter crash.  Blackbird flew 1,400 helicopter missions in Vietnam War (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 14

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 29, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 122 words

Veterans Adm chief Max Cleland says Air Force and HEW Dept have begun new
studies into long-term effects of exposure of Agent Orange, herbicide used
widely during Vietnam war, int.  Veterans orgns and other groups have been
demanding, for some time, wide-reaching investigation of long-term physiological
effects of exposure to herbicides containing dioxin.  Natl Veterans Law Center
deputy dir Lewis Milford, noting that VA has acknowledged that evidence may
exist to show long-term health effects of chem exposure, says questions remain
concerning scientific method to be used for study and VA has not said what it
will do for veterans who want to file disability claims and who need treatment
but who are not part of study (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 149-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 29, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Illus of VA head, Vietnam war veteran Max Cleland, placing wreath at Tomb of
Unknown Soldiers, Arlington National Cemetery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 149-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 29, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 329 words

3d of 3-part series on herbicides.  Notes herbicides use, 40 years after it was
introduced, remains subject of bitter debate and of lawsuits involving
potentially hundreds of millions of dollars.  At heart of dispute are phenoxy
herbicides, specifically substance called 2,4,5-T.  Critics insist it has caused
stillbirths, birth deformities, cancer and host of other maladies.  It is major
component of Agent Orange, herbicide widely used by US during Vietnam War.
There currently is partial ban on use of 2,4,5-T in US.  Dow Chemical Co says
that thousands of scientific studies of 2,4,5-T have not produced single
documented case of human injury.  Dow spokesman says there were no complaints
about phenoxy herbicide prior to Vietnam War and regards current controversy
fueled largely by Vietnamese propagandists.  Only illness definitely attributed
to herbicide exposure is temporary skin condition called chlorance.  US, until
partial ban by EPA on Feb 28 '79, was using about 7 million lbs of 2,4,5-T each
year, of which Dow made between 50% and 60%.  Dow estimates that sales of
2,4,5-T have yielded $12 million, only 0.2% of company's annual gross sales of
$6 billion.  VA asst chief medical dir Dr Paul A L Haber discounts charges from
veterans that they have suffered damage through their reproductive system from
Agent Orange.  Univ of Penna Dr Jeanne M Stellman disagrees with Haber.  Dow
technical adviser John Davidson says there are safe levels of type of dioxin
found in 2,4,5-T which present no hazard to people.  Wisc Prof James Allen
disagrees.  US Air Force Surgeon General's Office special asst Patricia Bragg
says that of 1,000 men who originally served in Operation Ranchhand, group that
sprayed Agent Orange, over 100 remain on active duty.  Organizations Agent
Orange Victims International and Citizen Soldier and National Veterans Law
Center disagree.  Other findings noted.  National Cancer Institute Dr Charles F
Wurster comments.  Haber por (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 14

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 30, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 61 words

Robert Muller, head of Council of Vietnam Veterans, in Quotation of Day at NYC
City Hall ceremonies marking Vietnam Veterans Week, says 'You people ran a
number on us.  Your guilt, your hang-ups, your uneasiness, made it socially
unacceptable to mention the fact that we were Vietnam veterans.  Whenever we
brought it up, you walked away from the conversation' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 150-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 30, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Editorial on Memorial Day urges correcting injustices and indifference suffered
by Vietnam war veterans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 15

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 30, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

Ad by Joan Baez, pres, Humanitas-Internatl Human Rights Com, scoring way in
which Vietnam treats pol prisoners (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Advertisement 15

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 30, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 2

LENGTH: 60 words

Joan Baez and other activists who opposed Amer involvement in Vietnam begin
protest against alleged violations of rights of pol prisoners by Vietnamese
Govt, news conf.  Baez's new Humanitas-Internatl Human Rights Com says torture
and brutal conditions in prison camps and 're-education centers' have been
documented by newspapers and Amnesty Internatl (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 150-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 30, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JON NORDHEIMER

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 55 words

Article on reactions of Amers to new spurt of films and books about Vietnam war
era.  Purdue Univ psychologist Dr Charles R Figley, Vietnam veteran and one of
country's authorities on veterans of war, says new films and books mark period
of reconsideration, time of confronting trauma to complete healing process.
Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 150-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 30, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 59 words

Robert Muller, paraplegic former marine lieutenant, charges US has abused and
turned its back on Vietnam war veterans because 'guilt, hang-ups and uneasiness'
cast a stigma on service in Vietnam, speech at opening of Vietnam Veterans Week,
City Hall, NYC.  Illus.  Mayor Koch, in proclaiming week, lauds Muller and urges
steps to rectify abuses (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 150-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 31, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY E J DIONNE JR

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 65 words

NYS Assembly, amid charges by veterans' groups that US is placing more value on
long weekends than on remembering its war dead, approves bill changing day NYS
will celebrate Memorial Day in future to match that of Federal Government.  Pays
tribute to veterans by passing resolution decrying treatment of Vietnam veterans
and calling on Congress to give them full veterans' benefits (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 151-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 31, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6

LENGTH: 23 words

US House approves new health benefits for Vietnam War veterans, including
readjustment counseling for those with emotional problems (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 151-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 31, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 5

LENGTH: 61 words

National Veterans Law Center issues legal challenge to Veterans Administration's
policy of refusing to consider disability claims by former military personnel
who were exposed to herbicide Agent Orange during Vietnam War.  Files suit
asking Federal District Court, Washington, DC, to declare illegal
administration's ruling that Agent Orange causes 'no harm' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 151-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 31, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

Pres Carter pledges to work to extend Vietnam veterans rights, White House
ceremony honoring veterans.  Illus with Robert Muller, executive director of
Council of Vietnam Veterans (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 151-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 1, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE HABERMAN and ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Former Sec of State Dean Rusk contends Pres Johnson acted with great restraint
during Vietnam war.  Scores news media for its role in reporting war.  Por (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 152-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 1, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY STEVEN V ROBERTS

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 24 words

Article on Repr David E Bonior and other young Congressmen who are leading fight
to improve treatment of Vietnam War veterans.  Bonior por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 152-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 1, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Page 8, Column 2

LENGTH: 53 words

Article on advertisements carried in 5 US newspapers, placed by
Humanitas-International Human Rights Committee, organized by Joan Baez, scoring
Vietnamese Govt's treatment of political prisoners.  Baez comments on stands
taken by herself and many former anti-Vietnam war activists in new campaign.
Baez illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 152-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 1, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 77 words

Vietnamese boat refugees recently arrived in Hong Kong say small groups of
former S Vietnamese soldiers and mountain tribesmen are still resisting
Communist forces in Central Highlands of Vietnam.  Reptdly took part in ambushes
of Communist trucks and killing of Communist policemen in provincial town.
Accounts are among 1st direct repts of continued armed opposition, though
refugees concede that number of their fighters involved is diminishing.  Map
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 152-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 1, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 134 words

Ieng Sary, Cambodian Deputy Prime Minister in Pol Pot regime, claims Pol Pot may
enter into coalition with his former enemy, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, in effort
to oust Vietnamese, int, Colombo, Sri Lanka.  Says he left Cambodian jungle hq
of Pol Pot forces to attend meeting of 3d-world nations in Sri Lanka, to which
he flew from Bangkok.  Concedes that Vietnam now controls most of Cambodia, but
claims that Pol Pot loyalist guerrilla forces are still active.  Praises
Thailand for allowing guerrillas to cross border into Thailand to escape
Vietnamese.  Denies that Pol Pot was responsible for killing thousands of
Cambodians during his 4-year rule, claiming Vietnamese agents committed
atrocities to blacken Cambodia's reputation.  Concedes country faces famine.
Pol Pot and Ieng Sary illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 15

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 2, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Vietnam accuses China of massing troops along its borders with Vietnam and Laos
with aim of restoring ousted adm of Pol Pot in Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 153-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 3, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 50, Column 4

LENGTH: 28 words

Federal Office of Personnel Management reports that over 345,000 Vietnam era
veterans work for Federal Government, accounting for 12% of total Federal work
force (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 154-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 3, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 50, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Govt statistics indicate that over 345,000 Vietnam era veterans are in Federal
employ and account for 12% of total Federal work force (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 15

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 3, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY TERENCE SMITH

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 123 words

Pres Carter says pervasive public fear of being misled and cheated is hampering
efforts to control inflation and deal with energy crisis, June 2 speech to
Indiana Democratic Party dinner in Indianapolis.  Calls for support for new
strategic arms limitation treaty with USSR.  Says in TV interview that he does
not regard recent reversals in Congress on energy as vote against his
leadership.  Met over weekend at Camp David with group of influential Democratic
members of House and their wives.  Among issues discussed at meeting, described
as 'primarily a social affair,' were energy, Panama Canal treaties, inflation,
unemployment and problems of House in the post-Vietnam, post-Watergate period.
Repr John Brademas comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 154-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 5, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

Vietnam, on eve of 3d prisoner exchange, accuses China of mistreating Vietnamese
prisoners (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 156-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 6, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

China and Vietnam release more sick and wounded prisoners in 3d exchange.  Both
sides have agreed to release total of 1,638 Vietnamese and 237 Chinese in series
of 5 exchanges (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 157-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 7, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 114 words

Amer specialists reptdly believe that China failed to achieve most of its
objectives in Chinese-Vietnamese border war, raising danger of another conflict
in next year or so.  Say Chinese objective was to force Vietnam to withdraw some
of its troops from Cambodia.  Note that instead of withdrawing, Vietnam
increased its forces.  Say second objective was to force Vietnamese to act more
cautiously along border.  Note Vietnam bolstered border garrisons with regular
troops and China is still complaining of border incidents.  Say third objective
was to force Vietnam to reaccess value of pro-Soviet foreign policy and shift
toward neutral stance.  Say opposite has happened (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 158-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 8, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 90 words

Captain and crew of Panamanian-registered freighter that brought 3,318 refugees
from Vietnam to Hong Kong are tried on charge of being involved in emigration
racket with Vietnamese officials.  4 Hong Kong residents also are charged.
Since January 43,631 refugees have arrived and officials expect 100,000 more by
end of summer.  Prosecutor Peter Duncan says defendant indicated that in about
May '78 Vietnamese Govt let it be known that overseas Chinese could leave
Vietnam and had authorized groups of Chinese to make arrangements (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 159-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 8, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 10 words

China and Vietnam to reconvene peace talks on June 25 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 159-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 9, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 33 words

Vietnam signs accord with UN High Comr for Refugees allowing 'orderly departure'
of emigrants.  Under agreement, UN will provide help in granting exit visas for
family or humanitarian reasons (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 160-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 10, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID HALBERSTAM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 57 words

David Halberstam letter disputes James Reston's May 25 article on former US
Defense Sec Robert S McNamara, who recently delivered oratory at University of
Chicago on meaning of security.  Says McNamara is one of most 'disturbingly
flawed' civil servants of this era.  Discusses McNamara's 'crimes against the
public weal' during Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 16

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 10, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

Marine PFC Robert R Garwood, awaiting results of whether he will face
court-martial on charges that he deserted and collaborated with enemy during
Vietnam war, receives letters of support (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 161-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 10, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 158 words

Delegates at conference of Third World nations, Colombo, Sri Lanka, defer
divisive issue of Egyptian and Cambodian representation to their Govt leaders
who will meet in Havana in Sept '79.  Proposal on Middle East concerns demand by
Syria, Iraq, Algeria and PLO that Egypt be suspended from Third World movement
for concluding peace treaty with Israel.  Arabs charge treaty has aligned Egypt
on side of US in rivalry between Washington and Moscow.  Moderate nations oppose
communique asking Havana meeting to specifically consider Arab proposal that
Egypt be suspended, but are willing to have Middle East question submitted in
general way.  Some nations reportedly are unwilling to have communique contain
any outright condemnation of Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty.  Cambodian problem
is settled temporarily by seating of delegation representing ousted Pol Pot
regime, while group sent by Vietnam-supported regime of Heng Samrin was excluded
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 161-4

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 12, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 198 words

Refugee and intelligence sources say Vietnam appears determined to expel all
ethnic Chinese minority members and is exacting hundreds of millions of dollars
from them before their departure, much of it to repay Soviet aid and arms sales.
Yu Hoang, Vietnamese official in charge of emigration in Ho Chi Minh City, says
Govt wants to expel Chinese as quickly as possible and asked him for help.  Says
there are still 800,000 to 1.2 Million Chinese in southern Vietnam following
departure of 300,000 during last year.  Red Cross official believes that as more
refugees put out to sea, likelihood of their reaching foreign shore is
declining.  Calculates that proportion of those drowning or dying of exposure,
hunger and thirst at sea has risen from 50% to 70%.  Refugees say gold collected
from refugees is melted down in Bank of Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh City, and shipped
to Bank of Foreign Trade, Hanoi, before transport to Moscow.  International
banking sources say overseas Chinese eager to help relatives in Vietnam remitted
$242 million to Bank of Vietnam in April.  Amount is more than half of Vietnam's
total estimated exports for all of '78, $416 million.  Refugees comment (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 163-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 13, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

US condemns Vietnam for virtually forcing all ethnic Chinese to leave country.
Rebukes Thailand for forcibly returning thousands of Cambodian refugees to their
country.  State Dept spokesman Hodding Carter 3d says root of Cambodian refugee
problem was Vietnamese invasion in Dec '78.  Says US is urging Thailand to allow
time for Cambodians to be interviewed for possible admission to US, France and
other countries (S)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 164-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 14, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Anthony Lewis article on human disaster that is developing in Southeast Asia as
result of exodus of thousands of refugees from Vietnam.  Notes International Red
Cross official believes that up to 70% of boat people have died at sea.  Holds
Vietnamese Government is forcing out people of Chinese extraction.  Calls on
Vietnam's neighbors and friends to condemn this cruelty (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 16

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT VAN LIEROP

SECTION: Page 26, Column 5

LENGTH: 41 words

Robert Van Lierop letter on May 28 articles on US efforts to manipulate funds to
maintain aid for Vietnamese refugees and on claims of Vietnam veterans that they
are suffering serious illnesses as result of herbicide spraying during war (S)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 16

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 146 words

Malaysian Deputy Prime Min Mahamad bin Mahathir says Government will ship out to
sea some 70,000 Vietnamese refugees now in coastal camps and country's forces
will shoot on sight any more refugees who try to land.  It is not clear whether
announcement is policy that will be carried out fully or tactic to try to enlist
help in dealing with refugee flood.  Malaysia has protested to Vietnam over
continuing exodus and demanded that Vietnam seek UN aid to facilitate direct
emigration of refugees to US and other Western countries.  Malaysia's refugee
population is estimated at 70,000 to 80,000, mostly ethnic Chinese.  Government
has refused to accept any as permanent settlers.  Mahathir says if refugees try
to scuttle their boats they will not be rescued.  Rejects appeal by UN High
Commissioner for Refugees Poul Hartling for continued compassion toward
Vietnamese (M) .

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 167-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 17, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROSWELL L GILPATRIC

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 29 words

Roswell L Gilpatric letter scores David Halberstam's June 10 letter on role
Robert McNamara played in Vietnam war and his service as Defense Secretary from
1961 to 1968 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 168-4

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 17, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY EUGENIE ABRAMS, LINDA C BLACK, RUTH GOODMAN, GEORGE J RUSSELL, DEVON
SCOTT, ROBERT SEELENFREUND, STEVEN SHABAD and TUCKER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 4

LENGTH: 40 words

Lrs on Hans Koning May 27 article on films, plays and books that have Vietnam as
their theme.  Lr writers are Robert Seelenfreund, Devon Scott, George J Russell,
Eugenie Abrams, Martin Tucker, Linda C Black, Ruth Goodman and Steven Shabad.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 16

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 17, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Vietnam announces start of reciprocal air service between Moscow and Ho Chi Minh
City (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 168-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 17, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY B DRUMMOND AYRES JR

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 118 words

Article on continued Indochina refugee exodus, which has become one of most
serious and tragic since World War II.  US State Department calculates number of
people fleeing Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos has increased to almost 10 times what
it was year ago, with about 300,000 people in camps in Thailand, Malaysia,
Indonesia, Hong Kong and other Southeast Asian countries.  Patricia M Derian, US
Asst Sec of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, comments.  Pres
Carter reportedly will discuss problem with Soviet leader Leonid I Brezhnev
during upcoming Vienna meeting.  Some members of US Congress and British Prime
Min Margaret Thatcher want to convene international conference on refugees (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 168-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 17, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 135 words

UN refugee official Rajagopalam Sampatkumar says he has been assured by
Malaysian authorities that country does not plan to shoot arriving Vietnamese
refugees or push those already in camps back out to sea, telephone interview.
Malaysia plans to increase naval patrols along eastern coast with object of
turning refugees back.  Reportedly is preparing stern message to Vietnamese
authorities holding Vietnam publicly responsible for accelerated flow of
refugees.  Concern for refugees mounted when Malaysian Deputy Prime Min Mahamad
bin Mahathir said refugees would be pushed out to sea and fired upon.  Diplomats
and refugee officials say anxiety caused by reported remarks is indicative of
steadily worsening climate in Southeast Asia toward acceptance, even
temporarily, of area refugees.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 168-3

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 17, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 82 words

China reacts cooly to American appeal that it play larger role in providing safe
haven for ethnic Chinese refugees forced to flee Vietnam, contending that it has
already accepted more than 200,000.  Issue is aggravated by actions of Malaysia,
Indonesia and Thailand in announcing they would take no more refugees.  US has
been accepting about 7,000 monthly.  Refugee officials contend privately that
Vietnam is probably expelling Chinese because of recent Chinese invasion of
Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 168-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY MILLIE SHAMES

SECTION: Page 16, Column 5

LENGTH: 27 words

Millie Shames letter lauds Joan Baez's Humanitas-International Human Rights
Committee 'open letter' to Vietnam protesting country's human rights policies
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 16

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 19, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Forces loyal to ousted Cambodian Prime Min Pol Pot say they have 'totally
liberated' Santuk Leo district 80 miles north of Phnom Penh.  Pro-Hanoi
Government says they are only 'imaginary victories'.  Radio Hanoi says Vietnam
is supplying Cambodian allies by ship up Mekong River (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 170-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 20, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 145 words

US joins Britain in seeking early international conference, probably meeting of
UN Security Council in July, to bring world pressure on Vietnam to stop forcing
ethnic Chinese population to flee country.  Proposal is circulating within
Carter Administration to double number of Vietnamese refugees admitted to US.
Has backing of several members of Congress.  Hong Kong Gov Sir Murray Maclehose
is meeting with US officials to deal with refugee problem.  House approves
resolution sponsored by Repr Lester L Wolff calling for emergency General
Assembly session.  Administration believes session would be too cumbersome and
costly.  Carter reportedly intends to discuss refugee situation at upcoming
Tokyo economic summit meeting and State Sec Cyrus R Vance plans to address
problem when he attends Assn of Southeast Asian Nations meeting in Bali after
Tokyo session (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 171-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 21, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

Cuba, in broadcast monitored in Miami, Fla, charges that US wants to establish a
military presence in Nicaragua and says such a move could create 'a Vietnam in
the very heart of Latin America' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 172-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 21, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 156 words

Vietnam agrees to propose international conference on Indochinese refugees, but
only if it deals with humanitarian, rather than political, considerations.  US
officials interpret statement as rejection of proposal put forward by British
Prime Min Margaret Thatcher, who urged UN Sec Gen Waldheim to call conference in
effort to stop exodus of ethnic Chinese from Vietnam.  Vietnam insists that
conference be held under auspices of UN High Commissioner for Refugees.  Hong
Kong Gov Sir Murray Maclehose says, after meeting with Waldheim, that there are
already 56,000 refugees in Hong Kong and more are arriving at rate of 24,000
monthly.  US favors two-stage approach that would involve Security Council
session to deal with political issues and international conference to deal with
humanitarian aspects.  Sen Edward M Kennedy has called for international
conference to address political and military aspects of refugee outflow (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 172-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 94 words

Analysis of US decision to seek replacement of Somoza regime and dispatch of
peace-keeping force to Nicaragua as a painful turning point for Carter
Administration.  Belief that human and political disaster was imminent led
administration to act despite resolve of Pres Carter and Sec Cyrus Vance to
avoid kind of intervention taken by Kennedy and Johnson Administration in
Vietnam and Dominican Republic.  Most controversial part of Vance's
program--sending of peace-keeping force--does not say whether US would involve
its own forces or play any role at all (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 17

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 24, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

China accuses Vietnam of building up military forces in Cambodia along Thai
border.  Says Vietnamese action endangers Thai security and independence and
poses threat to 'peace and stability' of Southeast Asia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 175-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 28 words

US Health, Education and Welfare Sec Joseph A Califano says China has agreed to
consider setting up processing camp for Vietnam refugees under UN sponsorship
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 176-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY PETER KOVLER

SECTION: Page 19, Column 2

LENGTH: 31 words

Peter Kovler article urges US to pursue policy of detente with Govt of Vietnam
and to extend aid to Vietnamese citizens of Chinese origin who have been
deprived of human rights (M)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 17

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 27, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 185 words

Repr Bob Eckhardt asks Health Education and Welfare Sec Joseph A Califano Jr to
give priority to study of impact that Agent Orange, used during Vietnam war, is
having on Vietnam veterans and to order independent studies by National
Institutes of Health and Center for Disease Control, House Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations hearing.  Says he wants Health, Education and
Welfare Department to be involved because he doubts that Defense Department can
do impartial study.  Air Force Surgeon General's office spokesman says there is
as yet no agreed-on scientific protocol for study that was announced on May 28
by Veterans Affairs Admr Max Cleland.Spokesman for Air Force Public Information
Office says protocol has been under discussion for many months and study will
begin in October.  Agent Orange Victims International pres Frank McCarthy and
National Veterans Law Center deputy director Lewis Milford score Government
inaction.  Council of Vietnam Veterans executive director Robert O Muller
accuses Veterans Administration of 'grossest negligence' in handling of Agent
Orange question (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 178-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 28, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

US Amb to UN Andrew Young cautions that it would be inappropriate for US to
criticize Vietnam for exodus of refugees in light of US's past involvement in
Vietnam, news conference (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 179-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 28, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY SHIH-HONG LIU and JUDITH STRAUCH

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 46 words

Letters by Prof Judith Strauch and Shih-hong Liu, Taiwan's Coordination Council
for North American Affairs news editor, on Prof Alfred P Rubin's June 20 letter
on Taiwan's and People's Republic of China's 'legal obligation' to aid ethnic
Chinese refugees fleeing Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 17

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 28, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

Syrian Air Force was outclassed in air clash with Israel over southern Lebanon.
Syrian pilots were flying Soviet-built MIG-21's from Vietnam War era.  Israel
pilots were flying US-supplied F-15's.  Characteristics of planes compared.
Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 179-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 55 words

Foreign ministers of Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and Philippines
urge Vietnam to halt flow of refugees, Association of South East Asian Nations
meeting, Kuta, Indonesia.  Are reluctant to grant temporary asylum to refugees.
Indonesian Pres Suharto and Malaysian Foreign Min Ahmad Rithauddeen bin Ismail
comment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 180-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 153 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 30, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 75 words

Foreign ministers of Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand and Malaysia praise Pres
Carter's announcement that US will double its monthly quota of admissions for
Indochinese refugees to 14,000, Assn of South East Asian Nations meeting.
Singapore Foreign Min Sinnathanby Rajaratnam opposes move.  Accuses Vietnam of
setting refugees adrift to destabilize non-Communist countries of Southeast Asia
and prepare way for Vietnamese hegemony over region (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 181-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
