
                               1 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 1, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 115 words

All but 13 of 570 disabled N Vietnamese POWs offered repatriation by S Vietnam
refuse to return to Hanoi; US had pressed S Vietnam to accept all of Hanoi's
conditions governing release in hope that move would increase world pressure on
Hanoi to reciprocate by releasing some Amer POWs; IRC screened POWs for their
wishes on repatriation but found only 13 willing to return on agreed date of
June 4; S Vietnamese officials are angry over low acceptance rate, plan to
announce they will go ahead with return of 13; speculation on reasons for POWs
refusal to return; some say POWs got word through grapevine to remain; manner in
which offer was made and conditions agreed on for return revd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 1, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 43 words

Chief of State Cheng Heng says Cambodia is willing to open talks to end war in
Cambodia if Vietcong and N Vietnamese withdraw their troops, s, Natl Assembly;
statement is 1st such pub declaration by Govt since overthrow of Prince Norodom
Sihanouk in Mar '70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 1, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 30 words

N Vietnamese and Vietnamese delegations to Paris peace talks reject Cheng Heng's
proposal to negotiate to end war in Cambodia as 'nonsense'; express support for
Norodom Sihanouk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 1, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

7-mo suspension of negotiations toward a Korean War armistice, '52-53, over POW
exch, recalled in light of refusal of 500 N Vietnamese POWs to return to N
Vietnam; 22,500 N Koreans and Chinese POWs refused to be repatriated in Korean
War; establishment of a Neutral Nations Repatriation Comm to resolve problem,
under terms of '53 armistice accord, described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 1, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

US troops strength in Vietnam reduced by 3,600 men to total of 255,700

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 1, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 127 words

Max Frankel notes stagnation in Paris talks; says some Washington officials
expect Nixon Adm may wish to 'Vietnamize' the talks, leaving them to Hanoi and
Saigon; there is concern that Amb Bruce may ask to retire soon; difficulty of
finding a successor and feelings of futility about talks may cause Pres Nixon to
consider a walkout, dramatizing his contention that he is ending US involvement;
Frankel on basic '72 Pres campaign s being developed for Nixon and which he is
testing; theme is peace soon, then prosperity; Pres aide P G Peterson links mil
strength and prosperity at home to defense of US econ leadership in world;
prepares fact-filled analysis of nation's weakened position in internatl trade
for use by Nixon in possible '72 Pres campaign; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 1, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 62 words

Survey of US field comdrs shows that 70% reduction in number of US combat troops
has left US bases more vulnerable to attacks but has not yet increased danger to
ground troops still in field; conditions in 4 mil regions described; most
pronounced effect of pullouts is on morale in field where some soldiers complain
of fears of 'being the last man to die in Vietnam'; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 1, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 106 words

One thousand USAF and USN servicemen in London hand in antiwar petitions to US
Embassy; action is largest antiwar protest among US servicemen in GB; protest is
part of growing antiwar movement among USAF enlisted men in GB, spurred by Amer
students at Oxford, Cambridge and London School of Economics; Capt T S Culver, a
protester, who was in Vietnam 2 yrs, says men protest because of 'ugly things'
happening in Vietnam and because they think 'US should leave now'; men stress
that protest is not a demonstration, which is illegal for US troops abroad; say
petitions, addressed to Nixon and Cong, are legal under mil regulations; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 1, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 154 words

N Vietnamese troops reptdly drive S Vietnamese task force of up to 2,000 men
from Snoul, Cambodia; S Vietnamese reptdly are badly battered, fled Snoul with
scores of wounded and fight their way across Route 13 toward S Vietnamese
border; they are reptd to be disabling arty guns and destroying some of their
trucks and armored personnel carriers; field repts says heavy enemy AA fire and
rds washed out by monsoon rains hampered aerial resupply; over 100 wounded S
Vietnamese soldiers have been evacuated by S Vietnamese and US helicopters;
retreat from Snoul opens up supply route for N Vietnam from portions of Routes 7
and 13 into northern provs of S Vietnam; N Vietnamese soldiers reptdly are
attacking retreating column; S Vietnamese forces claim major victory in sweep
through cluster of villages S of Danang; rept 215 enemy killed and 35 wounded;
terrorist bomb destroys Saigon bldg; 5 Vietnamese killed, 12 hurt; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 1, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 86 words

Memorial Day observances, US, include antiwar protests by Vietnam war veterans;
veterans retrace P Revere's midnight ride, Mass, to dramatize their protest;
hold mock 'search and destroy' mission in pk, St Louis; NY Veterans for Peace in
Vietnam holds ceremony, NYC; separate marches held in various places where
traditional veterans groups refuse to mingle with peace marchers; about 200 war
veterans, protesting war in SE Asia, march from Lexington to Boston, retracing
in reverse P Revere's midnight ride; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 1, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 114 words

Illus which he is testing; theme is peace soon, then prosperity; Pres aide P G
Peterson links mil strength and prosperity at home to defense of US econ
leadership in world; prepares fact-filled analysis of nation's weakened position
in internatl trade for use by Nixon in possible '72 Pres campaign; por; Frankel
notes stagnation in Paris talks; says some Washington officials expect Adm may
wish to 'Vietnamize' the talks, leaving them to Hanoi and Saigon; there is
concern that Amb Bruce may ask to retire soon; difficulty of finding a successor
and feelings of futility about talks may cause Nixon to consider a walkout,
dramatizing his contention that he is ending US involvement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 8

LENGTH: 49 words

Fed Ct, Minneapolis, delays hearing on C D Perkins contention that his orders
for duty in Vietnam are illegal because war had not been declared; Minn Atty Gen
Spannaus filed suit seeking permanent injunction against transfer of Perkins
under state law that authorizes legal challenge to war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 83, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

John J O'Connor revs several TV shows broadcast during weekend; rev of TV
program in which B D Moyers says young people are serious about wanting soc
change and that their jarring life styles are attempts to assert their
individuality; rev of TV panel discussion The People Speak Out, sponsored by
Common Cause, citizens' lobby headed by J W Gardner; program revs reasons for US
to withdraw from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

2 US helicopters lost; 1 reptdly crashed 24 mi NW of Saigon, killing 7 Amers
abroad

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 405 words

US Sup Ct, 5-5, rules that cities cannot make it crime for small groups of
citizens to loiter in 'annoying' manner in pub places; strikes down Cincinnati
ordinance similar to laws that number of cities have passed in recent yrs in
efforts to control boisterous or disruptive sidewalk gatherings; Cincinnati's
law had been criticized by Negroes, who charged that police had used it to
harass them; ordinance declared unconst on grounds that its vagueness denied
citizens due process of law because they could not know in advance if their
conduct was unlawful and that it infringed on 1st Amendment's guarantee of free
assembly and association because police might use it to break up gatherings of
people whose ideas are considered annoying; ruling detailed; Sup Ct, 5-4, gives
Fed judges broad authority to issue antistrike injunctions against rr unions
that fail to make 'every reasonable effort' to negotiate disputes before going
on strike; notes new powers' could provide cover for free-wheeling judicial
interference in labor relations' but concludes that Ry Labor Act requires such
enforcement; notes that although Norris-LaGuardia Act states gen policy against
antistrike injunctions, they could be issued when this is only practical and
effective way of enforcing ry act; Justice Harlan concludes that if ct has
misinterpreted Cong purpose, 'Cong can remedy situation by speaking more
clearly'; Justice Brennan charges in dissenting opinion that ruling would
'destroy entirely' idea of ry act; asserts that with threat of strike softened
by possibility that judge will intervene, employers will be less inclined to
negotiate; at issue was dispute between UTU and C&NW over assignment of
brakemen; Sup Ct unanimously rejects appeal by US marine D R Allen, convicted of
slaying 5 Vietnamese civilians near Hue in '68; appeal is 1st atrocity case to
reach ct; contends Allen was insane and that guilty plea he made at his trial
therefore was invalid; Allen is serving a 20-yr sentence; Sup Ct, 5-4, rules
that if a motorist erases a traffic accident judgment by going bankrupt, a state
cannot suspend his driving privileges pending payment of judgments; declares
unconst Ariz 'financial responsibility' law similar to laws in all states except
Mass; E F Kearney, dir of Natl Com on Uniform Traffic Laws, says decision will
probably prompt majority of states to require all drivers to purchase ins before
they can own a car

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 488 words

Pres Nixon pledges to undertake 'natl offensive' to counter problem of drug
addiction among young Amers, including servicemen who have become addicted while
in S Vietnam, news conf; noting recent rept on drug abuse by Presidential
advisers Rumsfield and Finch, says that he will meet with Pentagon officials to
discuss steps to deal with addicted soldiers and that problem will be given
highest priority at all levels; says, noting that problem is being aggravated by
low cost of heroin in S Vietnam, that action will include discussions with
Saigon Govt which has special responsibility for halting supply of hard drugs;
other action will include: halting drug traffic at foreign sources; prosecuting
sellers; initiating massive educational effort in US and treating addicts; says
that servicemen should have opportunity to be treated before being released from
mil, but does not say that this would be mandatory; reiterates opposition to
legalization of marijuana; contends there is no moral or soc justification for
legalizing its use and that it would encourage more youths to take hard drugs;
Nixon says it is too early to judge UAR-USSR treaty but says if treaty should
lead to introduction of more Soviet weapons in Middle East, it will constitute
spur to 'new arms race' and threat to peace in area; Nixon says that within 6
wks, after consultations with Chinese Nationalists and '3d countries,' US will
decide on its position on representation issue in Assembly, news conf; notes
there has been 'significant change' among UN members on issue, a ref to growing
support for Communist membership; says he will lift trade ban with China on
variety of items; Nixon dismisses criticism of war on moral grounds as
unjustified unless war is considered in a 'vacuum'; stresses again his hope for
early end to US participation; says that while he cannot stop sending draftees
to Vietnam, he hopes issue will become 'moot' as troop level declines; says he
hopes refusal of all but 13 of N Vietnamese POWs to return home will not
jeopardize efforts to secure release of Amer POws; says setting a fixed US
troops withdrawal date contingent upon release of Amer POWs, as urged by some
wives of POWs, will not help; says 'we've been around this track before'; speaks
optimistically of SALT talks, agreeing with published speculation they might
lead to treaty on ABMs and to an 'understanding' on offensive arms; Nixon repts
US will continue membership in ILO; says Adm will seek to persuade Cong to
appropriate funds to pay present and arrear dues; backs AFL-CIO pres Meany
argument that 'free world' trade unions have recd 'very bad deal' in ILO
meetings; warns that US support will end unless free world unions gain stronger
voice in orgn affairs; Nixon reasserts his willingness to discuss balanced
mutual reductions of forces in Eur with Soviet bloc; he says he does not now
plan trip to Eur for troop talks or any other question

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

Communist Chinese Premier Chou En-lai welcomes Rumanian Pres Ceausescu; lauds
Rumania for 'opposing big-power chauvinism,' in reference to Soviet policies;
thousands of Chinese participate in extravagant welcome apparently organized to
express China's appreciation for stubborn stand of neutrality taken by Rumania
in regard to Sino-Soviet ideological conflict and border dispute; Ceausescu
attends banquet, Peking; Chou En-lai attacks 'US imperialism,' s, Peking

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

Celebration in U Minh Forest in hon of 12th birthday of S Vietnam's 21st Inf Div
also represents demonstration of progress in securing an area long held by the
enemy; Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, Amb Bunker, Gen Abrams, foreign diplomats and S
Vietnamese dignitaries attend

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 113 words

Saigon spokesman Lt Col Le Trung Hien denies repts that S Vietnamese troops had
been driven under heavy attack from Snoul; says task force is still in Cambodia,
describes pullout as a 'realignment' caused by coming rainy season and not enemy
pressure; estimates that 700 N Vietnamese soldiers were killed by Amer and S
Vietnamese aerial attacks and by S Vietnamese tanks; puts S Vietnamese losses
during pullback at 6 men wounded; discrepancies between his and field repts
noted; Le Trung Hien says there will be further realignments of S Vietnamese
Army positions in Cambodia in preparation for rainy season; illus of wounded S
Vietnamese in Cambodia awaiting evacuation; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 53 words

Cambodian soldiers rept all-day battle with enemy soldiers in marshes on eastern
bank of Mekong River; rept about 200 soldiers killed; US Pentagon spokesman says
Cambodia had planned to withdraw some of its main combat units with onset of
rainy season, that withdrawal appears to be 'orderly and according to plan'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

US Army probes charges that US airborne troops killed 24 to 40 Vietnamese women
and children on beach near Bongson, Sept '68; charges made by ex-soldier W E
Marhourn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Tran Thien Khoi, brother of S Vietnamese Premier Tran Thien Khiem, removed as
Customs Investigation Div chief in S Vietnamese drive to curb drug traffic; was
scored in press for official indifference to smuggling at airport

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 86 words

Bruce N Kessler, spokesman for new group, Vietnam Veterans for a Just Peace,
scores 'irresponsible' antiwar protest by Vietnam Veterans Against the War, news
conf, Washington; says his group backs Nixon's policies and plans to counter
publicity given to antiwar veterans' groups headed by J F Kerry, who, he
charges, places US role in Vietnam in 'worst light'; J O'Neill, also in new
group, scores Kerry testimony to Sen Foreign Relations Com; Kessler and O'Neill
score com refusal to let them testify; Kessler por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 45 words

US Defense Dept names retired USAF Col E G Hopson to coordinate its policies and
programs for curbing drug abuse in armed forces; Asst Sec Kelley, who apptd
Hopson, is expected to announce program for better identifying and treating GI
drug addicts returning from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

Amb Ellsworth Bunker holds reunion at his Saigon home for all Yale grads he
could find in city

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 2, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 1

LENGTH: 32 words

James Reston comments on Pres Nixon's news conf remarks on addiction problem
among servicemen in S Vietnam; says soldiers find quickest way to avoid combat
and get back home is to take drugs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 3, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 73 words

US bombers and helicopter gunships make heavy raids on troops of 3 enemy divs in
eastern Cambodia in response to request from S Vietnamese comdr Lt Gen Nguyen
Van Minh; aim heaviest attacks on N Vietnam-Vietcong 5th Div which captured
Snoul and on what is believed to be enemy hq at Chupp rubber plantation; delayed
repts indicate S Vietnamese suffered severe casualties in withdrawal from Snoul;
illus of S Vietnamese armored vehicle

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 3, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

US Army printed during war 6,245,200,000 propaganda leaflets for air drops; US
role in psychological warfare diminishes as US troops withdraw; S Vietnamese
take over more of these operations; leaflets also issued by agency that handles
psychological warfare for US mission; estimated 10 billion leaflets believed
printed by Army and agency; oversaturation of targets lowered effectiveness of
leaflets, which Vietnamese used for various purposes; most leaflets now urge
Communists to defect; earlier leaflets told civilians to leave homes because of
impending attacks and when an area was declared a free-fire zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 3, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 42 words

US air strikes called in to Cambodia as Govt troops fight Vietcong forces near
Pnompenh for control of positions considered ideal for rocket attacks on
capital; heavy fighting reptd at An Cheng Buddhist pagoda; 200 enemy troops
reptd killed in battle

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 3, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 85 words

S Vietnamese lower house was thrown into turmoil by anti-Govt Deputy Nguyen Dac
Dan who threatened to blow himself up with a hand grenade; deputy was protesting
restrictive electoral bill; he held up debate on bill for 3 hrs; still earlier
he had drawn a pistol; said he was defending rights of the people; finally
yielded grenade to speaker; house also debated case of Deputy Ngo Cong Duc who
says he is being framed in move to charge him with attempted murder after fight
with a Mekong Delta provincial chmn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 3, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 94 words

Nguyen Thanh Le, N Vietnamese spokesman in Paris, charges repatriation move is a
sham; says US and S Vietnam pretend that only 13 of 660 POWs want to be
repatriated; says 2 nations 'have never been sincere in freeing captive
patriots'; US says interrogating of POWs was done exclusively by IRC; Nguyen
Thanh Le charges Pres Nixon's news conf statements gave 'new evidence' of
deliberate detention of Vietnamese patriots; S Vietnam Min Trans Van Lam
confirms that only 13 POWs wish to be repatriated; says most who refused to go
feared reprisals from Communists

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 3, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 6

LENGTH: 119 words

NYC Mayor Lindsay scores NYS Legis for failing to approve his revenue pkg, s,
munic finance officers conv; charges Legis is making 'travesty' of city's
financial plight; contends action is provoking massive pub outrage in city;
holds inflation and recession have swollen budget gap to 'calamitous
proportions'; scores state leaders for denying existence of budget gap; says
cities have yet to feel worst of 'Vietnam recession and inflation'; says cities
are at best on econ treadmill; Councilman Postel storms out of Council Finance
Com budget hearing after his motion to force NYC Health & Hosps Corp to submit
line-by-line budget is defeated; NY chap of AIA annual meeting; NYC Mayor
Lindsay made hon assoc member

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 3, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 23 words

Repr Koch and F M Cortina lrs on drug addiction among servicemen in Vietnam;
illus; Koch lauds article on drug addiction among servicemen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 3, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 40 words

J Simon, ex-adviser to People's Self-Defense Forces in Mekong Delta, in reply to
Maj Gen Cushman Apr 26 lr, says US policies against guerrillas led to situation
Cushman denies, hostilities specifically directed against mass of civilians

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 3, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

Tran Tan Quoc, ed of Saigon newspaper Duoc Nha Nam, says 'in this war without
front line, the Amers have come to be considered as mighty murderers who can
destroy the lives of innocent people with impunity'; says US Army has lost all
sympathy from Vietnamese people; urges that Amer troops be withdrawn altogether
quickly and earlier than planned by Nixon; says 'the sooner they leave, the
better'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 3, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 72 words

S Vietnamese Natl Assembly lower house approves, 101-21, bill containing
restrictive nomination clause whereby a pres candidate must get his nomination
paper signed by 40 deputies and sens or by 100 members of elected provincial
councils; vote overrules earlier Sen defeat of bill; bill could leave Nguyen Van
Thieu with no serious challenger in election; observers believe Nguyen Cao Ky
cannot get backing required to enter race

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 3, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 85 words

US Army charges Brig Gen J W Donaldson with murdering 6 Vietnamese civilians and
assaulting 2 others in winter of '68-69 by taking 'pot shots' at them from a
helicopter; Donaldson ex-aide Lt Col W J McCloskey charged with 2 separate
killings; Lt Gen C E Hutchin to decide if evidence is sufficient to call for
formal hearings, analagous to a grand jury probe; if such hearings are held,
Hutchin would then decide on holding court-martial or dismissing the cases; mil
careers of 2 officers detailed; their pors

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 4, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 21 words

48 Amers killed in action, 229 wounded, wk; 452 S Vietnamse killed, 1,171
wounded, 2k; l,49l N Vietnamese reptd killed, wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 4, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 59 words

2,500 S Vietnamese marines conduct sweep in NW corner of S Vietnam in effort to
smash a N Vietnamese troop build-up; enemy attacks S Vietnamese ranger co,
Tayninh Prov, kills 2, wounds 12; 1 Amer soldier killed, 2 wounded when their
patrol runs into 12 N Vietnamese, Ashau Valley; S Vietnamese troops battle enemy
soldiers near Kandol Chrum, Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 4, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 198 words

Sens George McGovern and Mark Hatfield to offer modified version of their '70
troops withdrawal amendment; por; in bid for broader Sen support, amendment
makes withdrawal deadline somewhat dependent on action by N Vietnam to release
Amer POWs; withdrawal deadline kept at Dec 31, '71 but is extended to cover US
forces in all of Indochina, not just S Vietnam; new sec provides that if within
60 days after enactment of amendment N Vietnam has not made arrangements for
release of POWs by Dec 31, '71 then withdrawal deadline will be extended by 60
days; also provides that instead of a withdrawal Cong may 'authorize such
further action as is recommended by the Pres to secure the release and
repatriation of Amer POWs'; Sens Proxmire and Mathias to offer amendment to mil
procurement authorization bill that would impose $68-billion ceiling on defense
spending, fiscal '72, about $7-billion below Defense Dept request; explain move
to curtail actual expenditures rather than appropriations, noting that in
previous yrs, while Cong has cut appropriations, Defense Dept has actually spent
more than appropriated by drawing on huge backlog of unspent funds, now totaling
some $35-billion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 4, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 106 words

Nguyen Van Thieu may have only 1 opponent or even run unopposed in S Vietnamese
Pres election under bill passed by lower house of Natl Assembly imposing
restrictions on candidacy; Nguyen Cao Ky followers doubt he can qualify as
candidate under restrictive rules; Maj Gen Duong Van Minh seen possibly getting
required support but he hints he will run only if elections are fair; says
restrictions are unconst; some Opposition deputies charge that before the vote a
Saigon official offered to free Ngo Cong Duc from jail in exch for their support
of the restrictions; 91 deputies send Nguyen Van Thieu a demand that Ngo Cong
Duc be freed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 4, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 8

LENGTH: 69 words

13 POWs head for transfer point on troop transport which also carries 200
crewmen, about 70 newsmen and many officials; atmosphere aboard trip described
as resembling a cruise to the Caribbean; vast logistical effort of US and S
Vietnam in transfer seen as aiming to impress world with allied humanity in
dealing with sensitive POW issue; officials speculate on reasons for mass
refusals to return to the North

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 4, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 110 words

Sources close to IRC, in Geneva, see merit in suggestion that Hanoi is
determined not to agree to any deal on POWs exch that will encourage US to hope
for a compromise peace; IRC insists their poll of POWs was completely impartial;
rept that an informal poll they took in Jan accurately forecast the vote against
repatriation; POWs were asked one at a time only one question, to be answered
yes or no; question used 'release' in the North rather than 'repatriation'; POWs
were reptdly concerned about whether Hanoi wanted them to accept release; some
Geneva sources say Hanoi exerts great control in S Vietnam prison camps and
issued secret orders to vote no

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 4, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

Met Pimen is enthroned as new Patriach of Russian Orthodox Ch; affirms ch ties
with Soviet regime; ceremony described; Pimen denounces US 'aggression' in
Indochina, Moscow reception

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 4, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 2

LENGTH: 44 words

Ed sees S Vietnam retreat from Snoul, Cambodia similar to that in Laos; notes S
Vietnamese renewed attempt to disguise its defeat with claims that lack
credibility; holds humiliation for S Vietnamese army points up urgency of
pressing for a negotiated settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 4, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 6

LENGTH: 48 words

A Geoffrey Woodhead, in article on laws affecting exercise of power by nations
as elucidated by Greek historian Thucydides, holds that Thucydides would view US
intervention in Vietnam favorably while US withdrawal from commitment would
diminish US honor and encourage adversaries; cartoon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 4, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 175 words

N Vietnam announces it is cancelling all arrangements on return of POWs,
statement issued in Paris; cancellation announced when 13 POWs are at sea
heading for point fixed for transfer; statement says that talking first of 570
POWs then only of 13 is 'an odious act' on the part of the US and S Vietnam;
says conditions laid down for transfer no longer pertain; S Vietnamese spokesman
Nguyen Trieu Dan insists S Vietnam complies with Geneva conv that only POWs who
agree can be repatriated; hints at pressure on POWs by Communist agents; N
Vietnam refers to POWs as 'patriots' who had been arrested illegally; N
Vietnamese spokesman Nguyen Than Le demands that 'patriots' be released and be
allowed to stay in the South or go North if they wish; those who go North should
be released near the demilitarized zone; doubts ability or willingness of IRC to
know the truth about conditions in Southern POW camps; US spokesman S Ledogar
says US deplores Hanoi's statement when it knows the men are already at sea;
illus of wounded N Vietnamese POW in Danang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 4, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 155 words

White House sources, following meeting between Pres Nixon, Defense Sec Laird and
many other top officials who are responsible for enforcing narcotics laws,
educating pub on dangers of drug abuse, and treating and rehabilitating addicts,
disclose that Nixon is planning new Fed agency to direct efforts to stem tide of
drug addiction among returning Vietnam vets and in gen pub; while some officials
believe that drug addiction admr will be named, others express opinion that new
activities will be centralized in HEW Dept; Ziegler, declining to give any
details, indicates that in addition to moves to cut off source of drugs in
foreign countries and to treat addicts before they are released from mil
service, Nixon will seek to deal with over-all problem of addiction among Amers;
Sen Subcom on Alcoholism and Narcotics chmn Hughes issues strong attack on Nixon
Adm's policies concerning drug addiction among servicemen; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 5, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 141 words

13 POWs return to Danang; ship returns on orders afer traveling 70 mi north; S
Vietnam charges Hanoi with bad faith; offers again in general terms to free all
sick and wounded POWs who want to return; entire episode seen setting back
chances of any similar venture for some time; US hope for reciprocity by N
Vietnam seen by presence on boat of a special 5-man receiving team who were
there on the 'slim chance' that Hanoi would send a few Amer POWs out with the
ship scheduled to pick up the North Vietnamese POWs; returned POWs are dejected
and confused; tell Saigon and IRC officials aboard they want to be kept apart
from all other POWs if they are sent back to Bienhoa POW camp; Saigon Foreign
Min says Hanoi, in accepting Saigon's offer on POW return, did not mention any
specific number of POWs as a condition for agreeing to receive them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 5, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 21 words

Pentagon announces that Laird is not satisfied with attempts by S Vietnamese
Govt to curb flow of drugs to Amer servicemen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 5, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 47 words

Drs A A Kurland and R Resnick tell HR Judiciary Subcom of new group of drugs
that they say might mark important breakthrough toward solving heroin problem in
US and S Vietnam; new drugs, called 'antagonists,' do not continue physical
addiction as does methadone; testimony detailed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 5, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Ed scores Hanoi's refusal to accept 13 POWs; says evidence suggests that Saigon
and US knew in advance that repatriation scheme would fall through; urges both
sides to stop playing with POWs as propaganda pawns

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 5, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 5

LENGTH: 43 words

M Hamilton lr urges not only US troops withdrawal but cessation of bombing from
bases outside the war zone; fears that Adm, if pub apathy permits, will probably
advocate continuation of bombing as a 'logical, cheap, and effective adjunct to
Vietnamization'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 5, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Anthony Lewis discusses Pres Nixon's statements concerning drug addiction among
servicemen in Vietnam; says Nixon said nothing at news conf that one reason for
addiction among troops is that they are fighting for a cause they do not
understand or believe in

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 5, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 86 words

Survey of increasingly acute unemployment among Vietnam war veterans; Labor Dept
repts about 375,000 were idle during '71 first qr, compared with 200,000 during
'70 first qr; repts at least 10% of approximately 2-million veterans have been
unable to find work, almost double natl rate; unemployment is particularly acute
among blacks under 24 (20.9%); graphs compare unemployment rates among black and
white veterans and non-veterans between ages of 20-24 and under 24; efforts to
ease situation discussed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 5, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 103 words

Enemy's success in capturing Snoul linked to its freer access of Ho Chi Minh
Trail to bring in supplies through Laos; 120 Govt soldiers reptd killed, 288
wounded in battle for Snoul; heavy mortar and rocket fire enemy uses since close
of S Vietnamese thrust against Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos in Mar indicates that
enemy has all the war supplies he needs; thrust into Laos was intended to choke
off enemy supplies reaching the south; conclude mil move did not cut off
supplies and that trail network serves N Vietnam Vietnam better than ever;
high-intensity shelling of 5 allied bases just S of demilitarized zone cited

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 125 words

CIA agents identify at least 21 opium refineries in border area of Laos, Burma
and Thailand that provide constant flow of heroin to Amer troops in Vietnam;
refining and distribution of opium, operated and protected in Burma and Thailand
by insurgent armies and their leaders and in Laos by elements of royal Laotian
armed forces, have grown until white heroin rated 96% pure is turning up in
Pacific coast cities of US as well as in Vietnam; Burma-Laos-Thailand border
area, known as Golden Triangle, normally accounts for about 700 tons of opium
annually, or about 1/2 of world's illicit production; CIA's analysis suggests
that production is expanding in area and there are indications that '71 output
may reach 1,000 tons; analysis detailed; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 14 words

Illus of S Vietnamese troops and armor returning to Vietnam after pullout from
Snoul

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 75 words

Heavy fighting reptd near Khesanh; 174 N Vietnamese reptd killed in series of
ground battles and air attacks; Danang hit by rockets, 2d time in a wk; US
marines in and around Danang have ceased combat operations while preparing to
withdraw; S Vietnamese troops have taken over security role; other mil action
reptd; Cambodia repts its forces strike at enemy troop concentrations in
marshes; find bodies of 15 N Vietnamese soldiers, arms and equipment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 55 words

Ngo Cong Duc released from prison after 91 members of S Vietnamese lower house
demanded he be freed; Govt orders charges against him 'indefinitely postponed'
but not dropped; in int, Ngo Cong Duc gives his version of incident which caused
his jailing; believes entire episode was a Govt plot; he is a Duong Van Minh
supporter; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 101 words

Duong Van Minh scores new S Vietnamese electoral law, s to 60 Vietnamese at
sidewalk gathering whom police had banned from attending private reception
marking 2d anniv of Natl Progressive Force, an anti-Govt, antiwar movement;
calls law unconst; Natl Progressive Force, led by Tran Ngoc Lieng, had advocated
for 2 yrs a govt of natl reconciliation uniting all anti-Nguyen Van Thieu and
antiwar factions in a provisional govt that would negotiate with reprs of Natl
Liberation Front to hold elections; Ngo Cong Duc, released from prison, among
guests at gathering; all are Duong Van Minh supporters; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 154 words

Maj Gen J W Barnes, under Army probe for alleged atrocities under his command in
'69, was promoted Mar 1 while still under probe; promotion made 5 mos after
start of probe into alleged atrocities and their alleged cover-up by Barnes and
other officers; Barnes faces charges on alleged cover-up; Lt Col A B Herbert,
who filed charges, contends, in int, that Army 'trickles down' the case through
3 separate probes to dissipate the allegations against Barnes and Col J R
Franklin, deputy comdr of Barnes's brigade; Herbert alleged in Sept '70 that
Amer soldiers killed and tortured Vietnamese prisoners and that Franklin knew
about it and failed to stop it; Franklin previously served on Lt Gen Peer's comm
which probed Mylai slayings; Barnes denies Herbert's charges; Herbert says, in
int, he had been penalised for insisting for 18 mos that the alleged atrocities
and cover-up be probed; details how he was penalized; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 29 words

Maj Mai Van So, brother of N Vietnamese Amb Mai Van Bo, defects to S Vietnam
authorities; was working with Vietcong N of Saigon when he was captured by US
troops late in '69

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 14 words

Article discusses problem of drug addiction among Amer servicemen in Vietnam;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 7

LENGTH: 33 words

Unverified accounts of high US officers engaging in 'turkey shoots'--firing at
fleeing Vietnamese peasants from helicopters-- cited; charges against Donaldson
say he engaged in such a 'turkey shoot'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 11 words

Comment on collapse of N Vietnamese POW repatriation attempt; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Comment on S Vietnamese Pres election and on bill setting up restrictions on
candidacy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 19 words

R Bender lr holds Amer foreign conflict in Vietnam and domestic conflict in Amer
have common element of racism

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

Ed, noting Pres Nixon's persistent unwillingness to face up the realities in
Vietnam, cites 2 moves in Cong to set a cutoff date for US mil action; cites
amendment offered by Reprs Nedzi and Whalen to bar use of funds under a mil
procurement bill for continuation of war after Jan 1, '72 and modified
McGovern-Hatfi eld amendment; says Nixon's policies have caused many in Cong to
give up hope for ending the war through negotiations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Debate increases over US Adm policy on troops withdrawal date and POWs issue;
some families of US POWs urge Nixon to set date for complete US troops
withdrawal in hope that Hanoi will then return the POWs; Nixon stands firm in
rejection of pullout date; contends that setting firm withdrawal date will
deprive US of major bargaining point with Hanoi and may endanger US troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 22 words

US helicopters reptdly sink 11 sampans, kill 22 Vietcong at mouth of Mekong
River; N Vietnamese shell Danang for 3d time in 9 days

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 174 words

Sen Symington charges that US Adm is spending 'hundreds of millions of dollars'
in a clandestine war in northern Laos, not the $52-million it has publicly
acknowledged; says he will present to closed Sen session specific data from
Lowenstein-Moose rept on increasing Communist Chinese presence in Laos,
information on how Adm keeps its activities secret and other data; Sen Kennedy
protests that Adm is indulging in 'contradictions and white-washes' on US
involvement in war in northern Laos and advancing a logic that 'justifies new
mil adventures by Pres anywhere in SE Asia'; his statement is prompted by State
Dept response to his query about what authority Nixon has for US mil activities
in Laos; response states that Pres has const authority to 'take reasonable
measures' in northern Laos as part of his program for withdrawing US forces from
S Vietnam; Kennedy's lr to Nixon had been prompted by Deputy Asst Sec Sullivan's
testimony, in Apr, that the war in northern Laos has 'nothing to do with mil
operations in S Vietnam or Cambodia'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 110 words

US officials concerned that Nguyen Van Thieu may be sole candidate because of
new restrictive electoral law; repercussions in US and in S Vietnam seen if
Duong Van Minh chooses not to run; questions would be raised on what happened to
US pledges to insure self-determination and fair elections; one-candidate pres
'contest' seen casting doubt on whole future of US support for S Vietnam; Nguyen
Van Thieu support for restrictive electoral law linked to 1st pres election in
'67 when 11 candidates were in race and Nguyen Van Thieu won with only 35% of
the vote; he feels that being a minority pres has weakened his authority; debate
over electoral law revd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 59 words

Repr Steele issues statement saying that high rate of heroin addiction among
Amer servicemen in Vietnam has prompted Nixon Adm to seek step-up in its rate of
troop withdrawals; says that step-up plans are direct result of his rept to HR
Foreign Affairs Com that soldiers run far greater risk of becoming heroin
addicts than combat casualties in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

Article on 'Vietnam syndrome', gen uneasiness and resentment found in many
servicemen returning from Vietnam; veterans, returned to US, still having to put
in some mos of duty at Ft Benning, Ga, suffer from 'returnee's syndrome';
feelings stem from variety of causes ranging from boredom to resentment over
separation from wartime buddies and indifferent welcome accorded them on return
to US; programs to counter syndrome, which was linked to sharp increase in crime
among returning servicemen, discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Sp/4 A B W Flint sentenced by ct-martial to 3 yrs prison and dishonorable
discharge for killing Maj R Degen and wounding Maj M F Davis after quarrel about
the volume of a recorder, Quangtri

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 21 words

Vietnam Veterans Against the War announces plan for 'a limited incursion into
middle Amer' for July 3-5 at Kansas City, Mo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 67, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

John J O'Connor revs NET-BBC program, Nuremberg and Vietnam: Who is Guilty?,
shown on WNDT; Prof T Taylor, others participate

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 7, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 21 words

Sharp clashes between allied forces and N Vietnamese continue in area between
Khesanh and Quangtri and near Ashau Valley; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 8, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 8

LENGTH: 13 words

Correction on Sp/4 Alfred Flint sentence; he was sentenced to 30, not 3 yrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 8, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 21 words

Hanoi news agency charges US with 'recurrent bombing' of southernmost part of N
Vietnam in May; charges 210 bombing missions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 8, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 67 words

US mil analysts say N Vietnam reptdly has begun unexpected effort to step up
flow of war materiel through southern Laos during current rainy season; is doing
extensive rd repair and widening Route 23 which is West of Ho Chi Minh Trail
complex; is leaving most of its transportation and engineer units in place in
southern Laos during monsoon for 1st time; mil analysts speculate on enemy's
objectives

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 8, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 57 words

US B-52s bomb enemy positions in northernmost S Vietnam; raids take place less
than 24 hrs after rocket attacks on allied troops guarding buffer zone; S
Vietnamese force of about 2,000 men reptdly are pressing new drive in SE
Cambodia to block enemy infiltration into western part of Mekong Delta in S
Vietnam; Cambodian mortar crew illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 8, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 32 words

Brother of Hanoi official, Mai Van Bo, Mai Van So says he defected because of
increasing disillusionmen t with Vietcong and because of good treatment by Amer
captors, news conf, Saigon; pors

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 8, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 20 words

Troop strength in Vietnam cut by 4,800, wk, to total of 250,900; 6 USMC units
totaling 1,240 men to return soon to US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 8, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Life at USAF base at Phucat, S Vietnam described; base has been under 'yellow
alert', signifying possible attack, for 5 nights; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 8, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 24 words

Prof L M Greenbaum lr on drug addiction among Amer servicemen in Vietnam and
prospect of returning veterans infiltrating civilian life as addicts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 8, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 8

LENGTH: 13 words

Correction on Sp/4 Alfred Flint sentence; he was sentenced to 30, not 3 yrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 9, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 150 words

Communist Chinese Premier Chou, warning that danger of world war persists,
strongly attacks US and USSR and calls on small and medium-sized nations to
unite and resist bullying by superpowers, s, Peking, at 'friendship meeting'
marking end of Ceausescu visit; holds China has no intention of assuming role of
superpower either now or in future; later, at Rumanian Embassy banquet, again
attacks US and USSR; Rumanian Pres Ceausescu remarks about US and USSR are mild
in comparison; Chou and Ceausescu join in taking stand against Soviet
interference in affairs of other Communist parties, ss, Peking; Ceausescu holds
each party must formulate independently its line and strategy, that relations
between parties must be on basis of equality and noninterference; Chou lauds
Rumanian party for ind course within movement; Ceausescu backs Communist China's
claim to Taiwan; scores US role in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 9, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 45 words

N Vietnamese troops end 4-day lull, renew attempts to seize marshy eastern
approaches to Pnompenh, bring capital within range of its heavy-mortar fire;
Cambodia repts least 80 Govt soldiers killed or wounded in fierce fighting near
Prey Thom, 12 mi NE of Pnompenh; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 9, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

US B-52s continue strikes in eastern Cambodia; S Vietnamese Gen Nguyen Van Hieu,
whose troops retreated from Snoul on May 31, has been relieved of his command

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 9, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

William Kunstler, atty who frequently defends war demonstrators, charges Fed
Govt uses grand juries to harass Vietnam war dissenters, s, NYC; says Justice
Dept operates its 5 Fed grand juries 'like star chambers to strip information
from witnesses'; charges Govt uses grand juries to harass war dissenters; says
extensive use of juries began recently because Justice Dept failed to get
evidence for convictions of anti-war leaders

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 9, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 87, Column 2

LENGTH: 77 words

John J O'Connor revs recent programs on TV coverage of Vietnam war carried on
NYC station WNYC-TV; notes some comments on war coverage made by TV
correspondent D Schoenbrun and Vietnam veterans spokesman J Kerry, program
guests, including Schoenbrun disclosure that no TV stations had been willing to
show his film on Vietnam and US foreign policy; film to be shown of Schoebrun
making s called Vietnam and Beyond, revg history of war and scoring US
involvement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 9, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 263 words

C M Clifford, ex-US defense Sec, offers 'concise, workable' plan he says could
be put into effect without delay, calling for complete US withdrawal and halt to
all mil activities by end of '71, s to peace groups, NYC; under plan, Hanoi and
Vietcong would agree, in return, to release all US POWs within 30 days of a
joint announcement of accord by both sides and Communists would agree to refrain
from attacks on Amers during period of withdrawal; to meet Nixon's repeated
contention that Hanoi cannot be trusted to do more than discuss the release of
POWs, Clifford says agreement would be void and US obligation to withdraw would
be suspended if Hanoi did not release POWs within 30 days; in int, says plan
'could become reality' if it were offered in negotiations; says his convictions
are based on talks and meeting with various people; Prof E O Reischauer tells
peace groups he opposed US involvement in Indochina since '45; says war must end
quickly and by a rapid deadline; White House press sec Ziegler takes issue with
Clifford's assessment of Hanoi's negotiating position; objects to Dec 31
deadline; noted that Clifford proposal is generally similar to McGovern-Hatfield
proposal; W A Harriman issues endorsement of McGovern-Hatfield and Clifford
proposals; por; Repr R L Legett says Vietcong negotiators in Paris promised him
recently that if date were set for total US withdrawal, they would release all
US POWs before that date; says Hanoi negotiators, however, made no change from
their formal position that withdrawal date would bring 'discussion' of POWs
release

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 9, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 151 words

Sen, in stunning reversal, approves, 51-27, Allott amendment to draft extension
bill increasing mil pay by $2.7-billion; vote is major setback for Nixon Adm and
major victory for those pressing for immediate move toward an all-volunteer
army; entire sum would go to enlisted men in 5 lowest ranks and to officers in 2
lowest grades; examples; Sen Stennis scores vote; holds additional funds will
have to be taken from other areas of mil budget and could jeopardize natl
security; Sen, 50-12, rejects amendment to draft extension bill that would have
recognized selective conscientious objection; approves proposal to set up
machinery that will permit 18-yr-olds to regis for draft and to regis to vote at
same time; Sen, in effort to end debate on draft bill, agrees to begin debate on
controversial Hatfield-McGovern amendment, which would require all US troops to
be withdrawn from Indochina by end of '71

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

USIA sources indicate that its hr-long propaganda film, 'Vietnam, Vietnam', will
'definitely' not be offered for TV or theater showings to foreign audiences;
move considered after nearly 3 yrs work and an outlay of $250,000 on film; 1
source, asked if film will ever be released, says 'it's a dead duck and it will
stay in the can'; USIA Dir Shakespeare reptdly believes that changing mil and
pol situation in Vietnam, as well as domestic pol considerations, now raise
doubts on film's value as convincing propaganda; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

White house Press Sec Ziegler suggests Clifford and others raise 'false hopes'
about Amer POWs for 'domestic pol purposes', news conf; Clifford, in statement,
asks that his proposal be put before the N Vietnamese and judged on its merits;
Sec Rogers, returned from Paris, says that Hanoi has not changed its 'basic
position' to only 'discuss' the POW issue after a US commitment on withdrawal;
describes as 'mere propaganda' Hanoi's hints of being prepared to release POWs
in exch for withdrawal date

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 41 words

Enemy forces pour rocket and mortar fire into 4 Cambodian strongpoints in Vihear
Suor marshland; refugees from heavy fighting flee across Mekong River; Cambodia
says it is able to carry out its 100 dead or wounded men; puts enemy casualties
at 200

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

S Vietnamese troops reptdly begin sweep 25 mi S of Pleiku; N Vietnamese reptdly
shell S Vietnamese Fire Base 5, Central Highlands

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

S Vietnam officially opens 160,000-sq mi area off coast for oil exploration and
exploitation; reptdly some 30 foreign cos have expressed interest

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

Lt Gen W G Dolvin assumes command of all US forces in northern provs of S
Vietnam; replaces Lt Gen J W Sutherland, named C/S of US Eur Command

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 18 words

Unemployed Vietnam veteran C Jackson acquitted of shotgun slaying of Atlantic
City Ptl J P Burke; case revd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 41 words

Sen Hubert Humphrey defends Pres Nixon's conduct of war against Sen Kennedy's
charges, read in Sen by Repub chmn Sen Dole, that Nixon times his policy to help
win re-election in '72; says he does not believe Nixon is 'playing pol with
Vietnam'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 26 words

Ex-Sen Goodell says US should never have committed itself to the Vietnam war, s,
SI Community Coll; says he hopes war will help reveal 'injustice in our soc'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 10, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Tom Wicker notes double standard inherent in impunity with which NYC munic
workers are able to tie up city's vital services while young people threatening
unsuccessfully to tie up Washington, DC, in protest against Vietnam war are
arrested; notes strikes as example of 'Amer mess' and as what is wrong with way
20th Century Amers try to operate their soc; says strikes demonstrate extent to
which many insts of power in Amer are essentially uncontrollable

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

Nguyen Cao Ky's campaign mgr says Vice Pres has worked out deal with Duong Van
Minh in hope of meeting restrictions of new electoral law; Vice Pres to seek
endorsements from council members, Duong Van Minh, from Natl Assembly; Vice Pres
may possibly throw his support to Duong Van Minh at last minute; Amb Bunker
reptdly expressed concern over possible 1-man election in luncheon with Vice
Pres; sets luncheon date also with Duong Van Minh in reptd plan to show
neutrality by meeting with both potential candidates; Vice President's newspaper
has been seized 5 days of last 10 for disseminating 'false arguments'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

Amb Bunker to return to Washington reptdly for consultations on possibility of
speeding Amer troop withdrawals from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 207 words

N Vietnamese and Vietcong say that if US sets withdrawal date, they will discuss
full exch of POWs without relation to any other questions, statement after peace
talks session in reply to frequent warnings by US that Communists would use POWs
discussions to raise new demands; Vietcong spokesman Duong Dinh Thau say that if
recent visitors in Paris from US had left affirming 'our goodwill and
flexibility' on the issue, 'they are right'; response is reply to questions
about Clifford and Leggett recent statements; at peace talks, Amb Bruce warns
that 'indiscriminate shellings' of Danang violate the understandings reached in
'68 to end bombing of N Vietnam; comments on what he calls other side's inhumane
and intransigent stand on POWs question; other side, at news briefings, avoids
explicit promise to release POWs at a given time; Duong Dinh says his side
rejects calumny that there is a difference between discussion and liberation;
says discussion will be toward liberation; Hanoi spokesman Nguyen Thanh Le says
that normally in all wars POWs question is not settled until settlement of all
other questions; says his side offers to settle it first to prove its goodwill
and flexibility, 'but the key is that Nixon fix a deadline'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 113 words

S Vietnamese Econ Min repts bids will be opened in '71 for exploration on
continental shelf; 18 US cos contending for concessions; application forms now
available but which cos will be allowed to submit bids will not be known until
after Pres election in Oct; US cos have been concerned that French would
dominate bidding because of friendly ties between French diplomats and Min Pham
Kim Kgoc, who heads petroleum bd; commercial attache of French consulate, in
Mar, proposed that French com screen all bids and advise Vietnamese on which to
accept; US oil reprs exerted pressure on Pham immediately, and last wk petroleum
bd rejected proposal; problems faced by US cos analyzed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 62 words

19 Amers killed in action, 261 wounded, wk, lowest level since Oct '65; 419 S
Vietnamese killed, 908 wounded, wk; 1,875 enemy killed, wk; S Vietnamese force
ends 3-day thrust across border into southeastern Cambodia; rept 90 enemy
soldiers killed; 3,000 S Vietnamese end sweep NE of Khesanh; 225 N Vietnamese
reptd killed; S Vietnamese losses put at 17 killed, 129 wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 7

LENGTH: 88 words

Repr Rogers offers bill to establish network of more than 300 drug addiction
treatment centers at cost of $160-million; facilities would be grafted onto
existing and future centers of Natl Inst of Mental Health; measure would create
framework of facilities to deal with growing civilian needs as well as mil
addicts returning from Vietnam; details; White House officials disclose that
Pres Nixon's choice to head new Fed agency to direct all aspects of natl war on
narcotics will be Dr J H Jaffe; Jaffee's background discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

Mil jury, Huntsville, Ala, convicts M Sgt Higdon of stealing $7,200 in cigarette
promotion funds while running Army clubs in Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 85 words

Sen Proxmire demands Sec Laird explain Defense Dept ad for bids from small
businesses in Washington area to record verbatim all newscasts emanating from
all met area radio and TV stations; sees dept seeking to involve free enterprise
in its 'snooping activities'; Defense Dept says it has had such contracts since
'63; says it is particularly interested in news dispatches dealing with Vietnam,
mil appropriations or mil-connected legis in order to keep key officials
informed 'on what's being said about us'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 5

LENGTH: 18 words

Lr charges double standard in handling of recent anti-Vietnam war protest in
Washington and strike in NYC

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 11, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

James Reston comments on imprecision of language at Paris peace talks as barrier
to successful negotiations; cites discussions on 'withdrawing' US troops as
example; contrasts Clifford's 'precise' proposals on withdrawal and POWs; scores
charges of 'pol' against Clifford; says Adm's rejection of Dec 31 deadline is
not linked to POWs but to fear that it gives S Vietnam not enough time to defend
itself

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 7 words

Ton Duc Thang re-elected pres of N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 88 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, moving to strengthen his Govt's position
before the elections, makes 1st important changes in his Cabinet since its
formation in '69; changes, shifts or eliminates some men associated with Nguyen
Cao Ky and others linked to scandals, but leaves important mins unchanged; most
significant change is that of Nguyen Cao Ky's friend, Finance Min Nguyen Bich
Hue, replaced by Ha Xuan Trung; Nguyen Cao Ky illus in Mekong Delta to celebrate
founding of Hao Hoa Buddhist sect, whose support he seeks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 137 words

W A Harriman says Nixon Adm is unwilling to discuss a troops withdrawal date
because 'it is quite clear' that Pres Nixon wants the present Saigon regime
maintained, HR subcom; says there would be 'no problem' in getting US POWs
released from North if US set a firm withdrawal date; backs Clifford plan;
McGovern-Hatfield amendment supporters seek to force Adm to concede that
reluctance to set date is linked to preservation of Saigon regime and not to
POWs issue; hope to gain votes this way from wavering Sens; Clifford says that
so long as Adm publicly says it rejects Clifford plan, there is no reason for
the other side to offer it, news conf; says he was informed his plan was
acceptable to Hanoi and that POWs could be promptly released; says 'most acute
peril' faces US if Nixon does not set withdrawal date; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 23 words

2 Cambodian gens fly to Saigon for talks with S Vietnamese mil leaders as
fighting outside Pnompenh reaches heaviest level of 15-mo old war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 39 words

Brig Gen G H Young, censured over Mylai massacre, to retire June 30; Brig Gen
Koster, also censured, gets new assignment; Koster shifted from First Army hq to
become deputy comdr of Test and Evaluation Command, Aberdeen Proving Grounds

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

US armored column patrolling southern edge of demilitarized zone wages 5-hr
battle with N Vietnamese force; 3 N Vietnamese killed, 7 Amers wounded; B-52s
raid northern front; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 26 words

M/Sgt William Higdon sentenced to dishonorable discharge, forfeiture of all pay
and allowances and fined $25,000; charged with accepting kickbacks in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 43 words

Lt J R Vequist, antiwar West Point grad who disappeared from his unit in
Heidelberg, W Ger, and was listed as a deserter, is in Stockholm with his
family; says he cannot serve in Vietnam and kill people who did no harm to Amer
citizens; seeks asylum in Sweden

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 26 words

Prof H L Rossett lr says May 26 rept on Sgt Dwight Johnson illustrates
'depression caused by post-Vietnam adjustment problems' facing returning
veterans

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 122 words

Anthony Lewis, in article of series on America and the World, holds Pres Nixon
failure to make pub statement on disaster in E Pakistan illustrates distortion
in American values that has occurred because of Vietnam; says US has spent
45,000 lives to prevent 'bloodbath' in S Vietnam but has made no audible sound
of protest over bloodbath in E Pakistan, one of 'largest and most blatant in a
very long time'; notes response in GB, by contrast, has been great with refugee
tragedy being dominant story in Brit press for many days; comments on distortion
in US values caused by war; says until J F Dulles staked out an Amer
responsibility in Vietnam in '54, hardly anyone would regard that country as of
any strategic interest to US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 4

LENGTH: 12 words

Nguyen Van Tuoi, publisher of Saigon daily Vietnam Guardian, dies, 48

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 118 words

Nixon Adm bars renewed use of Amers to enter southern Laos as leaders of teams
keeping watch on enemy movements along Ho Chi Minh Trail; decision linked to
growing Cong criticism of Amer mil activity in Laos and fact that US is now
turning over such missions to S Vietnamese; Amers participation in missions had
been set up in '64 as joint venture of US Army and CIA; their role included not
only trail-watching but attempts to rescue POWs and involvement in other highly
sensitive missions; Amers were barred from participation immediately after S
Vietnamese incursion into Laos in Feb and Mar; mil officials concede that
quality of intelligence on enemy infiltration has deteriorated since US ended
role

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 12, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

Hijacker shoots passenger to death during scuffle with stewardess aboard TWA
Boeing 727 on ground at O'Hare Internatl Airport; demands to be flown to N
Vietnam but is shot and seized by FBI agents and police after gun battle on
craft's arrival in NY

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 56 words

New N Vietnam Natl Assembly re-elects almost all top leaders including Pres Ton
Duc Thang; his por; observers in Hong Kong say his re-election could mean that
the issue of supremacy in collective leadership has not yet been resolved; N
Vietnam is believed ruled by triumvirate of Le Duan, Premier Pham Van Dong and
Truong Chinh; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 127 words

New N Vietnamese drive threatens to cut across southern Laos, give enemy forces
control of more major rd and river supply routes; enemy forces advance to with
17 mi of Pakse, regional capital and Govt's hq for southern mil region; overrun
outpost of Ban Nhik on Route 23, major hwy from north; Laotian Army moves up
reinforcements; reptdly destroy 2 enemy tanks in attack on Ban Nhik; Laotian
command repts Ban Nhik defenders fled in disorder, that 2 Laotian officers were
killed; Amer observation plane shot down in battle; pilot rescued; map;
Cambodian command repts 350 enemy soldiers killed in battle for Vihear Suor
marshes; puts its losses at 1 killed, 2 wounded; N Vietnamese forces attack S
Vietnamese forces in eastern Cambodia, 1st assault in 2 wks; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 65 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu seen reconsidering restrictive election law;
reptdly may propose amendment permitting candidates to be endorsed by grouping
of pol parties instead of only by specified number of prov councils or by
legislators as bill now requires; group of 6 pol parties urges Nguyen Van Thieu
to amend bill; Cabinet changes listed by Govt as 'reshuffle'; details on changes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Text of Jan 22 '64 memo from then Joint Cs/S Chmn Taylor to Sec R S McNamara
discussing widening of Vietnam war, document accompanying Defense Dept study of
war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

Texts of key documents accompanying study for period Dec '63 through Tonkin Gulf
incident in Aug '64 and its aftermath: McNamara Dec 21 '63 rept to Johnson on
Vietnam situation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 3

LENGTH: 18 words

Excerpts from Robert McNamara Mar 16 '64 rept former Pres Johnson on steps to
change trend of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 5

LENGTH: 16 words

Glossary of terms used in texts of documents accompanying US Defense Dept study
of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Text of former Pres Johnson Mar 20 '64 cablegram to Amb H Lodge in S Vietnam on
Vietnam war escalation contingencies, document accompanying Defense Dept study
of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Excerpts from Natl Security Action Memo 288, 'US Objectives in S Vietnam', dated
Mar 17 '64

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 20 words

Excerpts from July 25 '64 cablegram from then Amb M Taylor to State Dept warning
on S Vietnamese 'March North' campaign

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 24 words

Text of Aug 8 '64 US note to Canadian Embassy in US on points for J B Seaborn,
Canadian member of Internatl Control Comm, to relay to N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 5

LENGTH: 40 words

Excerpts from record draft of Aug 11 '64 memo, 'Next Courses of Action in SE
Asia', by Asst Sec W P Bundy, cabled to US Pacific command and US Embassies in S
Vietnam and Laos; memo concerns action available to US after Tonkin Gulf
incident

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Excerpts from summary of Amb Max Taylor's 1st mission rept from S Vietnam dated
Aug 10 '64 and sent to Robert McNamara by Joint Cs/s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 3

LENGTH: 30 words

Text of rept drafted by then Deputy Asst Sec M Green to Asst Sec W Bundy on US
actions taken after Tonkin Gulf incident, document accompanying Defense Dept
study of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 3

LENGTH: 23 words

Excerpts from Aug 17 '64 cable to Joint Cs/S, 'Next Course of Action in SE
Asia,' document accompanying Defense Dept study of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 5

LENGTH: 35 words

Text of Aug 27 '64 from Maj Gen R H Anthis, USAF aide to Joint Cs/S, memo to
Asst Secs Bundy and McNaughton on Sept '64 covert US air raids on N Vietnam,
document accompanying Defense Dept study of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 84, Column 1

LENGTH: 129 words

Repr L L Wolff proposes Pinelawn Natl Cemetery, near Farmingdale, NY, be
expanded to provide burial space for LI soldiers killed in Vietnam; notes all
other natl cemeteries in US NE area are now closed, with exception of
Gettysburg, which has less than 900 grave sites remaining; he also proposes VA
take over former Army camp at Yaphank for a veterans cemetery because of high
cost of land; recommends adm of natl cemeteries be turned over to VA; por; Wolff
announces that he plans to embark on series of programs to aid plight of Long
Island Vietnam veterans in several areas, including drug addiction, int,
Mineola, NY; noting that those involved with drugs are not being helped,
proposes that mil treat addicts while they are still in service; other proposals
detailed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 92, Column 1

LENGTH: 32 words

Coalition to Take Brooklyn Out of the War and Vietnam Veterans Against the War
set weekend peace rally in Prospect Pk, Bklyn, beginning June 19; Ital-Amer
Civil Rights League to participate

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 16 words

Comment on USIA decision not to show film 'Vietnam, Vietnam'; John Ford role in
making film noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 23 words

Comment on Clark Clifford plan; complete Us withdrawal from Vietnam by Dec 31 in
exchange for return of POWs within 30 days; caricature

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Comment on Bunker-Nguyen Cao Ky private luncheon to discuss election problem
raised by new law

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Ed on problems S Vietnamese elections pose for US; urges US pressure for fair
elections

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 10 words

Lr notes US Adm silence on new election law in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 257 words

Study seen as middle-echelon and official view of war incorporating material
from top-level files of Defense Dept; researchers did not have complete access
to complete files of the Presidents or to all the memorandums of their
conversations and decisions; NY Times failed to get study sec on secret
diplomacy of Johnson period; study shows vigorous and acrimonious debate within
Govt on policies; shows that all 4 Adms felt need to act to prevent Communist
control of South and, as rationale for policy, used domino theory that if South
fell, other countries would follow; study examines not only policies and motives
of 4 Adms, but also effectiveness of intelligence, difficulties of imposing US
tactics on South and Govt uses of the press; examines US constant difficulties
with Saigon Govts and inability to persuade South to make pol and econ reforms
US deemed necessary to win allegiance of people; study completed in Sec
Clifford's tenure; 6 to 15 copies reptdly reproduced, 1 copy going to McNamara,
others to Pres Johnson, the State Dept and to Nixon's staff; researchers used
files of McNamara, Asst Sec J T McNaughton and Asst Sec Bundy; study handicapped
by lack of access to White House archives and records of oral discussions of
Natl Security Council and of meetings of Presidents with their closest advisers;
Sec Rusk role remains 'shadowy' because he rarely committed himself to paper;
study seen providing vast storehouse of new information; called most complete
and informative central archive available thus far on US role

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 485 words

NY Times series on US involvement in war from World War II to mid-1968 as
revealed in massive study commissioned by Sec McNamara and conducted by US
Defense Dept; most of study's 3,000 pages of analysis and 4,000 pages of
appended official documents were obtained by NY Times; series is result of
investigative reptg by N Sheehan; written by Sheehan, H Smith, E W Kenworthy and
F Butterfield; articles and documents edited by A M Siegal and S Abt; study
traces policies and commitments of Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson Adms;
suggests that predominant US interest at first was containment of Communism and
later defense of US power and prestige, irrespective of conditions in Vietnam;
series opens with analysis of period from beginning of '64 to Tonkin Gulf
incident; study discloses that in this phase US mounted clandestine attacks
against North and planned to get a Cong resolution which would be equivalent to
a war declaration; clandestine operations were directed by McNamara; rept
describes development of Plan 34A, program of clandestine operations, and
development of precise scenario for escalation of war; Pres aide W W Rostow
stressed that N Vietnam was 'root of the problem'; urged threat to bomb Hanoi
indus as means of frightening North to order Vietcong to halt activities in
South; study shows Johnson Adm's intent, as Vietcong rebellion increased, to
substitute bombing of North for fighting Vietcong in the South and as means to
force Hanoi to cut guerrilla action to level where South could handle it;
McNamara warned that a settlement between the Vietnamese themselves would result
in a Communist take-over and destruction of US position in South; also warned of
possibility of coup by neutralist forces who might form a coalition govt with
Communists and invite US to leave; Asst Sec W P Bundy urged that this 'Vietnam
solution' must be prevented; study revs Apr '64 planning for attacks against
North; chief planner Bundy worked out 30-day program culminating in fullscale
bombing of North; evidence of infiltartion from North produced to justify
escalation of war; Amb Lodge argued for bombing of North soon at June '64
strategy session in Honolulu; session concentrated on air war and debated
obtaining of a Cong resolution prior to wider US action; events leading to Aug
'64 Tonkin Gulf clash detailed; meeting of Joint Cs/S followed at which they
began selecting target options for reprisal air strikes against North; confusion
developed at first over whether attack on US destroyer in gulf actually took
place; attack later reptd as genuine; Johnson meeting with 16 Cong leaders to
rept on attack and his decision to launch reprisal air attacks described;
introduction of Tonkin Gulf resolution drafted by Adm, testimony on it by Adm
officials and its final passage described; study comments that reprisal air
attacks were carried out with 'virtually no domestic criticism'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 112 words

US to increase aid to police forces in some SE Asian, Latin Amer and African
nations to help them deal with guerrillas and subversion; has supplied aid
through AID for past 10 yrs but now will revise strategy to stress modernization
of police forces and their instruction in antisubversion techniques; members of
US Cong charge that because S Vietnam police fight Vietcong subversion in
conjunction with Operation Phoenix, US aid program to police involves Us in 'pol
assassinations'; HR subcom to open hearings June 21 on Operation Phoenix; new
approach stirs some criticism; ask Conf for $32.7-million; Sen com holds
hearings on $3.3-billion reorgn plan for foreign aid

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 44 words

S Vietnamese fight 5 1/2-hr battle with N Vietnamese at besieged Fire Base Five,
Central Highlands; kill 24 enemy; suffer 1 killed, 21 wounded; mine explosions
kill 11 civilians, wound 9 in bus, 180 mi NE of Saigon; B-52s bomb positions S
of demilitarized zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Texts of key documents from study on Vietnam-Loas for period Aug '64 to Feb
'65:' Sec Rusk Aug 26 '64 cable to US Embassy in Laos on search and rescue
flights; copy of message sent to Comdr in Chief, Pacific

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 3

LENGTH: 15 words

Aug 18 '64 cablegram from US mission in Saigon to State Dept recommending
further mil steps

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 5

LENGTH: 24 words

Excerpts from Sept 3 '64 memo, Plan of Action for S Vietnam', which Defense Dept
study on Vietnam war indicates was drawn up by John McNaughton

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 14 words

Asst Sec W P Bundy Sept 8 '64 memo to Pres Johnson proposing mil steps in S
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 32 words

Text of Oct 6 '64 cablegram from US State and Defense Depts to US Embassy in
Laos authorizing air strikes on Laos infiltration routes into S Vietnam,
document accompanying Defense Dept study

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 18 words

Text of 2d draft of John McNaughton Nov 6, '64 paper, 'Action for South
Vietnam', on US aims and choices

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 5

LENGTH: 27 words

Excerpts from prepared Nov 27, '64 briefing on Nov '64 situation in S Vietnam
delivered at Washington meeting to sr officials to whom SE Asia working group
reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 5

LENGTH: 31 words

Excerpts from prepared Nov 27, '64 briefing by Amb Taylor, The Current Situation
in Vietnam--Nov, l964, delivered at Washington meeting to sr officials to whom
SE Asia working group reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 5

LENGTH: 34 words

Excerpts from Sept 19, '64 cablegram, signed by Amb Taylor, from US Embassy in
Saigon to State and Defense Depts and to Comdr in Chief, Pacific, reptg on
meeting of US envoys to rev operations in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 5

LENGTH: 64 words

Excerpts from Saigon Dec 24, '64 airgram to State Dept, as given in body of
Defense Dept study, on meeting of Amb Taylor and his deputy, U A Johnson, with
Gens Nguyen Cao Ky, Nguyen Van Thieu and Nguyen Chanh Thi and and Admiral
identified as Cang warning them against any coup attempt and stressing that mil
plans which they would like to see carried out depend on govt stability

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

Biogs of some key figures in Defense Dept study on Vietnam: McG Bundy, W P
Bundy, M V Forrestal, Nguyen Khanh, J T McNaughton and Gen Taylor

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 5

LENGTH: 17 words

Lr criticizes Times opposition to Sen M Mansfield amendment to withdraw half of
US troops from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 5

LENGTH: 29 words

S Vietnam observer at UN, Pham Huy Bach, in lr, takes issue with May 18 rept on
narcotics situation; says Premier Tran Thiem Khiem takes strong action against
drug traffic

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

Anthony Lewis, article in series, discusses concern of Britons over 'turning
inward'; quotes Prof P Wiles; says Us must recognize its part of the Vietnam war
is a moral failure, that even Amers can fight a bad and unjust war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 3

LENGTH: 24 words

Many Norfolk, Conn, orgns join in honoring memory of Pfc D J Shea, killed in
action in Vietnam war and posthumously awarded Medal of Hon; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 84 words

Defense Sec M Laird says US combat role in Vietnam will continue for some time
in a security capacity, TV int; refuses to offer timetable for more troops
withdrawals beyond those announced by Pres Nixon; still opposes setting deadline
for total pullout in exch for release of Amer POWs; says mutual reduction of
Western and Soviet naval strength is matter for exploration within Warsaw Pact
and NATO before negotiations between 2 sides could begin, TV int; does not refer
directly to Brezhnev comment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 163 words

Series on Defense Dept study of war; period between Aug '64 Tonkin Gulf
resolution and start of US bombing of North Vietnam in Feb 13, '65 covered;
study repts Johnson Adm reached 'gen consensus' at Sept 7, '64 White House
strategy meeting on necessity for air strikes against North; on Feb 8, '65
Johnson ordered new reprisal strikes against North and on Feb 13 ordered
sustained bombing of North; policy recommendations, strategy confs, pol
situation in Saigon and events leading up to Johnson decision for sustained
bombing detailed; policy recommendations from Amb Taylor, Asst Sec McNaughton,
Joint Cs/S, Under Sec Ball, McNamara, Rusk, McG Bundy and Asst Sec W P Bundy
cited; events include Oct '64 air strikes on Laos infiltration routes, Vietcong
attack on Binhoa airfield, attempted coup in S Vietnam by then Air Marshal
Nguyen Cao Ky and ex-Premier Nguyen Khanh, Amb Taylor's warning to them against
coup, and Vietcong attack on US mil adviser's compound at Pleiku

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 139 words

Pres Nixon, in lr to Labor Sec Hodgson, orders high priority for 'effective
mobilization of Fed resources' to place unemployed Vietnam war veterans in jobs
or in training; Hodgson discusses plans; says 370,000 veterans are currently
unemployed, a rate of 10.8% of those aged 20-29, compared with rate of 8.4%
among non-veterans in same age bracket; Nixon asks Hodgson to coordinate efforts
with J F Oates Jr, chmn of Jobs for Veterans Com and asks Hodgson to draw on
resources of Natl Alliance for Businessmen to spur placements; other plans
include giving veterans priority status under on-the-job training program
financed by Labor Dept, increasing counseling, training and job placement of men
while they are still in service and listing by Govt agencies and Govt
contractors of all job openings with US Employment service; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 187 words

Series on Defense Dept study of war; period between Mar and July '65 covered;
study shows Johnson decided on Apr 1 to use US ground troops for offensive
action in S Vietnam because Adm discovered that its long-planned bombing of N
Vietnam, just begun, was not going to prevent collapse in South; ordered
decision be kept secret; ordered 18,000-20,000-man increase in 'mil support
forces'; on July 30, Joint Chiefs approved 44 maneuver bns for deployment,
involving a total of 193,887 US troops; by end of the yr US forces in S Vietnam
numbered 184,314; policy recommendations, strategy meetings and events during
Apr-July period detailed; in Apr strategy meeting in Honolulu, when conferees
agreed to urge increase of US troops to 82,000, Under Sec G W Ball urged US to
'cut its losses' and withdraw instead; in June, he again opposed ground-troop
increase; policy recommendations from McNaughton, Taylor, Gen Westmoreland and W
P Bundy cited; events include 1st air strike, Mar, at N Vietnamese ammunition
depot and naval base, deployment of 2 USMC bns, Mar, and 1st major ground action
by US forces NW of Saigon in June

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 410 words

US Atty Gen J Mitchell asks NY Times to refrain from further pub of study
documents on ground that such disclosures cause 'irreparable injury to the
defense interests of the US' (M Frankel rept); if paper refuses, Govt will try
to bar pub by ct action; Times refuses to halt pub voluntarily; Asst Atty Gen R
C Mardian conveys request and intention to seek ct enjoinder in phone call to
Times exec vp H Bancroft; text of Times statement refusing to halt pub; Times
says it believes 'it is in the best interest of the people of the country' to be
informed of the study; says it will oppose any request for an injunction, but
will abide by the final decision of the ct; Mitchell makes request to Times in
telegram to Times pres and publisher A O Sulzberger; also asks return of
documents to Defense Dept; telegram text; Mitchell cites Espionage Law as basis
for request; Defense Dept spokesman W Friedheim cites 'ambiguities' in laws
governing disclosure of secret documents about whether they apply to pubs or
only to their source of information; says there is no precedent for application
of the law to a pub; Defense Dept statement expresses concern about violation of
security but leaves determination of legal action to Justice Dept; no official
challenges authenticity of Times series and the documents; Pres press sec
Ziegler stresses that Nixon developed a 'new Vietnam policy' and decided not to
continue or justify policies of earlier Adms, which are subject of Defense Dept
study; Sen Symington announces he will propose a 'full examination of the
origins of the war', Sen com hearing at which Sec Laird was asked about the
study; Laird is opposed to hearings; says Times series violates security
regulations; Symington says it is 'shocking' that Cong was kept ignorant of
study materials; text of Defense Dept statement; says material remains sensitive
and classified; Friedheim comments on discussions on the matter among officials
of Justice and Defense Depts; Sen McGovern says study tells story of 'almost
incredible deception' of Cong and pub; Sen Scott calls 'release' of documents a
'Fed crime', but describes their contents as 'instructive and somewhat
shocking'; says Nixon has taken pub into confidence on the war more than anyone
else; Repr McCloskey stresses importance of truthfulness by Govt; charges
deception in briefings he got in Vietnam; McNamara reptdly sent his copy of
study to Natl Archives; declines comment on matter; pors

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 31 words

N Vietnamese ambush US unit, 42 mi NE of Saigon, kill 4 Amers, wound 8; B-52s
bomb area around Khesanh base in attempt to head off a N Vietnamese build-up in
region; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 10 words

US troop strength in Vietnam at 247,000, lowest since Mar '66

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 101 words

Sen M Mansfield urges Pres Nixon seek immediate cease-fire agreement providing
for phased and rapid US troops withdrawal in return for phased return of POWs,
s, Boston Coll; says 'dragging out of withdrawal' only adds to Vietnam
'tragedy'; McGovern and Hatfield, speaking to nearly empty Sen chamber, continue
to stress that on basis of recent Hanoi statements, establishment of a
withdrawal deadline could lead to immediate agreement on release of POWs; Sen
Jordan announces he will vote for McGovern-Hatfield amendment; debate on
amendment centers on whether withdrawal deadline will lead to POWs release

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 121 words

Pres Nixon summons group of US ambassadors and Adm officials to White House to
discuss ways of curbing flow of narcotics into US; Ziegler says that much of
discussion concerned internatl drug traffic and that some consideration had been
given to possibility of providing more funds to foreign countries to halt or at
least diminish drug supply at its various sources overseas; discloses that Nixon
will unveil 'major initiative' by end of wk to help deal with drug problem;
proposals that Nixon outlined at meeting included creation of new govt agency or
bureau to help fight narcotics with initial grant of over $100-million in Fed
funds; those attending meeting identified; illus of marijuana and opium being
burned in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 76 words

Sen Goldwater, asked about Times series in TV int, says he knew 1 mo before
Tonkin Gulf clashes that Johnson planned to widen war; says he knew during '64
Pres campaign that Johnson planned to bomb N Vietnam and send US troops to fight
in S Vietnam; notes he was called a 'warmonger' all the time Johnson was saying
he would never send Amer boys; agrees that Johnson Adm 'lied' to pub; says it
would have been better for people to have known the truth; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 3

LENGTH: 15 words

McGeorge Bundy Feb 17 '65 memo to Pres Johnson on 'sustained reprisal' policy in
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 5

LENGTH: 15 words

Text of Feb 18, '65 draft paper by W P Bundy on results of US policy in Vietnam
in '65

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Text of 1st draft of 'Annex--Plan for Action for South Vietnam', appended to Mar
24, '65 memo from McNaughton to Sec McNamara

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Excerpts from Feb 13 '65 State Dept cablegram to Amb M Taylor on 'Rolling
Thunder' (bombing of N Vietnam) decision; rept says message was drafted at White
House

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 5

LENGTH: 23 words

CIA Dir J A McCone Apr 2 '65 memo to Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy
and Amb M Taylor on effectoveness of air war on Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 3

LENGTH: 25 words

Text of George Ball July 1 '65 memo to Pres Johnson, 'A Compromise Solution in
South Vietnam', document accompanying Defense Dept study of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 3

LENGTH: 15 words

Text of Pres Johnson May 10 '65 message of Amb M Taylor on pause in bombing of N
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 3

LENGTH: 19 words

Text of Walt Rostow May 20 '65 memo to Sec D Rusk, Victory and Defeat in
Guerrilla Wars: The Case of South Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Brit Prime Min H Wilson June 3 '65 cablegram to Johnson warning on bombing oil
targets near Hanoi

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Excerpts from John McNaughton July 2 '65 memo to Lt Gen Goodpaster, 'Forces
Required to Win in S Vietnam'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

Text of Robert McNamara July 1 '65 memo to Pres Johnson, revised on July 20, on
inceasing allied ground forces in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Texts of key documents from study covering the opening of the sustained bombing
campaign against N Vietnam in 1st half of '65: W W Rostow Nov 16, '64 lr to
McNamara favoring commitment of troops by US; memo from Rostow to Rusk, Nov 23,
'64 advocating ground troops and air attacks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 15, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 3

LENGTH: 65 words

Sen E Kennedy lr on H W Baldwin May 31 article corrects what he calls factual
errors and distortions in article regarding findings of his Subcom on Refugees;
says US should not take comfort in fact that war it has sponsored in Vietnam has
taken fewer lives than World Wars I and II; deplores calling those who score
impact of war on civilians 'extreme critics'; illus of Vietnamese children

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 321 words

Fed Dist Ct Judge Gurfein issues temporary restraining order barring NY Times
from publishing material from secret Pentagon study of US role in Vietnam war
for 4 days; refuses to order Times to return documents to Govt; says case could
be important in history of Govt relations with press; says that any temporary
harm done to Times is 'far outweighed by the irreparable harm that could be done
to the interests of the United States' if more articles and documents are
published while case is being heard; Times says it will comply with order;
lawyers for Times and Justice Dept tell Gurfein that it appears to be 1st time
in nation's history that a newspaper has been restrained by a ct from publishing
an article; Times represented by Prof A M Bickel of Yale Univ Law School, US
Atty's office by Asst US Atty M D Hess; gist of Govt's argument is that Times
violated Title 18 of US Code, Sec 793, which makes it a crime for persons with
'unauthorized possession' of government documents to disclose their contents
under circumstances that 'could be used to the injury of the United States or to
the advantage of any foreign nation'; Bickel argues that case is a 'classic case
of censorship' barred by 1st Amendment's free press guarantee and that statute
cited by Govt is anti-espionage law never intended by Cong to be used against
press; Gurfein hears friend-of-ct statements by N Dorsen of ACLU and K B Glen of
Emergency Civil Liberties Com; directs both to file briefs and reserves judgment
on their requests to be heard; Justice Dept had earlier filed civil suit seeking
permanent injunction against Times and 22 of its execs, editors and reporters;
22 listed; dept reveals FBI is investigating possible violation of Fed criminal
laws in connection with pub of documents; Gurfein order issued over Bickel's
objections; Times elects not to appeal it but to have issues tried on their
merits before the ct; Gurfein por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 25 words

S Vietnamese paratroops break 3-wk enemy siege of arty outpost in Central
Highlands after capturing huge enemy complex; 68 N Vietnamese reptdly killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 4

LENGTH: 123 words

Sec of State Rogers says US cannot abandon its 'natl objectives' in Vietnam to
meet 'ransom' demanded by Hanoi for release of POWs, news conf; says Hanoi has
decided to hold POWs to achieve pol objectives; says US natl interests in whole
Pacific area require that US not set withdrawal date at this time; says US plans
to continue econ and mil aid to Saigon even after US troops are withdrawn; says
aid questions can be negotiated after final settlement; says US still seeks ind,
non-Communist S Vietnam; says Adm is carrying out its policy of withdrawal and
fulfilling its promises; says US is spending 'in the neighborhood of
$350-million' during current fiscal yr in war in Laos, exclusive of costs of
bombing Ho Chi Minh Trail network

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 26 words

1st 3 installments of NY Times series on Pentagon study on Vietnam circulated in
Pentagon after having been reproduced by internal publication Current News

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 31 words

USSR news agency Tass calls documents 'a record of official duplicity'; Moscow
Gov newspaper Izvestia says they undermine the basis of Vietnam policy of
Johnson Adm and its successors

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 8

LENGTH: 29 words

Pierre Salinger expresses suspicion that Nixon Adm leaked study to NY Times,
radio int, Paris; says pub of documents can only help Nixon; defends Pres
Kennedy's Vietnam policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 3

LENGTH: 135 words

Pres Nixon's new antinarcotics program will establish agency called Special
Action Office for Drug Abuse Prevention, which will combine tasks of 7 domestic
agencies; Dr J H Jaffe to be named agency dir; White House reptdly is weighing
apptmt of 2d person with powers slightly less than those of Jaffe's to supervise
overseas antinarcotics activities; program will also include proposal that
servicemen who have become addicted in Vietnam be requested to undergo 3 wks of
mandatory treatment at West Coast rehabilitation centers; proposal will require
Cong approval because it will compel at least some to remain under mil
jurisdiction beyond terms of service; rehabilitation program will be preceded by
series of urinalysis tests to determine extent of addiction and by 7-day
'detoxification' period in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 74 words

Growing evidence of widespread drug addiction among Vietnam servicemen and
veterans spurs Cong and Pres Nixon to action on narcotics problem faced by US;
steps taken to date provide little more than framework within which many
problems must be solved; major problem is that no one knows how many addicts
there are in mil, let alone in Amer soc; 2d problem is where to set up
facilities to cope with addiction and what treatment to give addicts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 80 words

Nixon Adm is engaged in broad policy rev aimed at determining courses of action
that might improve Saigon's ability to withstand mil assaults in '72, after most
US troops have been withdrawn; Natl Security Council estimates Hanoi is bldg
toward a new offensive in South in '72; Adm is concerned about effects a major S
Vietnamese mil defeat in spring of '72 might have on Republicans in Pres
election; details on major questions officials consider in light of expected
offensive

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 343 words

Cong critics of Indochina war criticize Nixon Adm for obtaining restraining
order against NY Times; Vice Pres Agnew questions Times judgment in pub Pentagon
material; Sen Fulbright and Repr McCloskey ask Times to give them copies of
unpub material since Adm had refused Cong access to documents; Fulbright makes
request in lr to Times publisher A O Sulzberger; says material already pub has
not breached natl security and it is within Times's right under 1st Amendment to
pub it; McCloskey says that if he is given unpub material, he will have it pub
in Cong Record; Pres press sec Ziegler says no consideration is being given to
declassification of documents pub by Times; Gen Taylor charges Times initiated
'a practice of betrayal of Government secrets,' int on CBS TV news program; 62
HR members, mostly liberal Dems, sign lrs to Sec Laird and Atty Gen Mitchell
asking Laird to make Pentagon study available to Cong and protesting Mitchell's
'harassment' of Times; Sen Scott holds pub of documents harms public confidence
in Govt; Sen Tower questions whether pub of documents remains within Times motto
'All the news that's fit to print'; W Averell Harriman says public has been
'misled by the publication of a lot of miscellaneous documents'; Sen McGovern
decries Justice Dept's use of espionage laws to halt pub by Times; Gov Reagan
sees threat to natl security in disclosures; says news media ought to rev
material before pub in interest of security; HR Govt Operations Com to hold
hearings on Govt's classification procedures and on policies of withholding data
from Cong and public by 'exec privilege'; subcom chmn Repr Moorhead and subcom
member Repr Reid comment; Humphrey discounts repts that McG Bundy and W W Rostow
were closest to Pres Johnson on war matters; says Secs Rusk and McNamara had
been the key officials; Gen E G Wheeler then Joint Cs/S chmn, says his office
asked for but was never given copy of study; Vice PRes Agnew holds what is
proper amount of classified information that should be released is matter for
professional judgment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3; (AFP)

LENGTH: 31 words

Rumanian Pres Ceausescu arrives, Hanoi, from N Korea on official visit; is
greeted by Le Duan, Premier Pham van Dang and other top Vietnamese officials;
pledges aid 'until final victory'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 19 words

Sen roll-call on defeating McGovern-Hatfield amendment requiring US troops
withdrawal from Vietnam by Dec 31, '71

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

S Vietnamese troops conduct security sweep around Saigon to protect Armed Forces
Day parade June 19

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

NY Times series spurs Australian MP E G Whitlam to charge that Australia was
'conned' into sending combat troops to Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 2

LENGTH: 57 words

Gen Nguyen Khanh, head of S Vietnam Govt and its mil comdr in '64, says he was
in constant conflict then with Amb Maxwell Taylor, int, Paris; Taylor's repts on
him and other S Vietnamese leaders are part of documents published in Times
series; Nguyen Khanh gives his own version of events that led to his ouster and
virtual exile in Feb '65

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 83 words

Survey by NY Times correspondents shows no Eur allies have made complaints to
State Dept or asked questions about Times pub of Pentagon documents; Sec of
State Rogers had said that pub of documents would cause difficulty in foreign
relations and that some govts had made demarches to US; one reason given is that
politicians in recent yrs have printed many supposed secrets in their memoirs;
ex-Prime Min Wilson memoirs containing exchs on Vietnam with Johnson, Amb Bruce
and other officials cited

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 35 words

Defense Dept declines to comment on repts US officials fear that USSR could
break US codes of '60s by studying text of diplomatic cables published by NY
Times in repts on secret Pentagon study of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 36 words

Canadian Min M W Sharp complains to US Amb A W Schmidt that account in study
document published by NY Times of Canada's role as intermediary between US and
Hanoi is misleading; also complains about it being published

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1; (GP)

LENGTH: 16 words

Gallup Poll finds econ ranks 2d as natl problem, with Vietnam 1st and drug
addiction 3d; table

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 3

LENGTH: 31 words

Melvyn J Suplee lr opposes troop withdrawal by Dec 31, 1971 because US is on
verge of obtaining its objective of winning for S Vietnamese right to freely
determine their own future

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

Sen rejects, 55-42, McGovern-Hatfield amendment to selective service that would
have required withdrawal of all US forces from Vietnam by Dec '31; earlier, Sen
defeated, 52-44, compromise amendment to same bill by Sen Chiles that set June
1, '72 withdrawal date; considerable reluctance seen to impose deadline on Pres
Nixon; Sen Stennis urges that Pres not be relieved of responsibility in handling
war; Sen Hatfield says Cong has const responsibility for the war and the power
to end it; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 17, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 170 words

US Mayors Conf, in resolution expressing great concern about Pres Nixon's new
housing program, urges he cut off all Fed funds to communities that refuse to
provide for low- and moderate-income housing, conv; Mayors to seek conf with
Pres on ramifications of his policy; Housing and Urban Development Sec Romney
warns such action would create more problems than it cured; resolution was
offered by Syracuse Mayor Lee Alexander, who says Adm policy will do little to
require suburban communities to assume their share of housing burden; NYC Mayor
Lindsay in Phila for US Mayors Conf conv; illus; conf in 54-49 vote, urges Nixon
to withdraw all US troops from Vietnam by Dec 31; antiwar Mayors win after
effort for several yrs; conf adopts resolution urging Nixon to reverse his
'indicated position' and sign pub service jobs bill; closes on optimistic note
for 1st time in several yrs, with number of Mayors saying they believe Cong will
enact some form of revenue sharing; Milwaukee Mayor Maier elected conf head; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 276 words

Sen E M Kennedy calls for full disclosure of secret Govt data on Vietnam
policies and actions of John F Kennedy Adm; group of over 20 HR Dems led by Repr
Eckhardt say they will ask Judge Gurfein for permission to file friend-of-ct
brief; group hires Prof Thomas T Emerson of Yale Law School to represent them;
HR subcom on Govt information to open hearings on Govt policies on withholding
information; Sen Curtis, conservative Repub, lauds NY Times for pub Vietnam
articles and documents and criticizes Govt's extensive use of 'secret' and 'top
secret' classifications; Repr McCloskey move to have HR adjourn in protests
against Adm efforts to prevent further pub of documents defeated, 368-30; Repr
Abzug offers resolution demanding that Adm give Cong text of Pentagon study and
more recent studies of Indochina policy; Theodore C Sorensen, former aide to
Pres Kennedy, says it is dangerous mistake for Govt to try to prevent pub of
documents; sees no const or legal means for preventing pub; Reprs Wm Moorhead
and Ogden Reid, in joint statement announcing Govt information subcom hearings,
say Times case has caused 'agonizing reappraisal' by Cong of laws and
regulations preventing free flow of information about Govt activities; Sen James
Buckley voices concern that Times pub of Pentagon study may stir concern by
foreign govts over security of information entrusted to US and may cause persons
within Adm not to speak freely about development of policy alternatives for fear
of future disclosure of their views; Sec of HUD Romney says tudy confirms a
charge he made in '65 that the Amer people were 'brainwashed' about the war, s,
Charleston, W Va

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 344 words

Pres Nixon, in message to Cong, says that drug abuse has 'assumed dimensions of
natl emergency' and asks for $155-million more for campaign of rehabilitation,
research, educ, enforcement and internatl control of drug traffic; names Dr
Jerome H Jaffe to head new Special Action Office for Drug Abuse Prevention,
which will coordinate activities of 9 agencies now concerned with
rehabilitation, educ and research; says that agency will also direct compulsory
testing of all veterans returning to US and compulsory detoxification and
treatment of those found to have been taking drugs; will also have authority to
refer servicemen to treatment in VA or private hosps even if they have
dishonorable or bad conduct discharges; at present those with less than
honorable discharges are excluded; Nixon, noting that urinalysis tests of
servicemen is scheduled to begin June 19 in Vietnam, says that he will also ask
Cong for authority to keep addicts in uniform for as much as 30 days beyond
their normal date of discharge, with 7 days of this period being devoted to
detoxification in Vietnam and 21 days to rehabilitation in centers to be
established on West Coast of US; says that while additional funds will raise
budget for enforcement and treatment to $370-million, more money will be
provided if Dr Jaffe finds that it is necessary; of new funds requested by
Nixon, $105-million is to be used solely for treatment and rehabilitation of
addicts; other requests include: $14-million to enable VA to expand its 5 drug
addiction clinics to 30; $10-million for educ and training in use of dangerous
drugs; $2-million for research on drug addiction detection techniques;
$7.5-million for intensified investigation of large-scale traffickers and
$18-million for customs inspections and pursuit of smugglers; $1-million to help
other nations train enforcement officers; $2-million for research on herbicides
to destroy narcotics-producing plants; Nixon says that he will also ask Cong to
permit drug control assistance to Communist countries that are now ineligible
for aid

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

S Vietnamese marines, aided by US jets and helicopters, reptdly repel N
Vietnamese attack outside arty base just outside demilitarized zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 118 words

Gen Duong Van Minh, expected to disclose his 'peace' candidacy, say only that he
'might' run for Pres of S Vietnam, s, Saigon; urges reconciliation between
Communist and Non-Communist elements in S Vietnam; says he did not declare his
candidacy because Pres Nguyen Van Thieu has not yet signed or amended new
restrictive electoral bill; Gen and Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky reptdly work
together to undermine Nguyen Van Thieu; Nguyen Cao Ky again says he is running
against corruption; Duong Van Minh urges S Vietnamese forces to keep fighting,
but in cause of peace; says reconciliation between North and South can come only
when North recognizes non-Communist nature of South and accepts division for
time being

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

S Vietnam confiscates 14 dailies for allegedly violating Govt press codes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

25 Amers dead in combat, 62 wounded, wk; 322 S Vietnamese killed, 934 wounded;
1,883 enemy reptdly killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 13 words

Saigon seizes issues of 14 daily papers, charging violation of govt press codes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7

LENGTH: 45 words

UN spokesman W P Powell reiterates '65 statement by UN Sec Gen Thant that if US
pub knew facts about Vietnam in early '65 it would have agreed then to end the
war; cites Thant efforts in '64 and '65 for meeting between Hanoi and US reprs
which both sides turned down

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 107 words

HR, 254-158, rejects Reprs Nedzi and Whalen amendment to mil procurement bill
aimed at imposing deadline on withdrawal of Amer forces from Vietnam; amendment
would have provided that none of funds authorized in bill could be used to
support US forces in Indochina after end of yr; bill provides $21-billion,
$13.1-billion of which are for procurement; HR war critics pleased that for
first time they succeeded in forcing a direct vote on the war in the House and
were able to get support of over one-third of the membership; debate on bill
detailed; HR approves funds authorization bill which includes $7.9-billion for
research and development

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3; (AFP)

LENGTH: 9 words

N Vietnam official newspaper Nhan Dan scores treaty

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 56 words

NY Mayor Lindsay says NY Times should be permitted to continue pub series on
Vietnam; says Govt is 'treading on a very sensitive area' in its moves against
Times and that ct case threatens 1st Amendment freedoms; NBC pres J Goodman
backs Times; Amer Jewish Cong exec dir W Maslow urges effort to suppress
Pentagon study be abandoned

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 44 words

Former Sec of State Dean Rusk says he 'never heard' of secret Pentagon Vietnam
study, int, Decatur, Ga; says he does not know why Pentagon should have prepared
study without consulting him; does not know whether pub of more parts of study
would harm natl security

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 7

LENGTH: 60 words

Australian Prime Min McMahon, as result of disclosures in NY Times series, urges
probe on '65 commitment of troops to war; documents indicate US put pressures on
Australia and other countries to enter war in Nov '64, long before S Vietnam
formally requested such help; documents say Amb Maxwell Taylor urged S Vietnam
to request bn of troops from Australia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 112 words

Communist reprs at Paris peace talks, Nguyen Than Le, Duong Dinh Thao and Mrs
Nguyen Thi Binh, cite parts of Pentagon study published in the NY Times as
further proof of their contention that US is an aggressor, news conf after talks
session; Amb David Bruce says 'most of the problem remains N Vietnam's
aggression and subversion against its neighbors'; in reaction to Times series, N
Vietnamese bring out 6-yr-old white paper for newsmen called 'Twenty yrs of Amer
intervention and aggression in Vietnam'; paper cites W W Rostow plan for mil
action against North; says plan was amended by one drawn up for Under Sec
McNaughton calling for bombing attacks on North; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 81 words

Canadian Min of External Affairs Sharp defends Canadian Govt against charges
that in transmitting messages from US to Hanoi in '64-65 it was 'errand boy
bearing threats of an expanded war' and that it compromised its role as a member
of the Internatl Control Comm, statement to Commons; says Govt did not know in
advance of any US intention to bomb N Vietnam; documents printed by NY Times
gave details of message to be conveyed to Hanoi by J Blair Seaborn, Canadian
diplomat on comm

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnam Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky says it is untrue he bombed wrong target in
1st reprisal strikes against North on Feb 8, '66, as reptd in Pentagon study
document

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 25 words

Pres Nixon's message creating Special Action Office for Drug Abuse Prevention
excerpts; he comments on moves for rehabilitation of Vietnam veterans

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 26 words

Lr scores former Defense Sec Clifford plan on POWs and troops withdrawal from
Vietnam as partisan move to discredit Pres Nixon as election time approaches

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 18, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 5

LENGTH: 34 words

Prof D P Tompkins lr on Woodhead June 4 article on Thucydides and laws of power
in internatl affairs charges Woodhead misrepresents Thucydides in attempting to
enlist him as supporter of US Vietnam policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 19, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 242 words

Judge Gurfein refuses to lift restraining order against NY Times; ruling follows
day-long series of open and secret hearings; US Atty Seymour makes Govt's
primary argument; bases it on position that Times violated Fed law and Pres
Nixon's orders by illegally 'declassifying' top secret documents by pub them;
Times, in legal brief and affidavits by Washington correspondent Max Frankel,
holds that Govt's classification system is sham in which documents are routinely
overclassified and is used by officials to hide embarrassing data while
'leaking' other sensitive material; 3 Govt officials, Deputy Asst Sec Dennis
Doolin, Deputy Under Sec William Macomber and Vice Adm Francis J Blouin, testify
in secret hearing; seek to show that classification system is carefully
administered; Doolin says he revd Pentagon study on Vietnam on several occasions
because Sen Fulbright asked to see it; Macomber says 3 articles already pub by
Times had damaged US internatl relations; Blouin warns against pub all documents
in Pentagon's Vietnam archive; affidavits supporting times filed by Theodore
Sorensen, Amer Publishers Assn pres Sanford Cobb, ASNE pres McKnight, Adrian S
Fisher, Francis T P Plimpton, James McG Burns, Eric F Goldman, Barbara W
Tuchman, Times reporters N Sheehan, H Smith, T Szulc, R M Smith, J W Finney and
W Rugaber; Fed Dist Ct rejects Govt move for ct order to halt pub by Washington
Post of series of articles based on Pentagon study

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 19, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 107 words

Sens Cook and Stevens to offer amendment to draft bill proposing troops
withdrawal in 9 mos if agreement is reached on release of POWs; Sens Eagleton
and Hartke are co-sponsors; if amendment fails, Sen Chiles will offer amendment
proposing June 30 '72 withdrawal deadline, with provision that Pres Nixon can
waive it if he determines that N Vietnam has not entered into satisfactory
arrangement for release of POWs; Sen Pastore weighs offering sense-of-Sen
resolution calling for complete withdrawal by July 4 '72; Sen, 58-12, rejects
Sen Gravel amendment providing that men can be drafted only when state of war
has been declared by Cong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 19, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

Danang shelled by enemy on Armed Forces Day; bomb explodes in Saigon restaurant,
reptdly kills 3 Vietnamese, wounds 10; S Vietnamese rept killing 159 N
Vietnamese in 2 days of fighting near Baho Mt; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 19, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 26 words

Vietcong troops attack Cambodian positions near Srang, kill 2 soldiers, wounded
11; Cambodians repel enemy attack on town of Kokrous, 25 mi from Pnompenh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 19, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

(l20HR roll-call on Nedzi-Whalen amendpent urging Dec 31, 1971 deadline for
ending war in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 19, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Excerpts from arguments in US case against NY Times over Vietnam documents
before Judge Gurfein and from affidavits by Max Frankel and Theodore Sorensen;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 19, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 7

LENGTH: 17 words

Text of Federal District Judge Gesell's decision refusing to halt Washington
Post series on Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 19, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 99 words

MIT spokesman Robert Byers says Daniel Ellsberg called MIT employe to say he and
wife were well and there was no need for concern over their disappearance; their
whereabout still unknown; Byers says Ellsberg did not say whether he gave
documents to NY Times; details on Ellsberg's career and his views on war; in Nov
30 lr to Times he charged that Pres Nixon's policies prolonged and expanded
'this immoral, illegal and unconstitutional war'; reptdly came to fully dovish
position on war after returning from Vietnam in June '67; Ellsberg's father and
brother rept not seeing him for some time

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 19, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 3

LENGTH: 32 words

Prof S S L Chang lr notes US cannot sustain present payments deficit of
$5.5-billion; supports present low interest rate policy and ending war in
Vietnam as means of strengthening US position

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 19, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 1

LENGTH: 175 words

Sen Percy introduces into Cong legis to authorize Pres Nixon's $155-million
program for control of drug addiction; legis does not include feature that 30
days of rehabilitation for all returning addicted servicemen would be
compulsory; unless such feature is enacted, servicemen who reach end of their
period of enlistment must be discharged if they so desire, even if they are
addicted to heroin; Repr Murphy, contending that 30 days of rehabilitation is
inadequate, reintroduces legis that would make it possible for Army Sec to
commit soldier to be treated for as long as 42 mos in pub service hosps or
clinics; bill would extend to mil '66 Narcotics Act under which relative of
addict can have addict committed to compulsory treatment; Defense Sec Laird, in
related development, directs Army, Navy and Air Force to start within 7 days
urinanalysis tests; says that tests should be given at least 60 days before date
of serviceman's scheduled return from Vietnam and that similiar tests should be
instituted for servicemen in other parts of world

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 19, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 3

LENGTH: 31 words

Urinalysis tests to detect drug addiction in Vietnam to begin June 20; officer
in charge of program says mil command would like to test each servicemen when he
enters Vietnam for 1st time

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 19, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 84 words

Washington Post article based on sec of Pentagon study says S Vietnamese Premier
Ngo Dinh Diem in '55 prevented elections throughout North and South that had
been agreed on by '54 Geneva Conf; says Pres Eisenhower and Sec John Foster
Dulles feared such elections could lead to coalition govt and eventual Communist
takeover but they did not connive with S Vietnam to bar elections; Post notes
that study on which article is based is subject of Govt's injunction action
against The Times; article detailed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 18 words

Article on how combat death he foresaw came to a US soldier known as Winky in
Ashau Valley action,Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 129 words

Special conf on veterans problems held at Fordham Univ Lincoln Center Campus,
co-sponsored by Repr J H Scheuer and univ Liberal Arts Coll; speakers charge
that men returning from Vietnam are being treated as '10th class' citizens, with
complete lack of understanding of their situation; consensus is that black
veterans suffer most from unemployment because of their gen lack of educ; Dr R D
Trent ch--ges racism accts for major part of problem; illus; statistics show
that 50% of World War II veterans and 40% of Korean War veterans used Fed educ
benefits but that only 23% of Vietnam veterans take advantage of same; of
Vietnam veterans in minority and low-income groups, only 3.5% use benefits;
Scheuer cites variations in costs between present and post-World WarII period

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

Wis state VFW comdr A L Fish orders suspension of Memorial Post 10203 for
conducting activities against Vietnam war; says action has been approved by natl
comdr H R Rainwater; outgoing post comdr MD Cohen says over half of post's 70
members are Vietnam war veterans; charges that factor in suspension was recent
naming of post after WO D R Kink, local soldier who died in Vietnam, mother of
whom has been active critic of war; incoming comdr M Brenz sets ct suit unless
suspension is rescinded; vice comdr P Hermanson comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 104 words

Fed Judge Gurfein refuses to enjoin NY Times from further pub of articles based
on secret Pentagon study of Vietnam war; says Govt failed to show that pub of
Pentagon documents would harm natl interest enough to justify prior restraint on
pub; says press must be free to pub sensitive material even if it embarrassed
Govt; rejects Govt assertion that secs of espionage laws could be used to block
pub of classified data; Times publisher says decision reaffirms basic principles
of free press; US Appeals Ct Judge Kaufman bars Times from resuming pub of
articles pending hearing by 3-judge Appeals Ct panel on Gurfein ruling

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Texts of Judges Gurfein opinion and Kaufman order denying Govt request for
permanent injunction to bar NY Times from printing further articles on and
material from Pentagon Vietnam study

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 5

LENGTH: 36 words

London Sunday Times pub summary and analysis of NY Times articles based on
secret Pentagon study of US involvement in Vietnam; US Govt has obtained
temporary injunction against pub of further articles by NY Times

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

Text of Judge Wright opinion dissenting from imposing temporary restrain on
Washington Post's publishing series on Pentagon study of Vietnam war; texts of
opinion by Judges Robinson and Robb in same case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 81 words

Washington Post repts that Pentagon study documents show that Johnson Adm
strategists had little expectation that '65 and '68 pauses in bombing of N
Vietnam would produce peace talks; strategists did believe that bombing halts
ordered from time to time would help placate domestic and world opinion; study
credits Sec McNamara and Asst Sec McNaughton with proposing in July '65 a 37-day
bombing halt at end of yr; dispatch based on article in Washington Post and
distributed by AP

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 6

LENGTH: 54 words

Details on reaction to NY Times series on the Pentagon study of US intervention
in Vietnam from Sens Dole, Muskie, H E Hughes and Hollings and from Dem Chmn L F
O'Brien, Mayor Yorty, Gov Reagan, Repr Stratton and ADA; Wis State Dem Conv
scores Johnson and Nixon Adms for 'deceiving the Amer public'; lauds Times for
series

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 3

LENGTH: 109 words

UAW dissidents on W Coast start drive to oust Western regional dir P Schrade,
pol liberal who is outspoken critic of Vietnam war and advocate of aligning
student and union movements; charge Schrade neglects bread-and-butter business
of union in favor of extensive pol role; Schrade says he spends only fraction of
time on anything other than UAW business, charges dissidents include some
'extreme right-wingers'; F Shaw, an initiator of dissident petitions, denies
charge; challenge to Schrade comes at time when UAW's Western membership has
shrunk from 90,000 to 60,000, primarily because of massive layoffs in Calif's
sagging aerospace indus; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

Excerpts from ex-Pres Johnson, ex-Sec McNamara and McGeorge Bundy statments on
what they said in public and in private, on Gulf of Tonkin incidents, bombing of
N Vietnam and US full-scale troops commitment; private statements are from
Pentagon study

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 51 words

Comment on Govt's ct action against NY Times for publishing the Pentagon study
on how the US became involved in Vietnam; case discussed as pure test of press
freedom vs natl security; writing of Pentagon study by group commissioned by
Defense Sec Mcnamara, content of Times articles pub to date revd; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 24 words

Excerpt from Judge Gurfein opinion denying Govt request for injunction against
NY Times to report Pentagon study of US intervention in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              260 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

Ed lauds Judge Gurfein's denial of Govt plea for injunction to bar NY Times from
publishing articles about a secret Pentagon study of the Vietnam War

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              261 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

J Reston, commenting on pub of Pentagon documents, says that press power in its
conflicts with Presidency is ltd; says that strong case has now been made for
thorough Cong investigation of Vietnam war but that conflict between Govt and
press is only symbol of a more serious problem: deception and distrust between
Cong and exec branch

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              262 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

T Wicker on Johnson's assurances against bombing of N Vietnam Sept 28, '64 s
during Pres campaign and the private decision of Johnson and his advisers,
called 'gen consensus' in Pentagon study, that air attacks would have to be
launched; Gen Taylor on Aug 18, '64 proposed bombing; McGeorge Bundy role in war
escalation noted; cites study documents leading up to Johnson;s Apr l, '65
decision to commit US troops to ground combat; says it is a record of 'these and
other deceptions that the Govt now seeks to enjoin the Amer pub from reading in
the Amer newspapers'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              263 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 3

LENGTH: 33 words

C L Sulzberger on philosophical, legal and background of secrecy vs security
issue involved in dispute between Govt and NY Times; Times published the
Pentagon Study of US intervention in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              264 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 3

LENGTH: 30 words

Russell Baker satirical comment on deliberate leaking of secret Govt documents
on Vietnam in order to create panic and provoke Cong approval of funds for
various defense projects

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              265 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 203 words

White House press sec Ziegler says 1 reason for Nixon Adm's legal actions
against NY Times and Washington Post for publishing Pentagon papers is belief
that Govt cannot conduct its foreign policy effectively if it cannot deal with
foreign govts in confidential way; also says Pres advisers must not be inhibited
from submitting 'candid appraisals' of foreign pilicy options confronting Pres;
Communications Dir Klein, in private 'background' briefing for selected news
columnists to which Times was not invited, said Pres Nixon was more concerned
with discouraging officials opposed to Vietnam war from giving classified
documents to press than with effect of Pentagon study on natl security; pol
leaders and orgns, including Repub Natl Com chmn Dole, Dem Natl Chmn O'Brien,
Sen Muskie, Sen Hughes, former Sen E J McCarthy, Sen Hollings and Repr Stratton,
comment on Times series; Wis State Dem Conv delegates approve resolution
commending Times; ADA natl bd backs right of Times and other media to pub
Pentagon documents; Klein, in s to Natl Newspaper Publishers Assn, says pub of
deocuments goes beyond freedom of press issue; holds there is danger to natl
security when editor or publisher sets himself above the law

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              266 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 20, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says S Vietnamese Army will assure a South Vietnam 'free
of communism in any form', Armed Forces Day s, Saignon; opposes coalition govt
with Communists or a neutralist govt; S Vietnamese and allied troops
paradeFmembers of Govt, diplomatic corps and foreign mil staffs attend; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              267 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 252 words

Sen Muskie comments on pub of Pentagon documents by NY Times and Washington
Post; says steps must be taken to prevent Govt from operating in so secret a
fashion in future; says he plans to offer bill for creation of ind 7-man bd with
authority to declassify Govt documents; says that after 2-yr waiting period, bd
could make document pub and at any time send relevant documents to Cong; Sen
Javits welcomes ct test of security issue, praises Times's journalistic courage;
Sen Symington says it has been obvious for yrs that Exec branch has been
classifying material to cover up mistakes; says Pentagon documents on US
intervention in the Vietnam War should be made public as soon as possible; Sen
McGovern says greatest danger in nation is not release of documents but secrecy
in Govt; Time magazine repts former Pres Johnson is eager to defend himself
against content of documents; Newsweek magazine says sources close to Johnson
hold that Times articles give distorted and biased picture; Time says McNamara
hopes 'man who leaked rept will be forgotten' and that nation will 'get on with
task of learning from Pentagon papers'; Dr Daniel Ellsberg, reptd to be one who
gave Pentagon documents to Times, tells Newsweek he is flattered to be suspected
and glad that information has been made public; says Nixon adviser H A Kissinger
has copy of Pentagon rept but did not read it; over 70 NY News reporters,
editors and other employes sign ststement backing pub of Pentagon study and
protesting editorial in News

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              268 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 18 words

Vietnam antiwar rally held, Prospect Pk, Bklyn; organized by Coalition to take
Bklyn Out of the War; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              269 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 164 words

Ed says Pentagon study clearly shows how decisions affecting US participation in
and conduct of Vietnam war were planned and carried out while their far-reaching
pol effect and significance were either distorted or withheld from public; says
study shows that no one in upper ranks of Adm 6 or 7 yrs ago considered if
Saigon Govt's control of S Vietnam was of such vital interest to US that it
warranted open-ended mil involvement;; says Pentagon papers in no way affect
current plans, operations or policy, and there no longer appears to be any
justification for their having a classification that keeps them from public
access; says material was pub by NY Times, and by Washington Post, because
public has right to know and because it is function of free and unceensored
press; assailing continued Govt efforts to silence both papers on grounds of
'irreparable injury' to natl security, says fact is that Govt has done
irreparable injury to itself by efforts to thwart press freedom

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              270 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 31 words

USAF Maj Lewis H Ellison Jr charged, Travis Air Base, Calif, with stealing over
$150,000 worth of electronic equipment from helicopters being transported to and
from Vietnam war zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              271 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 8; (AFP)

LENGTH: 31 words

N Vietnam and Rumania charge US prolongs war, joint communique at end 4-day
visit to Hanoi by Rumanian Pres Ceausescu; believe that agreement was not
reached on all points in talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              272 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 48 words

38 med officers at Ft Knox, affiliated with Concerned Officers Movement, put ad
in Louisville Courier Journal & Times demanding US withdrawal from Vietnam by
end of yr; movement spokesman Maj Valentine Menis says list represents
approximately half of drs and dentists at Army Hosp there

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              273 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 58, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 53 words

Sen McGovern declares that high unemployment and other econ problems could cause
defeat of Pres Nixon in '72, TV int; calls for top-priority natl meeting to work
toward full employment; charges Adm is driving people out of agr and that 'agr
econ is near state of collapse'; holds Adm is 'obsessed' with Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              274 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

US B-52s continue raids against N Vietnam infiltration routes just below
demilitarized zone in Quangtri Prov in Khesanh area; S Vietnamese arty position
between Quangtri and Khesanh hit by rockets; other mil action reptd; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              275 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 233 words

Fed Dist Judge Gesell rules that Washington Post can resume pub of articles on
US involvement in Vietnam war, says Govt failed to show an immediate grave
threat to natl security; Govt obtains temporary restraining order from Appeals
Ct requiring Gesell to hear Govt case on its before entire nine-man ct merits;
Deputy Asst Sec of Defense Doolin testifies for Govt; says articles should be
suppressed because they contain information concerning current operations; Govt
offers as evidence a copy of '69 memo from Leslie H Gelb, dir on Pentagon study
on US involvement in war, asserting that he and 35 other researchers on project
flet they were 'writing history'; Pentagon spokesman says memo has been
declassified; George MacClain, dir of security classification mgt div, explains
top-secret classification of Pentagon study; Judge Gesell suggests that in
earlier closed session Govt officials stressed that publication would impair US
diplomatic relations around world; officials reptdly held that release of study
was evidence that US could not maintain security of confidential communications
from its own diplomats and from other govts; Post exec ed Benjamin C Bradlee
testifies on how Post recd Pentagon papers; Bradlee affirms that he and other
eds read galley proofs of Johnson's book; ct also holds closed session over
objections of Post atty; hears Doolin and Under Sec Macomber; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              276 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 436 words

Sen Allott charges NY Times with violating espionage laws and jeopardizing
chances to early end of US involvement in war by publishing Pentagon study;
study is becoming increasingly involved in Sen debate on Vietnam; war critics,
such as Mansfield, cite study as additonal reason why Cong should assert its
voice to bring war to end; Allott and Sen Dole argue that study pointed to
deception in previous adms, but say publication at this time is irresponsible;
Sen Kennedy says study shows Cong has been only a bystander in war, that it got
only those documents that supported policy decisions already concluded by the
executive; Mansfield says study confirms that US has been bound to a course
determined only by the Exec branch; demands mount among war critics in Cong for
probe of US involvement in war and for copies of study; Repr Boland offers
resolution calling for joint HR-Sen com to probe course of US involvement; Repr
Stratton calls pub of study NY Times and Washington Post 'un-Amer' in sense that
nation could be harmed; Reprs Abzug and McCloskey call upon exec branch to
produce study and current policy documents; McCloskey tells newsmen he plans to
turn over to HR subcom holding hearings on Govt secrecy and classification
paraphrased versions of some documents he got from Daniel Ellsberg describing US
involvment in Ngo Dinh Diem overthrow in '63; Repr Moss and Ogden R Reid to file
suit if exec branch does not comply with their demand for copies of study;
William F Buckley Jr says in Natl Rev ed that agrees with Times's assessment
that publication of documents do not damage US security; ex-Asst Sec Paul C
Warnke, in TV int, agrees that publication does not violate natl security, but
finds fault with publication because of omissions, including White House papers
which reflected fact that Johnson was the 'last holdout' when Pentagon advisers
urged bombing of North; Sen Mansfield offers amendment to draft extention bill
urging Pres to withdraw all US troops within 9 mos contingent on release of Amer
POWs; amendment, in contrast to other amendments, represents a non-binding
expression of policy but is part of strategy by war-critics to impose a
withdrawal policy on Nixon; amendment urges Pres to negotiate immediate
cease-fire to be followed by phased withdrawal of US troops in return for phased
release of US POWs; Sen, 79-0, approves Sen Kennedy amendment to Selective
Service bill imposing absolute limit of 2.4-million men on size of armed forces
by end of fiscal '72; Sen Armed Services Com had recommended such a limit but
had given Pres descretionary authority to lift it

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              277 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 138 words

3-judge panel of US Appeals Ct extends restraining order against publication by
the NY Times of material drawn from a classified Pentagon study of the Vietnam
war to permit all 8 members of ct to hear case; Govt is appealing Judge
Gurfein's decision in favor of the Times; US Atty Seymour files brief shifting
Govt's legal argument to contention that 1st Amendment's free-press guarantee no
longer applies after exec branch classifies information secret; holds that
Gurfein decision sanctioned disclosure of defense information in violation of
Freedom of Information Act and Espionage Act; Times attys file brief stressing
Gurfein's finding that information pub by Times could harm nation; ACLU gen
counsel Norman Dorsen and Victor Rabinowitz of Natl Emergency Civil Liberties
Union ask permission to file friend-of-ct briefs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              278 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 51 words

B-52s strike at N Vietnamese force that is assaulting Fire Base Fuller on
mountaintop below demilitarized zone; attack on fuller is part of gen increase
in enemy activity along northern frontier; US helicopter downed, Mekong Delta
south of Saigon; 2,300 troops withdrawn, wk; total troops now at 244,900

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              279 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

Medal of Honor winner Peter Lemon says that he was under influence of marijuana
when he fought off 2 waves of Vietcong soldiers and won Amer's highest mil
honor, int, Detroit; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              280 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 51 words

Army orders grand jury type of probe for Brig Gen John W Donaldson, charged with
murder of 6 Vietnamese civilians by firing at them from a helicopter between Nov
'68 and and Jan '69; orders same type of probe for Lt Col William J McCloskey,
charged with murdering 2 civilians; 2 cases are not related

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              281 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 2

LENGTH: 16 words

Excerpts from Govt brief to Appeals Ct seeking to bar pub by NY Times of further
Vietnam articles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              282 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 31 words

Excerpts from Judge Gesell ruling denying injunction against further pub in the
Washington Post of classified Pentagon documents on US involvement in Vietnam
war by Washington Post

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              283 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 6

LENGTH: 46 words

Text of Jan 15, '69 lr to Defense Sec Clifford from Leslie H Gelb, head ot task
force that wrote Pentagon study on Vietnam war; lr gives his views on study and
how it was prepared; calls study 'not so much a documentary history, as a
history based solely on documents'; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              284 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 4

LENGTH: 128 words

BLS consumer price index up 0.5% in May, same increase as registered in country
as whole; regional director Bienstock says rise marks start of 5th yr of
uninterrupted price increases in metropolitan NY area; notes this is 1st time in
4 mos that latest increase was higher than rise during preceding mo; says cost
of living went up more slowly, Jan-May than in '70 period; over-all price index
has jumped 5.9% during last 12 mos; Bienstock links 7.1% rise in housing costs
in NYC since May '70 in part to recent upward adjustments in rent-control and
rent-stabilization codes; predicts further increase with vacancy decontrol law;
group of 100 women, including actresses G Verdon and A Smith, hand out leaflets
on Lexington Av linking spiraling costs to Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              285 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

Ed urges US 'stretch itself' to insure integrity of S Vietnamese Natl elections;
backs resolution by Sens Stevenson and Mathias to establish 10-member Cong com
to insure neutrality in elections on part of US officials in S Vietnam and fair
play in the elections themselves

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              286 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 3

LENGTH: 67 words

Prof R Fisher article holds NY Times should recognize that it broke law and
engaged in form of civil disobedience by publishing secret documents pertaining
to Vietnam; suggests what law covering classification of Govt documents ought to
be and positions on pub of Pentagon documents which Times might properly take;
Fisher stresses Govt's right and need to classify documents as secret or top
secret

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              287 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 3

LENGTH: 52 words

W W Rostow denies James Reston statement in June 13 column that Pentagon study
showed how seldom anybody in the Kennedy and Johnson Adms questioned moral basis
of US war effort; comments on moral issues involved in supporting pursuit of US
natl interest especially as it pertains to SE Asia and Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              288 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 22, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 110 words

NY Times survey shows support for Vietnam war is strong among many US mil
chaplains despire widespread ch opposition to war; as result, chaplaincy is
under renewed fire by critics seeking to end it as institution in US mil forces;
chaplains do not preach support for war from the pulpit, but give their views in
ints; views of Lt Col James E Shaw, Maj Gen Frances L Sampson, Brig Gen Gerhardt
W Hyatt and Maj Emlyn Jones cites; appeal of RC group, Natl Assn of Laymen, to
Cardinal Cooke to remove priests from mit cited; Cardinal has not replied; other
protests against Cardinal's alleged pro-war stand cited; illus of chaplain
conducting service in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              289 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 330 words

US Atty Seymour, arguing Govt's case against NY Times, and Solicitor Gen
Griswold, arguing case against Washington Post for publishing material based on
a classified study, say Secs Laird and Rogers and Joint Cs/S have agreed to
interagency rev of secret Pentagon study to determine how much could be
declassified; Laird says he has already ordered rev of documents to see which
can be released; White House press sec Ziegler says Laird is responding to Pres
directive of Jan 15 ordering Govt agencies to study classification procedures;
says publication of some of study documents compromised purpose of directive
enlarging 'people's right to know'; lawyers for Times show no interest in
Seymour offer; Washington Post atty William R Glendon rejects offer; Ziegler and
Laird say Times and other papers do not have full 47-vol Pentagon study,
covering period from '40 to '68; Ziegler says they have preliminary documents
from a partial draft; Sen Fulbright says his com has had parts of study 'for
some time'; says Nixon Adm has only itself to blame for furor created by pub of
study; HR Govt Operations subcom to begin hearings on Govt methods of
classification and release of documents; Repr McCloskey, subcom member, says he
will make public then the parts of Pentagon study in his possession; subcom chmn
Repr Moorhead says he would welcome appearance by Dr Ellsberg, said to be source
of materials in Times possession; Sen Humphrey calls for pub of study; William F
Buckley Jr, in NY Post column, says he reserves judgment on whether papers
should pub articles based on study; Sens Moss and Tunney comment on study;
Newsweek article says Johnson feels Robert F Kennedy may have inspired rept to
aid him in '68 Pres nomination campaign; ABC pres Elton H Rule says alarm has
been sounded for public's right to know; says Govt attempts to suppress pub of
Vietnam articles by Times and Washington Post are further example of official
pressure against 1st Amendment guarantees

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              290 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 249 words

Full 8-judge Appeals Ct hears arguments by Govt and NY Times on the right of the
Times to publish secret information on the Vietnam War; promises early decision;
Appeals Ct in Washington hears arguments in similar Justice Dept suit to enjoin
Washington Post from pub articles based on Pentagon study; continues temporary
restraining order; Fed Dist ct issues temporary restraining order against Boston
Globe which began publishing articles based on Pentagon study; Chicago Sun-Times
pub article based in part of Pentagon study; Times lawyer Alexander Bickel, in
argument before ct, reveals some of secret proceedings before Judge Gurfein;
says Gurfein asked Govt witnesses to 'show him where the shoe pinches' but that
witnesses could cite only about 6 documents in 7,000-page record that could harm
natl security; US atty in NY Seymour argues that Times undermined Govt's
classification system by pub material classified top secret; holds that once
Govt classifies a document as secret, cts should bar any newspaper from
publishing it unless paper can prove that classification is 'arbitrary and
unsupportable'; ct grants Norman Dorsen of ACLU and Victor Rabinowitz of Natl
Emergency Civil Liberties Union time to argue as friends of ct; Dorsen holds
proceedings so far represent defeat for 1st Amendment because restraining order
was issued on strength of gen Govt allegations and is likely to set precedent
that would encourage Govt to go to ct whenever officials are upset by news
stories

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              291 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 143 words

Chicago Sun-Times article based on secret Govt documents says high-ranking
Kennedy Adm officials had advance knowledge of coup that toppled S Vietnamese
Pres Ngo Dinh Diem in '63; prints excerpts from memo from Asst Sec Roger Hilsman
to Sec of State Rusk urging US to encourage and aid in coup; Sun-Times ed James
F Hoge says part of material used in article came from Pentagon rept; repts no
Govt effort to halt publication; Boston Globe article based on Pentagon study
says Pres Johnson, just before Mar '68, decided to support S Vietnam but to
reduce US troops; also repts on study document where Gen Maxwell Taylor
recommends to Pres Kennedy that US ground combat troops be sent to S Vietnam
under pretext of flood control; repts other details from study; dispatches based
on articles in Chicago Sun-Times and Boston Globe and distributed by AP and UPI

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              292 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 162 words

Sen adopts, 57-42, Mansfield amendment to draft extension bill calling for
withdrawal of all Amer forces from Indochina within 9 mos if Amer POWs are
released; questionable if more hawkish HR will pass amendment; White House
reaction is that amendment, even if enacted, is not binding and that Pres Nixon
will pursue the withdrawal policy he has set forth; Nixon press sec Ziegler
reiterates Nixon's belief that establishment of withdrawal deadline 'inhibits'
negotiations in Paris; says amendment is only view of 57 Sens, not of Cong as a
whole; amendment passage is 1st major victory of war critics in mos of trying to
find some legis formula to end war; Mansfield interprets amendment as filling
policy void created by '70 repeal of Tonkin Gulf resolution; amendment is
cosponsored by Sens Cook and Stevens; amendment by Sen Stennis that provision of
a 'firm commitment' by N Vietnam be replaced by 'release' of POWs at first
rejected and then passed; details on voting

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              293 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 37 words

Guerrilla forces attack village of Hieutu in Mekong Delta, reptdly kill 4 S
Vietnamese militiamen; later ambush S Vietnamese relief force, killing 13,
wounding 7; S Vietnamese at besieged Fuller base continue to hold out

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              294 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 60 words

S Korea reptdly informs S Vietnam it is considering withdrawing all of its
nearly 50,000 troops over next 18 mos; 1st withdrawal of 15,000 men to be made
in '71; schedule reptdly surprises US officials and upsets S Vietnamese; in
Saigon and Seoul talks S Vietnamese urges Koreans to postpone their withdrawal
program by 1 yr; S Korean role in war discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              295 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 25 words

Sen roll-call on Mansfield amendment to draft extension bill calling for
withdrawal of US forces from Indochina within 9 mos if US POWs are released

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              296 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 5

LENGTH: 23 words

Illus of Sens Cook, Eagleton, Hartke and Stevens who are sponsors of the Vietnam
troop withdrawal amendments to the draft extension bill

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              297 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 3

LENGTH: 166 words

VA Admr Donald E Johnson announces more than 5-fold expansion of VA special drug
addiction clinics to cope with flood of mil addicts; says that present network
of 5 clinics will be expanded by addition of 27 by Oct 1; says system of 32
centers will be able to rehabilitate more than 6,000 addicts per yr; details;
Sen Alchoholism and Narcotics Subcom, in related development, hears testimony on
Pentagon plan to give all servicemen in Vietnam urinalysis; Maj Morgan Peck
notes how some men can escape detection; Asst Sec Roger Kelley testifies on
costs; clashes with Sen Schweiker on question of confidentiality in
rehabilitation process; Defense Dept Asst Sec says that cost of program will be
$40.5-million; other testimony detailed; US State Dept says that Amers are being
jailed abroad on narcotics violations at alarming rate and warns travelers that
severe sentences in primitive jails are often imposed; says that by end of May,
747 Amers were being detained in 50 countries on drug charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              298 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 2

LENGTH: 105 words

Capt Ernest Medina pretrial hearing; Lt Gen Albett O Connor denies decision to
try Medina was prompted by desire to protect Army's image; testifies he was
completely unaware of alleged conspiracy to keep Medina from testifying at
Calley trial; Connor's chief legal officer Col Wilson Freeman testifies that
impact of Medina case on pub opinion was discussed by high officers but had not
weighed in decision to recommend that Medina be tried as the man responsible for
Mylai massacre; F Lee Bailey charges Army tried to undermine Medina credibility
by announcing charges against Medina on eve of Medina's testimony at Calley
trial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              299 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 5

LENGTH: 55 words

FBI agents Bernard C Rachner and Cortland J Jones int Repr McCloskey about
documents he has relating to Vietnam war; limit int because of TV crew and
newsmen present; McCloskey says he was not asked for documents and he did not
show them to agents; says he told agents, when asked, that Ellsberg was source
of documents; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              300 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 2

LENGTH: 18 words

Text of Fed Dist Judge Julian order restraining Boston Globe from further pub of
Vietnam articles; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              301 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 6

LENGTH: 138 words

Appeals Ct, Washington, continues restraining order against Washington Post
pending ruling on Govt attempt to halt pub of Vietnam articles; Post atty
William R Glendon rejects offer by Solicitor Gen Griswold of Govt rev of
Pentagon documents for possible declassification of some portions; Griswold
argues that articles are threat to Pres powers and to US diplomatic
negotiations; holds that Pentagon study case involves 'the integrity of the
institution of the Presidency'; Glendon says it is evident from affidavits filed
by Post execs and newsmen that classified information is often given newsmen by
Govt officials; ct permits Repr Eckhardt to argue on behalf of himself and 26
other Cong members that Pentagon study should be made public; post, in brief
filed with ct, indicates it has over 4,400 pages of Pentagon study

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              302 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 20 words

Boston Globe repts Daniel Ellsberg plans to make statement on his role in
disclosure of Pentagon documents in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              303 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 2

LENGTH: 51 words

Nixon Adm to announce pledge by Natl Alliance of Businessmen to seek out at
least 100,000 jobs for Vietnam veterans over next 12 mos; group spokesmen refuse
to comment on program until it is officially announced, but one official holds
target of 100,000 jobs far too high, citing current unemployment rates

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              304 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 131 words

US Appeals Ct rules, 7-2 that Washington Post has Const right to pub series on a
secret Pentagon study on US involvement in Vietnam but restrains it from
continuing it until night of June 25 to allow a Govt appeal; finds Govt failed
to prove that natl security requires prevention of pub; says that 'vitality of
the principle that any prior restraint on publication comes into court under a
heavy presumption against its Constitutional validity' has been estab by Sup Ct;
Justice Dept will not take legal action against Chicago Sun-Times; Boston Globe,
still barred from publishing its series, gets ct permission to place its study
materials in safe deposit box insted of them over to the ct; Knight newspaper
group and Los Angeles Times publish article reptdly based on Pentagon study

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              305 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

Article in Knight papers, reptdly based on Pentagon study, says Sec of Defense
McNamara proposed coalition govt in S Vietnam in '67 after becoming discouraged
with ground war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              306 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 21 words

Homeward-bound Amer soldiers in Vietnam, taking Army's new urinalysis test for
heroin use, describe ways test can be beaten

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              307 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 132 words

ACLU dir Aryeh Neier, testifying at Sen subcom hearing, challenges right of
armed forces to tell law enforcement agencies results of urinalysis tests that
servicemen returning from Vietnam are undergoing; also challenges right of armed
services to pass on to other Govt depts information that psychiatrists may
elicit from individual servicemen undergoing treatment for drug abuse; clashes
with VA gen counsel John Corcoran on this issue; questions right of Defense Dept
to keep servicemen in uniform beyond their period of enlistment for drug
addiction rehabilitation; details; HR Appropriations Com, in related
development, approves $17.1-million for expansion of VA's network of drug
addiction treatment clinics; HR Appropriations Com approves $134-million for
patient care in VA hosps

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              308 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 21 words

Sr N Vietnamese leader, Le Duc Tho, returning to Paris peace talks after a yr's
absence, to head N Vietnamese delegation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              309 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu signs bill designed to restrict number of
opponents he will face in pres elections; Amer officials expect him to have 1 or
2 opponents; Duong Van Minh and Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky seek to meet law's
endorsement requirements; candidates must file endorsements by Aug 3

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              310 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 131 words

US Appeals Ct, 5-3, orders further delay on NY Times series on Vietnam; holds
that after June 25 Times can resume pub of series but could not use any material
that Govt contends is dangerous to natl security; order Judge Gurfein to hold
secret hearings and determine by July 3 which portions of study should not be
published for security reasons; Arthur O Sulzberger instructs Times's counsel to
appeal to US Sup Ct as soon as possible; crucial item in ct decision is sealed
list submitted by Govt containing list of itmes that Govt says would cause grave
natl danger if disclosed; Times objects because at Gurfein trial Govt cited only
6 items as dangerous; Appeals Ct says Govt must be given opportunity to prove
that items it submitted are dangerous; text of majority opinion; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              311 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 21 words

Text of White House press sec Ziegler statement on Pres Nixon's release of
Pentagon study of US intervention in Vietnam to Cong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              312 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

Publication by NY Times and other papers of Pentagon study material spurs Sen
inquiries on Vietnam war; Sen leaders move to create special joint panel of
Foreign Relations and Armed Services Coms to probe origins of war; Mansfield
works out proposal for a special unit to avoid jurisdictional dispute between
the 2 coms; Foreign Relations Com to proceed with own probe of policy decisions
that led to US involvement; Sen leaders stress that purpose of inquiries is not
to assess blame for US involvement in Vietnam but to draw lessons from it on how
to improve foreign policy machinery of exec branch and Cong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              313 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 2

LENGTH: 16 words

Transcript of Walter Cronkite int with Daniel Ellsberg on Vietnam war and
Pentagon study of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              314 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 171 words

Chicago Sun-Times article says Pres Kennedy sent Vice Pres Johnson to Saigon in
May '61 to persuade S Vietnam to request US ground troops; says study documents
show Pres Ngo Dinh Diem opposed presence of US troops except in case of direct
aggression by N Vietnam; article gives details on Kennedy role in '63 coup
against Ngo Dinh Diem; Justice Dept does not move to bar Chicago Sun-Times from
printing further details the paper says it got from 'sources involving the
Pentagon study'; says Sun-Times material is taken from documents declassified by
Johnson in '68; article in Knight papers describes Ngo Dinh Diem '63 ouster;
says ex-Sec of Defense McNamara's troop plans went from 275,000 to 600,000 from
Aug to Nov '65; Knight exec ed Lee Hills says his orgn has no plans to pub
further material from Pentagon study; Los Angeles Times article based on
Pentagon study says Natl Security Council rejected State Dept expert
recommendation in '63 to pull out of Vietnam because it could not win a war
against the Communists

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              315 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 4

LENGTH: 209 words

Ex-Asst Sec of Defense Paul C Warnke, who had over-all responsibility for
preparation of Pentagon study, says none of material published so far could
endanger natl security; however, says certain part of unpublished portions of
study could be harmful if 'prematurely revealed'; as an example cites sec of
study dealing with secret diplomatic initiatives taken during Johnson Adm; NY
Times, in 1st article in its series, said this vol was missing from its
material; Warnke deplores unauthorized release and publication of study; says
release could set a 'very mischievous precedent'; says Defense Sec McNamara
intended that rept be made pub 'in a relatively short period of time'; denies
there was attempt to deceive or mislead pub about steps taken in '64 and '65;
former Asst Sec of State Hilsman gives his version of Kennedy Adm role in coup
against S Vietnamese Pres Ngo Dinh Diem; says that although Times is guilty of a
'technical illegality' in publishing series, he is for publication because
security is not involved in treating of events that 'are over'; illus; W W
Rostow, in light of Pentagon study disclosures, comments on Johnson decision to
bomb N Vietnam and Johnson depicting himself as candidate of restraint in '64
Pres campaign, TV int

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              316 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 6

LENGTH: 35 words

Amer flag reptdly stolen from flagpole of Medal of Hon winner PFC Daniel J Shea
memorial, Norwalk Conn; Hon Amer Com offers $100 reward for flag's return; the
memorial also honors 15 others killed in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              317 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 135 words

T Wicker says if HR does not pass Mansfield amendment to the Selective Service
Bill, already approved by Sen, calling for withdrawal of all Amer forces from
Indochina within 9 mos if Amer POWs are released, may filibuster a draft
extension bill that did not include it; says Pres Nixon would most likely sign
it if that kind of power play brings amendment to him, but his signature would
not mean that he has to accept the amendment as his policy; for he could disavow
it, holding Cong has no right to direct Comdr in Chief and Chief Exec in conduct
of foreign policy and direction of armed forces; says amendment is formula aimed
at ending the war and freeing the prisoners, but what Nixon has in mind is
survival of a non-Communist S Vietnam, at least long enough so that he cannot be
charged with its loss

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              318 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 3

LENGTH: 148 words

J C Hagerty, ex-Pres Eisenhower's press sec, article on pub of Pentagon
documents by NY Times and other papers; questions what is natl security and who
determines it and what is obligation of news media; says present dispute afford
opportunity to examine classification system from a truly natl interest point of
view; suggests that Times, in pub 1st 3 articles in Vietnam series, could have
briefly explained actions by N Vietnam and aid to N Vietnam by China and USSR;
says that Govt, in seeking to stop Times from pub further material, should have
explained that it was acting to halt leaks of secret documents and protect
confidentail relationships between Govt and other nations; suggests there should
be a periodic rev of all classified material by an ind and quasi-judicial bd or
comm or Natl Security Council, article; Lyndon Johnson illus with Nguyen Cao Ky
in Honolulu in '66

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              319 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 2

LENGTH: 145 words

German actress Romy Schneider, by flying to Bonn for party given by Chancellor
Brandt, defies W Ger ct warrant threatening prosecution because she confessed to
having abortion; Gen Creighton Abrams, comdr of US forces in Vietnam, decorated
by Thai Govt, ceremony, Bangkok; friends say Tricia and Ed Cox honeymooned at
Camp David, Pres retreat in Md; Washington sources predict Pres Nixon will pass
over more sr officers and appoint Lt Gen Chaisson to succeed Gen Chapman as
commandant of the Marine Corps when his term expires Dec 31; por; Charles L
Brieant Jr apptd to Fed Dist Ct; Fla Gov Askew signs substitute divorce bill
that permits couples who have legal permanent separation to receive what is
called 'dissolution of marriage'; Leopold Stokowski ill; he will undergo
check-up in London hosp; Mrs Harry S Truman undergoes routine physical exam in
Kan City hosp

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              320 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 199 words

Pres Nixon announces he will make available to Cong complete 47-vol Pentagon
study, but says study will retain top-secret classification and that he makes
study available with understanding that Cong will not make them public pending
rev of their classification by exec branch; '65 Defense Dept study of Gulf of
Tonkin incident will also be included; papers will go temporarily to Sen
secretary pending decision on how Sen probe of Vietnam origins of war will be
carried out; copies give to HR will go to Armed Services Com; Sen moves toward
creating special joint panel of Foreign Relations and Armed Services Coms to
hold hearings; Nixon informs Mansfield of decision on study; White House press
sec Ziegler reads statement to newsmen on release of study; says release will
have no effect on Govt actions against various papers to stop publication of
study documents; Reprs Moss and O R Reid to continue pressing a ct suit filed
June 23 to force Govt to make all parts of study public under Freedom of
Information Act; are unhappy with Speaker Albert decision to make documents
available only to HR Armed Services Com; HR Govt Operations subcom defeats
motion by Moss to seek conf with Albert

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              321 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 24, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 164 words

Sen, 65-27, only wk before Govt's draft authority expires, votes to impose
closure and end 7-wk debate; move is only 5th time since '27 that closure has
been invoked; Sens Mansfield, Stennis, Thurmond vote for closure, stressing natl
security needs; Stennis and Thurmond vote for it for 1st time; others voting for
it for 1st time noted; vote was called to prevent filibuster promised by Sens
Gravel and Cranston to prevent draft extension as one way to end Vietnam war;
Stennis and Mansfield illus; Sen, 49-38, votes to exempt drs from draft if they
agree to spend 4 yrs practicing med in poverty area or another region where
there is serious shortage of drs; Repr T P O'Neill says he will offer motion to
instruct HR conferees to accept Mansfield amendment; HR observers believe motion
will be voted down; many backers of amendment who voted for closure agree with
Sen Pastore who told Sen that if amendment is deleted in conf he will never
again vote for closure on the draft bill

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              322 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 206 words

NY Times petition US Sup Ct to permit it to resume pub of material from Pentagon
study of Vietnam war; ct confers for several hrs but does not act on appeal;
expected to decide next day; Justice Dept, after Fed Appeals Ct turns down its
petition for a rehearing on its effort to stop Washington Post from resuming
publication, appeals to Sup Ct; 2 appeals brings before Sup Ct for 1st time
question of any ct's authority to restrain press from publishing news that the
Govt says harms natl security; Solicotor Gen Griswold asks Sup Ct to stay Post
from resuming publication pending Sup Ct decision; says purpose of move is to
place Times and Post on even footing; says Ct could treat his application for a
stay as a petition for rev of Appeals Ct proceedings; Times asks in separate
papers that Ct rev and overturn decision handed by Appeals Ct in its case; at
issue is a secret 'special appendix' given to Appeals Ct by Justice Dept
containing inventory of portions of study that Govt says endangers natl
security; Govt says inventory is in form of sworn statements by Govt officials;
Times says this bears out its contention that the Ct of Appeals relied on sworn
'testimony' that had not been subjected to cross-examination; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              323 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

Le Duc Tho, a member of the N Vietnamese Poliburo, back at Paris peace talks,
says it is up to Pres Nixon to make next move by proposing 'reasonable' date for
withdrawal of US troops, airport news conf; says he has no new proposal 'for the
time being'; expresses interest in Mansfield amendment; says POWs issue could be
settled promptly after withdrawal date is agreed on; says Vietnamese people want
peace and independence; US Amb Bruce and Vietcong repr Duong Dinh Thao debate
POWs and troops withdrawal issue at talks session; Le Duc Tho illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              324 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 71 words

USSR defends its policy of seeking better relations with US as necessary to
reduce risk of new world war; stresses this does not mean approval of Amer
policy in Vietnam or Mideast or any slackening of struggle against imperialism;
stand expressed in article in Kommunist, Communist party ideological journal by
Lev M Sheidin; seen aimed at Chinese and at Soviet party members who doubt
wisdom of seeking arrangements with US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              325 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 19 words

Casualties25 Amers killed in combat, wk, 215 wounded; 353 S Vietnamese dead, 822
wounded; enemy dead put at 1,681

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              326 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 2

LENGTH: 25 words

S Korean officials say it is discussing with Saigon plans to withdraw only 1 div
of S Korean troops from Vietnam, not 50,000 men as reptd in NY Times

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              327 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 7

LENGTH: 85 words

Pope Paul VI addresses Coll of Cardinals, ceremony marking feast day of his
patron saint, John the Baptist; Pope emphasizes efforts of ch to promote Middle
East peace; cites need to protect not only holy places but also Christians,
Arabs and Jews of region so they can live in 'freedom and normality'; declares
his vision for Jerusalem is of sacred city guaranteed by internatl legal
safeguard where peoples of all faiths can feel at home; hopes RC charitable
institutions will be able to bring aid to Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              328 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 60 words

This dispatch based on article pub in Los Angeles Times and distributed by AP;
Los Angeles Times article it says is based on Pentagon study discusses Natl
Security Council rejection of '63 recommendation by Paul M Kattenburg, then head
of State Dept's Vietnam Working Group, that US pull out of Vietnam because it
could not win the war against the Communists

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              329 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 186 words

William G Florence testifies that only 1/2 of 1% of classified Pentagon
documents contain genuine secrets that should be kept from pub, Moorhead subcom
on Foreign Operations and Govt Information hearing; he is recently retired Air
Force aide who spent yrs in Pentagon reviewing classification of sensitive
documents; holds disclosure of 99 1/2% of classified documents could not be
prejudicial to defense interests; says practice of stamping documents top
secret, secret or confidential has become so widespread that defense
classification system is 'literally clogged' with material bearing
classification markings; estimates at least 20-million classified documents are
either in circulation or in storage in Defense Dept alone; holds classification
system has led to unnecessary costs to taxpayers of $50-million yrly; Repr
McCloskey defers his planned testimony until has chance to compare portion of
study he has with the complete study scheduled to be given to HR; doubts there
is any information in documents that should remain secret other than the names
of CIA agents involved in coup against Ngo Dinh Diem

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              330 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 7

LENGTH: 102 words

M Frankel comment on impact of publication of material from Pentagon study on 3
branches of Govt; notes that White House was quick to state that Pres Nixon was
pursuing a 'new' Vietnam policy that should not be judged by conduct of his
predecessors; discusses reaction of Repr Paul McCloskey, Sens Hubert Humphrey,
Ed Muskie and George McGovern, Nixon's potential rival in '72 Pres election;
notes most opponents of Nixon's conduct of the war back full Cong inquiry into
origins of war; notes that Nixon tries to deflect this move by granting Cong
right to inspect the study; comments on anxiety felt by US mil

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              331 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 35 words

Brit Amb Cromer says he has told State Dept of its concern for confidentiality
of diplomatic exchs in light of publication by NY Times and other newspapers of
secret Pentagon study on origins of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              332 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 6

LENGTH: 130 words

Justice Dept says it will not 'at this time' take action against Los Angeles
Times and Knight chain because Pentagon articles on Vietnam they printed do not
constitute a natl security threat; says latest Chicago Sun-Times articles are
from declassified documents, as were the earlier articles; details on Sun-Times
and Knight chain articles; Knight newspapers exec ed Hills says chain has no
plans to pub further material from Pentagon study; check of several major
newspapers shows they are publishing as much as is available about the study;
Fed Ct allows Boston Globe to resume publishing articles supplied by new
services and based on new disclosures published elsewhere; hearing set on Fed Ct
order barring Globe from publishing additional stories based on its own
documents

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              333 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 6

LENGTH: 67 words

Los Angeles Fed grand jury investigating the disclosure of a secret Pentagon
study on the Vietnam war questions Miss Lynda Sinay, who describes herself as a
friend of Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony Russo; she is reptdly questioned on
Ellsworth's use of a copying machine and on his views on the Vietnam war; Miss
Sinay had 1st invoked 5th Amendment but testified after being granted immunity
by Fed ct

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              334 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 7

LENGTH: 63 words

Chemist Betty Hamann, questioning truth of statements by Amer soldiers in
Vietnam that they have 'beaten' urinalysis system, says that tests have proven
that system is 97% accurate in detecting heroin and other drug use; says that 3%
margin of error is screened out by cross-checking with thin-layer
chromatography, system that is expected to be available in Vietnam by July 1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              335 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 58 words

Rev David P Belliveau lr sees parallel between situation in which Russian
writers such as Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn and Yuli Daniel find themselves accused
of 'anti-Soviet defamation' with their writings banned from pub and situation in
which NY Times finds itself accused of 'anti-Amer defamation' because of pub of
Pentagon papers on Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              336 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 5

LENGTH: 52 words

Lr scores US State Dept's attack on Israel for violating Geneva accord
prohibiting transfer of populations into occupied territories; cites US own
violations of accords in S Vietnam and notes that Jordan's occupation of E
Jerusalem for 20 yrs was unlawful and not recognized by US or majority of UN
member nations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              337 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

J Reston notes that partial disclosure of Pentagon study material on Vietnam has
forced Adm to turn over all study documents to Cong for analysis and has started
movement to reform classifying system; comments on 'confusion' and 'chaos' in
present system

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              338 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 3

LENGTH: 41 words

Prof N Chomsky says Pentagon study on Vietnam reveals how small group of
technocrats and crisis mgrs acting in secret and concealing their deception
under anti-espionage code, conspired to involve US in a war of aggression in
Indochina; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              339 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 4

LENGTH: 115 words

Sen Goldwater article says NY Times will get many journalistic awards for its
publication of the Pentagon study, but believes it deserves 'some kind of booby
prize' for its failure to detect the intentions of the Johnson Adm during the
'64 Pres campaign; says there was no doubt in his mind that Johnson intended to
escalate the war by bombing N Vietnam and by possible use of Amer ground troops;
says indications for this were 'all over the place'; says classification laws
were enacted to protect the majority of the people, not to ' thwart the
journalistic enterprise of the Times, The Washington Post or anyone else who
deals in the publication of information for public consumption'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              340 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 7

LENGTH: 56 words

Pres Nixon visits mother's birthplace, Vernon, Ind; dedicates plaque in her hon;
says US is ending Vietnam war in a way which will bring lasting peace;
accompanied by Agr Sec Hardin; he then goes to Indianapolis to speak at dinner
hon retiring Purdue Univ pres Hovde; flies to Chicago for night; Nixon, Hardin
illus in Indianapolis; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              341 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

Mil Judge B Raymond Perkins drops charge against Sgt Jon M Sweeney alleging he
abandoned weapons in Vietnam battle, deletes 3 clauses in charge alleging he
communicated with enemy, Quantico, Va, trial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              342 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 14 words

Article on life in Ducduc, S Vietnam village describes villagers' security fears

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              343 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 42 words

Fresh S Vietnamese troops flown to Fire Base Fuller in US helicopters reptdly
retake position 1 day after it fell to N Vietnamese troops; US bases in same
area come under attack; 4 Amers killed, 8 wounded in 2 other attacks within 15
mi of Fuller; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              344 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 25, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 6

LENGTH: 34 words

Vietnamese farmer Nguyen Tanh, in Quotation of Day about daily life in Vietnam,
says 'Nothing is of such importance to us as security. Next we think of how to
make a living. Nothing else is important'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              345 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 192 words

US Sup Ct agrees to rule on Govt efforts to enjoin the NY Times and Washington
Post from publishing material from Pentagon study on Vietnam; Chief Justice
Burger, in 2 orders places the Times and the Post under equal publication
restraints, based on restriction imposed on the Times by US Appeals Ct; Supreme
Ct Justices Black, Douglas, Brennan and Marshall declare in dissent they favor
freeing both papers to print without hearing arguments; Govt required to file
with the Sup Ct and press lawyers lists of any portions of study it asserts will
endanger natl security; both papers may publish in their Sat issues any other
information in study except items on Govts dangerous list until Sup Ct decides
the cases; Times says it will not resume its series because matter is before the
Ct, and that printing an article whose content is dictated by Govt officials
amounts to submitting to censorship; Post says that it also will not resume
publication of material from study; 4 dissenting justices also dissent from the
part of the order that restrains the papers from publishing certain material; Ct
to schedule a rare Sat session to hear case; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              346 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 46 words

Lt Gen J H Cushman, US commander in Mekong Delta, announces beginning of
sweeping crackdown against illegal drug use by Amer servicemen in S Vietnam;
18,000 soldiers confined to mil compounds and all personnel, vehicles and planes
in compounds are searched; drive detailed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              347 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

Hunt reptd under way near DMX for enemy replacements that contributed to S
Vietnamese loss of Fire Base Fuller; base is deserted; illus; S Vietnamese
spokesman says troops flown in had not yet reoccupied base; contrary repts made
on assault on base; Cambodian high command repts little mil action for past 24
hrs, that enemy troops trying to seize positions in marshlands near Pnompenh
have withdrawn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              348 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 162 words

Capt Ernest L Medina ordered to stand trial for Mylai murders but possibility of
death sentence is eliminated; trial tentatively set to open July 26; Maj Gen
Connor decides case does not require Govt to seek death sentence; decision to
reclassify case comes as result of prosecution being refused permission to go to
Vietnam to take depositions from 2 sgts who were with Medina during Mylai
incident; mil law in capital case bars admission of depositions by prosecution;
Connor, in order to get evidence, agrees that charges be tried as non-capital
case; ct then grants permission for prosecution and defense attys and Medina to
go to Vietnam at Govt expense to question the 2 sgts; depositions quoted Medina
as saying killings of civilians were 'ordered', backing Lt William Calley's
defense that he acted under orders; Howard refuses Bailey plea to dismiss case
because of command influence influence playing role in bringing Medina to trial;
Bailey and Medina illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              349 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 94 words

Chicago Sun-Times article says Govt documents show CIA advised Pres Nixon in '69
that if US withdrew from Vietnam 'all of SE Asia would remain as it is for
another generation'; says Nixon disregarded advice and decided on a slow
withdrawal, expansion of war into Laos and Cambodia and a partial reviving of
bombing in N Vietnam; Sun-Times does not identify documents as part of Pentagon
study; says its information came from secret Govt documents; says CIA totally
rejected domino theory on which US based its policy during Eisenhower, Kennedy
and Johnson Adms

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              350 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 88 words

St Louis Post-Dispatch prublishes 38 columns of article drawn from Pentagon
study papers on Vietnam; asst managing ed David Lipman says paper has 'no
reservations' about its belief that publication of article are in 'public
interest'; does not think there is any breach of natl security; hearing on Govt
move to prevent Boston Globe from publishing further articles postponed; Justice
Dept repts attys for paper advised dept that paper would refrain from futher pub
pending Sup Ct decision in NY Times and Washington Post cases

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              351 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 94 words

W Eur reaction to the publication by the NY Times and other newspapers of the
Pentagon study on Vietnam; study is one of most widely reptd stories in W Eur in
recent mos; NY Times Eur Bureaus rept heavy flow of requests for copies of
issues containing article on study; overwhelming sentiment of press and newsmen
is one of admiration for papers that have stood up to the Govt on a highly
sensitive issue; admirations stems in part from gen dissatisfaction with US
policy in Indochina; some press comment cited; Eur govt officials are more
reserved about the matter

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              352 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 7

LENGTH: 113 words

LI newspaper Newsday threatened with suit by Holt, Rinehart & Winston Inc for
publishing account of US involvement in war based on galley proofs of Johnson's
forthcoming book, The Vantage Point: Perspectives of the Presidency, 1963-1968;
Newsday says it got material from publishing indus source; says book
acknowledges Johnson Adm was privately preparing in early '64 for large-scale
involvement in Vietnam long before extent of commitment was known to public;
interpretation, which coincides with some accounts of Pentagon study, rejected
by Johnson aides who edited book; Holt, Rienhart & Winston says it will sue
Newsday for damages and seeks enjoining action from NYS Sup Ct

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              353 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 4

LENGTH: 49 words

Vice Pres Agnew assails press, calls pub of Pentagon documents on Vietnam a
'common, cheap, fencing operation,' s, Young Repub Natl Fed conv, Phoenix, Ariz;
says recent poll shows most Amers do not support 'freedom to print stolen
documents'; defends Nixon Adm's record in attempting to end war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              354 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 105 words

Ed on draft bill and some of its key provisions; recalls Johnson use of draft
authority in '65 to expand rapidly direct Amer participation in Vietnam without
having to go to Cong to justify his demand for additional manpower and notes
that it is appropriate that bill has become focus for Cong efforts to speed Amer
mil involvement in Indochina; sees Mansfield amendment which calls for a
negotiated withdrawal of all US forces from Indochina within 9 months in return
for release of American pows, if finally approved, reasonable way for Cong to
tell Adm it does not intend potential power of draft to be used to prolong
conflict

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              355 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 2

LENGTH: 61 words

Excerpts from Daniel Ellsberg article in Public Policy revg US involvement in
Vietnam War; he disputes 'quagmire' conception of US involvement; says each Adm
since early '50 has been caught in the same game whose first rule is not to
'lose the rest of Vietnam to Communist control before the next election'; ex-Sec
of Defense Robert McNamara illus in Vietnam in '65

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              356 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 26, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 4

LENGTH: 17 words

Job problem of veterans returning from Vietnam discussed; Roswell, NM, used as
example; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              357 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 77 words

Vietnamese Communists control 3/4 of Cambodian countryside, 1 yr after departure
of Amer ground forces; enemy's goal believed to be S Vietnam, not Pnompenh;
Cambodian losses in driving enemy soldiers out of Vihear Suor area reptly are
much higher than reptd in official figures; some of the wounded are being
brought into Pnompenh in Amer helicopters from S Vietnam that are used by US
Embassy personnel; Cambodian mil spokesmen comment on current situation; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              358 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 36 words

Sup Ct hearing for NY Times and Washington Post on the Pentagon study of US
involvement in Vietnam described; spectators crowd Ct chamber; illus of crowds
waiting to enter Ct bldg; study delivered to ct in 3 cartons

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              359 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 191 words

US Sup Ct hears 2 hrs of argument in NY Times and Washington Post cases;
rejects, 6-3, Govt request to give in secret its reasons why pub of Pentagon
study on Vietnam would harm natl security; Solicitor Gen Erwin Griswold, arguing
for Govt, de-emphasizes earlier arguments that pub of documents classified 'top
secret' could be barred as violation of espionage laws and Exec orders; stresses
claim that cts may block pub of secrets that pose 'grave and irrevocable' threat
to natl security and injury that pub of Pentagon documents might do to future
diplomatic relations; Alexander Bickel, arguing for Times, holds that if Pres
has any 'inherent powers' to obtain injunctions against press, such powers must
only be used in extraordinary circumstances; proposes that 'prior restraints'
could only be imposed when pub of article would have 'direct, immediate and
visible' harmful effect; William Glendon, for Washington Post, argues that Govt
case are made up of 'broad claims and narrow proof'; holds that contention that
pub of articles might jeopardize diplomatic negotiations does not warrant
halting pub; illus of Times lawyers leaving Ct

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              360 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 84 words

3 S Vietnamese intelligence teams led by Amers reptdly wiped out behind enemy
lines; 2 teams operated across Laotian border, 3d observed N Vietnamese
movements at outpost 1 mi N of Khesanh; US planes attack around abandoned Fire
Base Fuller; heavy US air raids reptd S of demilitarized zone to keep N
Vietnamese from massing for southward drive in dry season; Pentagon spokesman
doubts Amers were involved in intelligence operations as reptd; US soldier illus
returning to Fire Base Barbara after patrol

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              361 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

Baltimore Sun article says Hubert Humphrey when he was Vice Pres urged Johnson
in '65 not to bomb N Vietnam; article is reptdly based on '70 int with Humphrey
and memo Humphrey reptdly sent Johnson on Feb 17, '65

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              362 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 3

LENGTH: 85 words

Moscow Pravda commentator Yuri Zhukov says publication of Pentagon study on
Vietnam by the NY Times and other papers has nothing to with principles of a
free press; says powerful secs of the business world were concerned over
declining profits and decided to use the Times and other papers as their tool in
fighting other monopolies; Vietnam documents continue to get publicity in USSR
press; excerpts are edited to avoid embarrassment to USSR policy; every ref to N
Vietnam's involvement in South is deleted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              363 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Transcript of oral argument in NY Times and Washington Post cases concerning
their publication of the Pentagon study of US involvement in Vietnam before the
Sup Ct

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              364 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 65 words

Detroit News editorial says NY Times and other papers that have pub parts of
Pentagon study have been used by peace groups to make propaganda point; says
Times and other papers did not act in natl interest when they chose to pub an
incomplete acct of US involvement in Vietnam; News has not published any account
taken directly for the study but has published accounts from other newspapers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              365 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Knight press article repts that Pentagon study documents show that US mil
leaders were putting pressure on Pres Johnson to expand Vietnam war into Laos,
Cambodia and N Vietnam in '66 and '67

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              366 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

St Louis Post-Dispatch repts it has been enjoined by Fed Ct from further
publication of article based on Pentagon study on Vietnam; 1st article quoted
ex-Defense Sec McNamara memo on various aspects of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              367 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 6

LENGTH: 43 words

Article on Daniel Ellsberg career; revs his progression from hawk to outspoken
critic of Vietnam war; noted as 1 of 36 authors involved in Pentagon study;
Ellsberg said in recent TV int that reading study over had part in changing his
mind about the war; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              368 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

Comment on NY Times and Washington Post cases concerning their publication of
the Pentagon study on Vietnam, which presents the landmark issue of fundamental
conflict between press freedom and Govt security; issue is: Under what
circumstances can Govt block pub on grounds of natl security; arguments revd;
cartoon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              369 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 35 words

Comment on significance of Sen Mansfield's amendment to the Selective Service
bill to set a definite deadline for withdrawal of US troops from Vietnam by
conditioning total withdrawal only on release of POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              370 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 11 words

Comment on Capt Ernest medina hearings on the Mylai massacre; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              371 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Reston says dispute over pub of Pentagon documents is symbol of much larger
problem; the division in the nation over Vietnam war and issue of whether; says
what is being exposed is a system of secrecy, of Presidential presumption, of
influential staff advice by men who cannot be questioned, of concealment and
manipulation, a sysstem which has got out of hand and could cause 'irreparable
damage' to nation; warns against weakening the instruments of information and
rev at such a time; Reston notes how TV has increased power of Pres

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              372 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Gen M B Ridgway comments on faulty judgments which led to US involvement in
Vietnam; comments on disengagement problems; caricature

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              373 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 27, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 27, Column 0

LENGTH: 160 words

Donald Kirk article Why They Call Lon Nol 'The Mayor of Pnompenh' describes
visit to Cambodia and search for 'la guerre populaire'; stresses mil ineptitude
of the troops, overpowering sense of privilege, condescension and cynicism
displayed by sr Cambodian officers and fundamental ineptitude and weakness of
natl leaders; holds 'remarkable improvement in army' claimed by Amers at US
Embassy is quantitative, not qualitative; says Amer mil men privately admit that
Communists, who already successfully control countryside, can overrun Pnompenh
at any time but do not want the burden of governing it; lauds Brig Gen In Tam,
recently named Vice Premier, as outstanding Cambodian officer; concludes army's
only reason for hope is infectious drive of avg soldier who appears unaware or
unfazed by defeats and humiliations; illus of young Cambodian soldier and some
war trophies, heads of N Vietnamese soldiers; map showing Communist dominated
and infiltrated areas

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              374 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 211 words

Sup Ct decision awaited on the Govt's effort to prevent further publication of
the Pentagon's study of US involvement in Vietnam;; FBI presses its search for
Daniel Ellsberg despite statement by his lawyers that he would give himself up;
Sen McGovern say sudy reveals crimes of deception by Govt officials more serious
than any violations of security classification involved in its release; Very Rev
Francis B Sayre scores deception and 'abuse of truth' by 'my friends'; Newsweek
repts Gallup Poll shows majority of Amer opinion disapprove of Govt effort at
suppression; George W Ball says study should be published but cautions against
the search for villians or heroes in it, TV int; seems to agree with Ellsberg
warning that Nixon Adm now stands at another critical turning point of Vietnam
policy; justifies his own pub advocacy of the official view of the war in '66,
contrary to his private opposition to expansion of the war he was presenting to
Govt's inner councils; says this is 'exactly what any Govt official must
necessarily do if there is to be orderly govt'; does not think study presents a
security issue; Time magazine repts Dean Rusk warned Pres Kennedy in '61 not to
send 8,000 US troops into Vienam as Taylor was advocating at the time; Ball
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              375 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 78 words

Post-Vietnam Marine Corps, its status and mission discussed; article notes there
were no mutinous cos of marines in Vietnam and that their 'balanced' outfits
were prepared to fight not only a guerrilla skirmish, but also an all-out war;
'lean and mean' tradition, with hard discipline remains; some problems,
including that of drug use, discussed; Marine Corps tough stand on narcotics
users noted; Brig Gens R D Bohn, L F Snoody and Gen Chapman comment on corps;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              376 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 72 words

2 N Vietnamese rgts reptdly infiltrate across demilitarized zone into S Vietnam
in 1st large enemy movement through the zone in about 3 yrs; movement
contributes to one of heaviest series of enemy attacks in Quangtri Prov since
height of '68 battles there; US has threatened resumption of air strikes against
North in retaliation for any movement across the zone; Amer jet fighter crashes
in central Cambodia; 1 crewman killed map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              377 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 88 words

Mayday protest sponsors, Peoples Coalition for Peace and Justice, at end of
3-day meeting, Milwaukee, announce plans for new Vietnam War protests in August
and fall; protest will culminate in another attempt to stop Fed Govt in
Washington the week of Nov 7; David Dellinger hopes publication of Pentagon
study on war will bring even more support to protests, new conf; details on
protest plans; Rev James E Groppi opened meeting with call for resignation of
Abp William E Cousins, who questioned use of RC school for meeting

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              378 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Gen C W Abrams, comdr of US troops in Vietnam, and Amb Bunker are lay readers in
sparsely attended ecumenical service, Saigon RC Cathedral; war not mentioned
during service; illus; event is 1st ecumenical Christian service in cathedral

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              379 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Vietcong Organization12-yr old boy, Nguyen Dinh Chinh, and 11-yr-old girl, both
of whom worked for Vietcong, tell in separate ints, Danang, of torture by S
Vietnamese police during long periods of interrogation; police deny maltreating
children; boy illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              380 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 274 words

Pres Nixon and Sec of State Rogers seen planning number of amb transfers; at
least 5 posts involved; Philip C Habib seen replacing William J Porter as Amb to
S Korea; Porter seen reassigned; Asst Sec Marshall Green seen succeeding Armid H
Meyer as Amb to Japan; Green's deputy, W H Sullivan, seen replacing Leonard
Unger as Amb to Thailand; successors seen also named for Amb to Belgium John
Eisenhower and Amb to Israel Walworth Barbour; Amb to S Vietnam Ellsworth Bunker
and Amb David Bruce, chief negotiator at Paris peace talks, seen eager to retire
as they are both in their seventies but Adm wants them to remain in posts for
near future; US Adm says to replace either of them before the S Vietnamese pres
election on Oct 3 would be more a pol act than a diplomatic one and would be
interpreted as lessening of support by US of Pres Nguyen Van Thieu; leading
candidates to replace Israel's Amb to Washington Rabin reptdly are Mordechai
Gazit, dir of Amer affairs for Israeli Foreign Min, and Aviezer Chalouche,
banker and former Foreign Min official; charges are that Rabin has been too
conciliatory in presenting Israeli negotiating position; Sen McGovern, as well
as Sen Kennedy, seeks to visit China; White House silent on repts that Nixon has
asked that either he or a repr be invited to China in early '72; Dr Galston
thinks Nixon's prospects are poor; cites some of Premier Chou En-lai's comments
on Amer pol figures during their talks in recent Peking meeting; repts Chou
characterized Nixon as 'automatic anti-Communist'; characterized Dulles as
'impossible man'; H A Kissinger presumed to be repr that Nixon would send to
China

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              381 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 5

LENGTH: 53 words

Prof Eugene Rabinowitch, in lr on implications of press publication of Pentagon
secret study on Vietnam, recalls that he, before A-bomb was dropped on Hiroshima
and Nagasaki, considered revealing plan to Amer people and now feels he would
have been right to have done so; Jacques Brasshall lr on Pentagon stud issue

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              382 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 3

LENGTH: 73 words

R Augstein recalls '62 'Spiegel Affair,' in which Chancellor Adenauer Govt
suppressed W Ger news magazine Spiegel and arrested its eds for publishing
article about defense concept of Min Strauss which Govt charged contained state
secrets; article contrasting this treatment with current court conflict between
US Govt and NY Times on Times publication of secret Pentagon study on Vietnam
war; Augstein defends Times publication of study

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              383 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 196 words

David Ellsberg surrenders, Boston, to US Atty for arraignment; earlier, tells
newsmen he gave pentagon study on Vietnam to press; also says that in '69 he
gave Sen Fulbright information contained in study documents; regrets he did not
release study to press at that time; will not confirm that The Times, 1st paper
to publish some of documents, was the recipient of the study or whether he is
linked to subsequent appearances of study material in other papers; Times still
silent on source of its documents; Los Angeles Fed grand jury returns 2-count
indictments against Ellsberg; indicted for theft of Govt property and
unathorized possession of documents and writings related to the natl defense;
Ellsberg can decide to be tried either in Los Angeles or Boston; Ellsberg
released in $40,000 bail; July 15 hearing set for removal of Ellsberg to Los
Angeles where case may be tried; at later news conf urges everyone to read
documents and hopes that disclosures will help 'free ourselves from this war';
says he sought to raise the issue of personal responsibility and accountability
of officials; says nothing in documents he disclosed would harm US; Ellsberg and
wife illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              384 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 44 words

Sup Ct puts off decision on Times and Washington Post cases; ct officials say
decision may be issued July 2; Times has been restrained from publishing its
series on the Pentagon study of US involvement in Vietnam 13 days so far;
Pentagon papers delivered to Cong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              385 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 25 words

Pro-Govt student leader Le Khac Sinh Nhut shot and killed at Saigoon U by
unknown assailants after he was named deputy chmn of the Saigon Student Union

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              386 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 32 words

Sen Mathias offers legis designed to grant $1,000 yrly to Vietnam veterans who
want to continue their educ; bill also would direct VA to pay eligible veterans
up to $175 monthly subsistence

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              387 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 224 words

Pentagon study on US involveme nt in Vietnam delivered to Sen and HR and placed
in locked vaults; Defense Sec Laird warns disclosure of information in study
would harm natl security; Cong members can read study, but are barred from
taking notes or divulging contents; Pentagon spokesmen say many of the documents
would be made pub, probably in 45 days; Laird says some documents are still so
sensitive they must remain secret indefinitely; Sen Mansfield repts tentative
agreement for 2-com joint hearing on Times publication of study; seom Sen and HR
leaders appear dubious that study contents will be kept secret; 7 members of HR
Govt Operations Com, under rarely used law requiring any exec agency to submit
'any information' requested of it in relation to any matter within com
jurisdiction, demand Pentagon give com members copies of study and study of
Tonkin Gulf affair; Prof Walter Rostow says there are systematic distortions in
Times's account of study; says study is an incomplete record and does not
reflect discussions between Pres and his advisers or Cong leaders; says a search
of Johnson's statements on Vietnam will show he did not lie or decive anyone;
remarks are made in reply to questions after he and Sen Birch Bayh exchanged
views on US withdrawal from Vietnam, foreign Policy Assn, NYC; illus of study
delivery to Sen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              388 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 78 words

Dispatch based on article in Christian Science Moniter and distributed by AP;
Christian Science Monitor article it says is based on Pentagon study of Vietnam
repts that for 21 mos in '62-64 US 'laid plans to pull almost all Amer troops
out of Vietnam over a five-yr period'; says plan was dropped in Mar '64;
editorial says publication of study at this time is a constructive act; says
paper examined all its material to make sure there is no breach of natl security

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              389 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

S Vietnamese troops reptdly reoccupy Fire Base Fuller; intend to pull out again
soon in order not to become target for enemy gunners; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              390 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 51 words

Amnesty Internatl says S Vietnam bars inspection of POW camps; refusal comes
after N Vietnamese tacitly agreed to inspection of their camps; orgn exec Sean
MacBride says S Vietnam had first suggested the inspection, not expecting North
to permit one; S Vietnamese Embassy in London denies South made request

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              391 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

HR roll-call on Mansfield amendment vote to the draft bill for troop withdrawal
from Indochina in 9 months of US POWs were released

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              392 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 11 words

3,200 troops withdrawn from Vietnam, wk; total troops at 241,700

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              393 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 3

LENGTH: 44 words

Prof Charles Frankel comment on Walt Rostow's June 22 article denying that moral
issues were neglected in Vietnam war; notes highly intelligent men who 'think
they have done their duty by morals when they mouth abstractions whose living
meaning is left unexamined'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              394 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 3

LENGTH: 95 words

Prof R Falk repts that basic concerns emerging from talks with N Vietnamese and
Vietcong delegations at Paris peace talks is their continuing belief that POW
issue is smokescreen behind which Pres Nixon intends to continue war; on their
part, Amb Xuan Thuy reaffirms importance of setting a reasonable date for total
US withdrawal as only precondition of POW release; Falk repts Hanoi officials
stressed they have neither reason nor desire to hold US POWs once there is clear
evidence US intends to end mil role in Vietnam and commits itself to total
withdrawal; cartoon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              395 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 29, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 82 words

HR rejects 219-176, Mansfield amendment to draft extension bill for withdrawal
from Vietnam in 9 mos if POWs are freed; vote is best showing war critics made
in HR in nearly 2 yrs of trying to press issue; Pres Nixon asked Speaker Carl
Albert to argue against amendment; issue goes to Sen-HR conf com; if amendment
is weakened in conf, bill faces probable filibuster when it returns to Sen
floor; Repr Charles Whalen motion instructing HR conferees to accept Mansfield
amendment is tabled

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              396 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 30, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 186 words

Sen M Gravel reads to newsmen what he says are parts of Pentagon study on US
involvement in Vietnam; hoped to read study on Sen floor in all-night session
but quorum could not be mustered; effort presumably would have been start of
filibuster to prevent draft extension; instead convenes session of a subcom of
which he is chmn and begins reading; study, as read by Gravel, concludes that US
involvement in Indochina began with a choice between supporting French
colonialism or Communism and that the US sided with the French; among those
present are Sens H E Hughes and A Cranston, Repr J C Dow and some members of
Vietnam Veterans Against the War; Gavel says he does not have all 47 vols of
study but believes he has over half; says he did not seek papers, that they were
offered; makes them available to newsmen; numerous copies are made; says he was
advised by 'Const lawyers' he would be immune from Fed prosecution since he was
reading at official subcom session and will be protected by Cong immunity; is
convinced he is not imparing US security; makes antiwar s after finishing
reading for 3 hrs; Gavel illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              397 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 30, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 93 words

Justice Dept, after discussion with Christian Science Monitor ed Erwin D Canham
about Pentagon study articles on Vietnam not yet published, says it will not
move to enjoin paper; says paper cooperated by disclosing nature of contents of
articles and that contents do not harm US security; Sen Mike Mansfield tells
newsmen that Sec of Defense Laird reptdly works to declassify the Pentagon study
within 30 days instead of the 45 days originally projected by the Pentagon;
hearing on Boston Globe postponed until Sup Ct acts on NY Times and Washington
Post case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              398 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 30, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 5

LENGTH: 12 words

Lr scores NY Times for publishing Pentagon study material on Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              399 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 30, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 17 words

Vice Pres Agnew, S Vietnam Premier Tran Thieu Kiem and other dignitaries arrive,
Seoul; Agnew illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              400 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 30, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 63 words

Christian Science Monitor article based on Pentagon study on Vietnam tells how
US ignored N Vietnamese Communist Ho Chi Minh plea for aid in winter mos
following end of World War II and of his proposal that Vietnam have status equal
to that of Philippines; repts that when he got no answers to his requests he
acquisced in a return of the French to Vietnam for a 5-yr period

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              401 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 30, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 5

LENGTH: 30 words

Albert Fauross lr takes issue with Roger Fisher June 22 article; scores Govt
deception of public as revealed in Pentagon study on Vietnam; says people have
authority to judge policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              402 of 402 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 30, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 1

LENGTH: 202 words

United Church of Christ biennial gen synod end 5-day meeting, Grand Rapids,
Mich, after calling for repeal of all legal prohibitions of physician-performed
abortions; says that such move will take abortion entirely out of realm of penal
law and make voluntary and medically safe abortions available to all women; gen
synod proposes day in '71 and '72 be set aside as 'Amer Indian Sunday' for
denomination-wide collection of ch's work among Indians; specific day to be
designated by ch's stewardship council; calls on Nixon Adm to seek deplomatic
relations with mainland China along with its membership in UN; synod re-elects
Rev Dr Joseph H Evans, black min, to post of denomination sec, closing session;
authorizes expenditure of $500,000 each yr over next biennium for 'empowerment'
of black congregations in denomination; gen synod urges Pres Nixon to stop
efforts to impose restraint on pub of pol information and opinions, including
documents that had been classified as secret but that do not bear directly on
current mil operations; urges Nixon 'in consultation with cong, immediately to
submit fresh proposals for the negotiation in Paris of a compromise to end the
Vietnam war within the next 6 to 9 mos'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
