
                               1 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 194 words

Sen Foreign Relations Com reopens Vietnam debate; hears only from critics of Adm
policy; supporters will be heard tomorrow; Fulbright raises questions about
feasibility and implications of Vietnamization and disengagement; Goodell says
Vietnamization has been 'great pub relations success' but is not true policy of
disengagement; says war has been 'cosmetized'; Sen Hughes describes
Vietnamization as 'semantic hoax'; says it will 'perpetuate' US involvement;
scores Vice Pres Agnew; suggests Adm has created mood of 'natl euphoria' by
'pistol-whipping' news media; Fulbright says broadcast indus has been given
notice to go easy on Vietnam issue 'unless they want to feel the lash of Mr
Agnew'; Agnew accuses Dems of 'casting about aimlessly' for way to discredit
Adm; says Amers back Pres Nixon and if they stick with him, US will be out of
war; Hughes and Sens Eagleton and Cranston testify in support of
sense-of-the-Sen resolution calling for termination of Amer commitment to S
Vietnam unless Saigon Govt takes steps to broaden Cabinet, end press censorship
and release pol prisoners; details on questions raised by Fulbright; other
details on hearing; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 44 words

Vietnam war foes in US form group called Com of Liaison With Families of
Servicemen Detained in N Vietnam to facilitate communication between POWs and
their relatives in US; say Hanoi has agreed to work with com; Mrs C Weiss is
co-chmn; explains what com will do

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 108 words

N Vietnamese negotiator Ha Van Lau says Pres Nixon's 3 criteria for withdrawal
of US forces can never be met, 50th session; criteria are progress in talks,
reduction of level of fighting in S Vietnam and evidence that S Vietnamese can
assume burden of natl defense; Ha Van Lau says Nixon's real policy is to prolong
indefinitely US mil occupation of S Vietnam; Habib scores Hanoi-Vietcong
position on peace; allied and foreign diplomats agree peace-making attempts are
near rock bottom; Hanoi and Vietcong ignore Amer proposal for private sessions;
Vietcong distributes what it says is list of victims of alleged massacre by US
soldiers at Songmy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 104 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, who was elected in '67 with only 37% of vote, proposes
run-off elections be held if no Pres candidate wins majority on 1st ballot in
future elections, s, Saigon; argues neutralism is perilous policy for S Vietnam
at present and that expanded pol representation in his Govt would not be
meaningful until pol parties have matured and won larger followings; replies to
critics who charge his Govt does not represent majority of people; insists S
Vietnam has not compromised its independence by alliance with US; seeks to
explain his opposition to proposals that S Vietnam adopt nonaligned foreign
policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 176 words

Defense Sec Laird says withdrawal of Amer troops will continue despite stalemate
in Paris talks and persistence of substantial enemy threat on battlefield, news
conf, Saigon; says additional withdrawals can be made because of 'positive
progress' he finds in Vietnamization program; says despite progress in turning
battle burden over to S Vietnam, hard problems lie ahead in both mil and econ
areas; says temporary setbacks must be anticipated; declines to discuss topics
he raised during meeting with Nguyen Van Thieu; says he talked with Nguyen Van
Thieu on ways in which allies could encourage Communist delegations to begin
meaningful negotiations; of;ers gen impressions of his visit; dodges questions
about whether Amer pilots flying reconnaissance missions over N Vietnam are
authorized to strike ground targets before they are fired on; says pilots have
right and duty to protect themselves; is flanked by Bunker, Wheeler and Abrams
during news conf; discloses meeting will be held in about 2 mos by countries
supporting Saigon Govt with troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 167 words

Sen McCarthy accuses Nixon Adm of misleading US 'over issues at stake' in war,
Sen com; scores Vietnamization; questions official assertion that only
alternative is precipitate pullout; says negotiated settlement is real
possibility if US agrees to withdraw its forces and coalition govt is formed;
argues Nixon policy offers 'no basic change'; Sen Cooper says US is now getting
out of Vietnam; McCarthy and Fulbright express surprise that US justifies its
presence in S Vietnam by desire to assure free elections; McCarthy illus;
pacification chief W E Colby says Open Arms program for encouraging Vietcong
defections has been success, Sen com hearing; says 43,000 Vietcong rallied to
Saigon regime last yr, providing vital intelligence data and, in many cases,
joining S Vietnamese forces; US official W K Hitchcock repts that while war has
'generated' 3-million refugees in last 6 yrs, only 270,000 are now on S
Vietnamese Govt's relief roles, Sen com hearing; says figure 1 yr ago was
1,450,000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 44 words

State Dept says N Vietnamese infiltration into S Vietnam in '69 was less than
1/2 of '68 flow; dept spokesman repts infiltration in '69 estimated at 100,000
to 110,000, compared with 250,000 in '68; dept agrees with Saigon repts on
number of enemy in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 166 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says it will be 'impossible and impractical' to withdraw
all Amer combat troops in '70, news conf; says further Amer withdrawals will
depend on 'crucial question' of whether US supplies S Vietnam with adequate
equipment and funds to modernize its armed forces; says he is drawing up list of
required aid; says he has been assured by Nixon Adm that necessary assistance
will be provided; speaks of troop withdrawals in terms of yrs; says he believes
peace will come in 2 or 3 yrs when communists are defeated; acknowledges no
progress has been made in Peace Talks, news conf; says S Vietnam will continue
to attend conf; says he believes enemy will not negotiate seriously in Paris as
long as it is in a weak battlefield position; says Communists will launch
another gen offensive in near future; paints rosy picture of '69, TV s; says 97%
of rural population lives in areas under relative control of Saigon Govt; warns
'70 will require further sacrifices by S Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 13 words

Bomb found aboard Air Vietnam jetliner which had flown from Danang to Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 78 words

Ed, opposing Dem Policy Council call for US Vietnam troop withdrawal in 18 mos
and noting Sen com hearings and Defense Sec Laird visit, says critical issue
between Pres Nixon and critics of Vietnamization is concept behind residual
force; says concept has become known as 'Korean solution', which is unrealistic
for Vietnam; urges revitalization of Paris talks and standstill cease-fire; says
Nixon Adm seems tied to increasing intransigent position of Saigon Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

Amb Pham Dang Lam, S Vietnam's chief negotiator, returns to Saigon for routine
talks with S Vietnamese Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 55 words

US spokesman says US war communiques no longer give distances of battles from
Saigon because US command is 'trying to eliminate the overemphasis' on their
closeness to city; says distances are now given from nearest town or village,
and from Saigon only when it is 'significant'; 6 Amers killed by Vietcong
grenades near Bencat

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 72 words

3 US helicopters downed; ground action continues light; 77 enemy killed in
scattered clashes; 11 civilians and 1 S Vietnamese Govt worker killed in enemy
attack on Cambodian border outpost; 6 workers wounded; 6,333 US aircraft have
been downed in war, 3,342 of them helicopters, at cost of more than $6-billion;
Saigon lawyer calls on all sides to observe truce from Jan 30 to Feb 12 in hon
of Tet; Vietcong has announced 4-day truce

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

Len Ackland, in rept on refugees made for Rand Corp and compiled in '68, says
some S Vietnamese were made hostile to S Vietnamese Govt by 'excessive and
misdirected' allied bombing and shelling; says refugees, who converged on Saigon
during Tet offensive, claimed S Vietnamese soldiers stole their possessions;
details on rept; some corp officials comment; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 24 words

US Embassy, Saigon, announces TN-20, new strain of 'miracle' rice that combines
high yields with better taste, is being introduced in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

Wives of 4 US airmen shot down over N Vietnam visit mil hosp in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

US troops uncover big enemy arms cache in jungles NW of Saigon; B-52s raid; 1st
US troops to leave Vietnam under Pres Nixon's 3d-phase cutback leave Danang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Amb E Bunker describes '69 as yr of meaningful progress in S Vietnam, but
concedes enemy 'is still a mil force to be reckoned with', s, Saigon; says there
are indications enemy plans another offensive; summarizes allied mil and pol
achievements during yr; speaks of limited US objectives; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 31, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 36 words

Le Duc Tho returns from consultations in Hanoi and says N Vietnam is ready for
serious negotiations; says no concessions will be made at negotiating table
under US mil pressure; says Nixon pursues double-faced policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

Le Duan warns N Vietnamese to be prepared to fight US for 'many more yrs' to
force full withdrawal of US forces, s, Hanoi; scores Pres Nixon statement that
US would use mil means to counter any Communist attempt to re-escalate war;
observers hold s makes clear that N Vietnam will continue to insist on total and
unconditional pullout; Nhan Dan ed scores Nixon news conf; other details on s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 56 words

Vietcong gunners shell Bienhoa air base; US helicopter gunships kill 23 enemy
near Bienhoa; 52 other enemy soldiers killed by US forces in 2 battles N of
Saigon; S Vietnamese hq repts 4 persons killed and 13 wounded in 2 terrorist
incidents; S Vietnamese major killed; action appears to be tapering off with
approach of Tet cease-fires

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Anxiety pervades Saigon as Tet celebration begins; enemy's '68 Tet offensive
noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 5

LENGTH: 29 words

Sen Javits says Saigon Govt's timetable for withdrawal of US combat forces
appears to be a yr and possibly 2 yrs longer than Nixon Adm's, Sen s on his
recent trip to S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 101 words

Repts from S Vietnam indicate success of pacification program may be in doubt
because of inability to destroy underground Vietcong 'shadow govt' and of
resurgence of terrorism against village officials; indicate program is making
marked progress in some of its aspects; information on pacification is discussed
in secret memorandum prepared for Natl Security Council and in Saigon Govt's
latest repts on pacification; memorandum says tens of thousands of refugees are
returning to villages and most roads are open and safe; Sen Foreign Relations
Com to hold hearings on pacification; details on program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 32 words

Nixon Adm officials say they are now convinced that 500 Amer POWs being held in
N Vietnam are regarded in Hanoi as hostages to be traded off for some pol or mil
benefit in closing stages of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

New approach by US to Paris talks fails; Habib arrives at session without
prepared text and tries to engage Communist delegations in informal discussion;
Communists refuse to move from their stand that US must unconditionally withdraw
its forces and abandon Saigon Govt; N Vietnamese delegate scores Pres Nixon call
for N Vietnam to negotiate; US spokesman, after session, says US took
'extraordinary steps'; details on session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 143 words

N Vietnam launches largest supply operation of Vietnam war down Ho Chi Minh
trail in eastern Laos; US counters it with intense B-52 bombing raids; Laotian
Army troops arrest 3 Western newsmen who make their way unannounced to Govt base
at Long Cheng; release them to US Embassy; Amb Godley says Amer mission 'has
lost interest in helping out press' because of incident; N Vietnamese troops
encircle strategic airfield outpost of Muong Soui; US sources say defenders are
still in control; US planes reptdly take off from Long Cheng base at rate of 1 a
minute presumably to support fighting in Plaine des Jarres area; Los Angeles
Times repts 1 reporter said many 'armed Amers in civilian clothes' are
supporting Laotian command; Washington officials say N Vietnamese thrust across
plain has gone farther and faster than was expected by US; map; refugees illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 34 words

US base at Laikhe near Saigon handed over to S Vietnamese by 1st Inf Div,
scheduled to leave by April 15; Lt Gen J Ewell comments; Lt Gen J Ewell to leave
S Vietnam to become mil adviser to US delegation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 124 words

Vice Pres Agnew on Far East tour to explain to US allies Pres Nixon's doctrine
of Asian self-reliance; interrupts tour to make 1-day stop in Saigon; meets with
Pres Nguyen Van Thieu; brings New Yr's greetings to Amer troops; is accompanied
by Amb Bunker, Deputy Amb Berger and Gen Rosson upon arrival at Pres Palace;
greeted by Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky; in Manilla reptdly reassured Pres Marcos
that US intended to remain power in Pacific; Amer sources say reassurance was
essential because Asian leaders feared doctrine meant US was 'cutting and
running'; say view was made more pronounced by Nov 19 issuance of partial
transcript of secret Sen hearings on US defense commitments to Philippines;
Agnew prepares to leave Manila; wife accompanies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Consensus in Saigon said to be that '69 was very good yr for Pres Nguyen Van
Thieu; diplomats and observers in Saigon hold he is in position of remarkable
strength; some problems that faced him in '69 noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Article on relaxed atmosphere in Hanoi; propaganda posters said to be few, their
tone said to be mild; views of N Vietnamese leaders on diverse subjects noted;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 2

LENGTH: 69 words

Ed deplores tendency of US Army authorities to manage news aimed at US
servicemen; deplores mgt in cases where news is merely unfavorable, not vital;
cites case of Sgt H Morgan of Armed Forces Radio and TV Network, who was
transferred from Saigon to Danang after making wry ref to Vice Pres Agnew and
being accused of editorializing by superior; notes instances of suppression
involving Stars and Stripes Pacific ed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

James Forest and another Amer reach Hanoi as part of peace delegation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 22 words

Maj K Raby and Capt A Daniel arrive in Saigon; say they plan to meet with Lt Gen
W Peers; Peers makes another survey of hamlet; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (AFP)

LENGTH: 11 words

Hanoi feels tremors; residents flee homes; Peking silent on quake

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

CBS, NBC and ABC protest to Nixon Adm Communications Dir H Klein that their
camera crews were barred from covering parts of Vice Pres Agnew's visit to
Saigon; network coverage was ltd to 1 crew on pooled basis while USIA covered
whole visit with 4 camera crews; Klein aide blames 'army snafu'; network
spokesmen say Klein is apologetic

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 43 words

24-hr gen strike in Saigon by thousands of workers extended for another day to
back demands for pub bus service in city; labor union estimates 55,000 are on
strike, Govt says only 15,000 workers are on strike and there is little outward
effect on city life

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 19 words

Saigon Govt announces firecrackers, banned since '68 Tet (Lunar New Yr)
offensive, will again be banned on new yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 35 words

Father of missing US pilot says that N Vietnamese Embassy in Moscow has agreed
to ask Hanoi whether his son was captured or killed; says he received
'unbelievably polite' treatment during meeting at embassy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 19 words

Sp/5 Lawrence and Cpl Sinkovitz transferred from US radio and TV network to
other duties within command in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 48 words

Enemy kills 4 Amers and wounds 79 in shellings of US units at arty base 300 mi
NE of Saigon and in other areas; details on attack on base; allied troops kill
33 enemy near Tayninh; US troops later rept discovery of bodies of additional 56
enemy soldiers; other action reptd; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 78 words

Amer forces uncover major N Vietnamese communications center just N of Saigon
that intercepted at least 1,400 operational messages and presumably compromised
some field operations; 12 N Vietnamese soldiers trained to speak and write
English captured, another soldier killed when communications center was
discovered 3 wks ago; N Vietnamese were not able to break authorized Amer codes,
but many US troops had been using unauthorized codes, easily decipherable by
enemy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 52 words

US troops capture enemy base camp near Danang; 7 enemy killed in fighting;
Vietcong deserter leads Amer troops to enemy supply cache near Tamky; analysts
in Saigon say they do not expect enemy to mount major offensive during Tet;
expect upsurge in fighting; details on enemy strength in specific areas; map;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

19 enemy killed in attack on allied base near Cambodian border; 8 enemy killed
trying to cross Saigon River

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 37 words

Saigon police break up meeting in which militant Buddhist students called on
people to rise up in natl campaign for peace; Saigon Buddhist student leader
accuses US and S Korean troops of indiscriminately killing civilians

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

Richard Hughes, Amer, turns over to Vietnamese operation of Saigon home for boys
he founded in '68 and has run for 20 mos; comments; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

S Vietnamese mil spokesmen rept about 18 persons, including 16 S Vietnamese
officer cadets and their instructors, killed when mines planted by Vietcong
explode in training area near Saigon; 33 wounded; 27 Amers wounded in shellings
of base at Nhatrang; 30 enemy shellings reptd; other action reptd; increasing
number of Amer mil planners are coming to believe enemy builds toward major
offensive next summer, rather than next mo, as previously thought

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 53 words

US forces kill 54 enemy troops in 3 sharp clashes N and NW of Saigon; N
Vietnamese press agency charges that 285,000 S Vietnamese have been contaminated
and that more than 2.25-million acres of land have been destroyed by US toxic
chems, gases, napalm and other bombs; says Nixon Adm has intensified use of
weapons; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 50 words

72 enemy killed in attack on S Vietnamese Marine brigade command post in Mekong
Delta; 15 S Vietnamese killed, 41 wounded; 13 US soldiers killed, 3 wounded in
ammunition explosion at arty base 55 mi N of Saigon; S Vietnamese pilot escapes
after his jet blows tire while taking off from Bienhoa airport

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 24, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 7 words

B-52s raid in Mekong Delta and near Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 37 words

US command repts 22 enemy killed in clash near Tayninh, S Vietnamese hq lists 21
enemy killed in scattered fighting; other action reptd; map; attack suspected
enemy bases along Cambodian and Laotian borders NW of Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 17 words

Saigon mil ct sentences young S Vietnamese musician to 5 yrs at hard labor for
composing antiwar songs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 24 words

US planes attack N Vietnamese supply truck convoy in Ashau Valley; 5 Amers
killed, 4 wounded in battle 300 mi NE of Saigon; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 113 words

Amer officials say 2 US Govt agents were infiltrated into Saigon press corps but
were later withdrawn after their identities were exposed; high-ranking official
says 'someone goofed'; there is no official word on why agents masqueraded as
newsmen or who ordered the operation; agents seen trying to uncover news
sources; agents H Hethcox and W T Tucker identified by Defense Dept as lt and
sgt in Army's Criminal Investigation Division; Asst Sec Henkin says press
accreditation of 2 agents was inadvertent; House subcom says it will send formal
lr to Sec Laird asking for explanation of incident; Amer Univ Press Services,
with which agents indicated a connection, disavows role

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 167 words

US command announces US fighter-bomber attacks AA missile base 90 mi inside N
Vietnam after unarmed Amer reconnaissance plane is fired upon by missiles;
reconnaissance missions have been conducted daily since Nov '68 bombing halt;
details on incident; White House denies incident signals change in US policy;
Sec Rogers says bombing has not been resumed; US, in session of Paris talks,
affirms it sends reconnaissance planes over N Vietnam with fighter escorts, but
denies this violates bombing halt understanding; N Vietnamese delegate charges
US planes bombed and strafed several populated areas; says reconnaissance
flights violage bombing halt agreement; map; Peace talks, 52d session; Ha Van
Lau charges US planes bombed and strafed several populated areas in N Vietnam;
Habib reaffirms US sends reconnaissance planes over N Vietnam with fighter
escorts, but denies this violates Nov '68 bombing halt understanding; N
Vietnamese spokesman says reconnaissance flights violate bombing halt agreement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 72 words

Official sources concede 4, not 2, agents were infiltrated into Saigon press
corps to spy on newsmen; say credentials have been withdrawn and those who
issued them have been disciplined; statement issued in Washington indicates all
they got was verbal admonition; all 4 agents, 2 of whom were Vietnamese, said
they represented Amer Univ Press; House subcom calls in lr to Defense Sec Laird
for 'complete high-level rev' of incident

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 111 words

Pentagon acknowledges problems in getting US newsmen to areas controlled by S
Vietnamese Army comdrs; says in many cases newsmen are forbidden to enter areas
or are given no information, apparently because comdrs are displeased with repts
about their units; says intervention by US mil comdrs has helped somewhat but
situation is likely to recur; situation disclosed by Asst Sec Henkin in exch of
lrs with Repr Reid; Reid repts he was told by Pentagon that under new US policy
correspondents no longer need lrs of introduction from Vietnamese comdrs to
visit S Vietnamese units, and that it is sufficient to notify Saigon authorities
6 hours in advance of visits

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 2

LENGTH: 24 words

Ed charging US Defense Dept's explanation of infiltration of 4 Govt agents into
Saigon press corps is inadequate, sees threat to press freedom

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

Enemy troops attack remote US base N of Saigon and then regroup and attack Amer
patrol sweeping perimeter; 43 enemy killed, 4 Amers killed, 3 wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 101 words

Sen Fulbright charges S Vietnamese pres Nguyen Van Thieu persecutes opposition
leader Tran Ngoc Chau for exposing, as described by columnist J Kraft, Nguyen
Van Thieu's 'pol bag man' Nguyen Cao Thang, Sen com hearing; says US mission in
Saigon has 'shrugged its shoulders' over case, despite instructions from
Washington to intervene on behalf of Tran Ngoc Chau; describes affair as
'ominous development'; Nguyen Van Thieu succeeds in obtaining number of
signatures needed on petition lifting Tran Ngoc Chau's parliamentary immunity;
Kraft repts Bunker was directed to intervene on Tran Ngoc Chau's behalf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 60 words

Amer fighter-bomber attacks enemy missile and gun positions for 2d time in wk
after unarmed reconnaissance jets come under intense enemy AA fire; 2 firing
sites silenced, no US planes hit; S Vietnamese killed, 31 wounded by US
helicopter gunship in accident 275 mi NE of Saigon; casualty figures for last wk
listed; 40,371 Amers have been killed in war; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

Tran Ngoc Chau says he feels he has been betrayed by Amer mission in Saigon
despite long and close working relationship, int; says US knew about meetings
with his bro, a Communist who was convicted as spy last July and sentenced to
life in prison; charges Nguyen Van Thieu aide bribed majority of his Lower House
colleagues to get them to sign petition lifting immunity; US Embassy spokesman
declines to comment on Fulbright charge; Amer source confirms embassy had
communication from Washington on case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 177 words

New Mobilization Com to End the War in Vietnam, orgn representing over 100
antiwar groups, sets Mar 16-22 as antidraft wk; plans demonstrations in 100
cities; stresses they will be peaceful; says local bodies choosing to engage in
civil disobedience must separate these actions clearly so that those not wishing
to take part will not be drawn into them; leaders believe there has been new
rise in dissatisfaction because of increasing skepticism over lottery system;
suggest various ways of harassing local bds; Vietnam war protesters plan
activities focusing on Apr 15, tax filing deadline; will seek to encourage
withholding of all or part of taxes; to announce plans early next wk for
'winter-spring offensive'; plans will be based on new strategy intended to
broaden opposition to war by moving away from natl demonstrations 'back to the
grass roots' and by breaking down generalized opposition to war into protests
against specific war-caused grievances; announcement will come from New
Mobilization Com; details on plans; illus of New Mobilization Com decal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 9, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 69 words

Bomb explodes at office of S Vietnamese Natl Press Center in Saigon, destroying
bldg's 2d-floor offices and setting fire, which is soon extinguished; allied
forces rept killing 88 enemy in heavy fighting near Cambodian border; other
recent action noted; 2 S Vietnamese mercenary soldiers killed, 11 wounded in
explosion in area where enemy munitions have been captured; map shows location
of press center; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 4 words

Action W of Saigon reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 55 words

US planes attack enemy gun positions inside Cambodia after Amer observation
helicopter is struck by ground fire from Cambodia and explodes in air; incident
occurs during fighting along border 80 mi W of Saigon, where S Vietnamese have
been trying to block escape of battered N Vietnamese regiment into Cambodia;
details on incident

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 20 words

US mil personnel looking for souvenirs swarm into allied camp storing enemy arms
found in last few wks near Saigon; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Village of Thoibinh, located in placid Mekong Delta area 90 mi from Saigon,
barely feels war; inhabitants are members of Hoa Hoa religious sect, which is
militantly anti-Communist; conditions in village discussed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 168 words

3,000 young activists, Student Mobilization Com to End the War in Vietnam, meet
at Case Western Reserve U; meeting marked by factional disputes and exercise of
tight control by Young Socialist Alliance; alliance asserts control over Student
Mobilization Com, coalition of radical and antiwar groups, by filling most of
com's key staff posts; alliance opposed by Ind Radical Caucus; alliance's
backers, whose tactics tend to be more moderate, favor keeping withdrawal from
Vietnam as single center issue of com in hopes of attracting broad support;
caucus wants to broaden issues; vote to defer demonstration in support of F
(Ahmed) Evans, black nationalist under death sentence for '68 gun battle with
police, until after conf ends; backs proposal to flood local draft bds with
extraneous personal data as part of antiwar demonstrations during Mar; calls for
massive antiwar demonstrations across US during wk of April 13-18, including
student strikes in hss and colls; conf is marked by factional disputes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 37 words

Article on urban crisis posed by refugees in Saigon; 1.3-million refugees from
countryside have poured into city in last decade of war in search of security
and chance to make living; plight of 1 family detailed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 75, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 7 words

USSR Deputy Foreign Min Firyubin in Hanoi

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 47 words

Article on performance of S Vietnamese troops in river operation NW of Saigon
that is said to be test of Vietnamization program; conflicting assessments of
performance said to illustrate difficulty of answering question of how well S
Vietnamese will perform after Amers leave; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Electronic equipment and quick defensive measures credited with repelling enemy
probe near Saigon and probably saving Amer lives

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 74 words

Vietnamese woman who says she survived massacre in Songmy area says Amer troops
entered her hamlet and shot women and children, TV int; says she fled village
and, upon returning, found about 100 people dead, including her daughter and
grandchild 2 Vietnamese men tell similar story; Gerity found guilty, sentenced
to 7 yrs at hard labor, dishonorable discharge and forfeiture of all pay; his
father says he is 'sacrificial lamb' for Saigon Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

Hanoi radio says Pres Nixon's foreign policy statement shows his Adm wants to
win war through force rather than negotiation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 31 words

Thailand rescinds notification to Pan Amer that recreation flights for US troops
from Saigon would not be allowed to land at Bangkok after Feb 25; suspends
official who sent notification

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 52 words

Tran Ngoc Chau found guilty in absentia by Saigon mil ct of damaging natl
security through having had dealings with his bro, Hoang Ho; sentenced to 20 yrs
at hard labor; Hoang Ho sentenced to death; is believed to have left country;
Tran Ngoc Chau says he will camp in Natl Assembly until Govt forces him out

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

Vietcong guerrillas and S Vietnamese troops exch gunfire in Saigon; terrorists
set off 2 bombs in city, injuring 5 people; enemy gunners shell Bienhoa Air
Base; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 10 words

Lr says N Vietnam and USSR are aggressors in Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 218 words

Sp/5 R Lawrence's statement widens controversy over censorship issue;
controversy flares within ranks of Amer mil spokesmen; US command begins
investigation into charges of censorship and distortion on mil radio and TV
network in Vietnam; Lawrence and Cpl T M Sinkovitz removed from their
assignments; Sen Fulbright charge that Pentagon's information program is 'pub
relations' effort to make mil look good noted; many young soldiers in
information offices charge they are permitted to write only favorable news
releases and have been reprimanded for volunteering unfavorable information to
civilian reporters; other charges noted; Sp 4 B O Hodierne and Sp 5 M Maxwell,
both of whom were removed from their information posts, comment; top information
officials contend they follow strictly policy of 'maximum disclosure with
minimum delay' in dealing with civilian newsmen; some senior officials label as
'baloney' censorship charges; some specific incidents that have occurred
recently and touch on censorship assertions noted; text of statement made by
Lawrence on the air; Lawrence and Sinkovitz controversey stems from fact that
Vietnam war is undeclared war and no formal censorship has been imposed various
instances of charges and reprisals involving Stars and Stripes and broadcast
network; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 117 words

Allied officials estimate N Vietnamese infiltration into S Vietnam in '69
totaled 100,000 to 110,000 men, 30,000 to 40,000 fewer than in '68; say, as in
'68, infiltration rose toward end of yr; estimate there are 230,000 to 240,000
enemy soldiers and Communist party functionairies in S Vietnam, or ready to
enter; '68 figure was 290,000; authorities say significance of '69 enemy figures
as key to enemy intentions is difficult to assess; recent repts on infiltration
by Nixon and Secs Laird and Rogers noted; former infiltrator gives picture of
infiltration process; other former infiltrators tell of their experiences;
allied forces, excluding US and S Vietnam, total 68,900; US force totals 474,400

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 122 words

Ed Sanders, 'exuberant spokesman for cultural revolution,' and Donald Kalish,
middle-aged 'staid and serious' peace worker, testify for defense; they are
called examples of divergent wings of radical movement; Sanders is at odds with
Judge Hoffman from begining; refuses to be sworn, asking to affirm instead; Govt
agrees; he tells of meeting on Jan 4 '68 at Rubin's NYC home at 2 radicals,
reflecting diversity of movement, testify; Mr Sanders said he was asked to
coordinate rock groups for Yiopie 'Festival of Life' during conv; Kalish, who
also refuses to be sworn, testifies he was co-chmn of Mobilization Com to End
War in Vietnam and tells of his participation in Mobilization meetings leading
up to demonstrations during conv

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 73 words

Reprs for New Mobilization Com to End War in Vietnam, SCLC and Black Panthers
announce plans to mark birthday of late Rev Dr King with protests in 24 cities
against policies of repression and genocide against blacks and other groups,
news conf, Washington; Panther repr says his orgn is preparing to charge US with
genocide before UN; is backed by SCLC official; Gov Curtis issues proclamation
setting 'Martin Luther King Junior Day' in Me

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 211 words

Justice Dept ex-aide W A Pomeroy testifies that dept made unsuccessful efforts
to get Chicago officials to negotiate with demonstrators prior to conv; says he
and another Justice Dept official, R Wilkins, went to Chicago in July '68 to
meet with Mayor Daley; Judge Hoffman does not let Pomeroy tell of substance of
their talks with Daley; Pomeroy allowed to describe talk he and Wilkins had
later that day with defendant Davis; says Wilkins told Davis that they were
trying to get Chicago to open lines of communications with Mobilization Com to
End War in Vietnam; says US Atty Foran was also present at meeting; says Davis
stressed Mobilization Com wanted peaceful demonstrations and welcomed Fed
efforts to get talks started with city; says R Clark, then Atty Gen, apptd him
to coordinate Fed, state and local security at conv; Govt objects to
introduction of memo he submitted to Clark July 23; Hoffman rules memo
'irrelevant and immaterial'; Pomeroy, at later press conf, reads parts of memo
defense considers irrelevant; 1 sec says that main problem seemed to be
unwillingness of Chicago to negotiate; Pomeroy says Daley was responsible for
disorders; Hoffman orders trial to meet 7 days a wk from now on after Kunstler
protests his order to hold Sat sessions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

Statistics on US war spending show conflict provides significant benefits for
economies of S Korea and Philippines, as well as helping to shore up their mil
establishments; details; econ benefits from presence of Philippine troops in
Vietnam; estimated econ gains put at $40- to $50-million; earnings represent
remittances from troops; show S Korean econ and mil benefit from dollar earnings
remitted by S Korean troops in Vietnam; '68 dollar earnings put at $171-million,
'69 projected at $200-million

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

Student Mobilization Com to End the War in Vietnam announces plans for conf in
Cleveland, Feb 14-15, to discuss ways to drive ROTC off every campus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 2, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Premier Souvanna Phouma says he is prepared to 'close his eyes' to existence of
Ho Chi Minh Trail in eastern Laos, along which N Vietnam moves troops and
supplies into S Vietnam to aid Vietcong, if N Vietnam will withdraw its 50,000
troops from rest of Laos, int; says he made like proposal in '69

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 2, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 149 words

Sen Foreign Relations Com makes pub rept suggesting that Nixon's Vietnamization
policy rests on dubious assumptions about abilities of S Vietnamese Govt and mil
intentions of N Vietnam; rept questions whether S Vietnamese Army would be
capable of withstanding heavy N Vietnamese attack; contends substantial Amer
involvement would still be required in S Vietnam even if Vietnamization should
succeed; says war 'appears to be not only far from won but far from over'; rept
does not have specific com endorsement, but has important effect on views of com
members as they prepare to open hearings on war; Fulbright calls rept 'sober,
dispassionate and revealing'; says it gives him some sense of 'realities of
continuing Amer involvement'; rept was drafted by com consultants J G Lowenstein
and R M Moose; is said to mark new approach by com in studying war policy;
details on rept; Fulbright illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 23 words

N Vietnam broadcasts recorded message from late Pres Ho Chi Minh at start of
celebration of Tet; Lunar New Yr celebration begins, Peking

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 268 words

Former Pres Johnson offers his version of events 2 yrs ago that led to end of
Amer troop buildup, partial bombing halt and his decision not to run for
re-election, TV int; argues that allies won great mil victory by repulsing
enemy's '68 Tet offensive; says it was enemy's exhaustion that led him to offer
new peace move; confirms repts that his mil leaders requested 206,000 more
troops; says request reflected fear that Communists would stir up trouble
elsewhere in the world and that some allied forces might have to be withdrawn
from Vietnam; says suggestion for partial bombing halt came from former Sec
Rusk, rather than former Sec Clifford, as other former officials have contended;
berates 'sideline' critics in Sen, notably Fulbright; reasserts conviction that
halting aggression in Vietnam was as essential as stopping Hitler's armies; his
remarks drawn from 2 long ints conducted at his ranch by CBS newsman W Cronkite;
Johnson scores NY Times for printing story saying he implemented Westmoreland
request for 206,000 more troops; says he regarded Tonkin resolution as 'sky's
the limit' authorization to take whatever action might be necessary to protect
Amer troops and prevent aggression; insists Fulbright understood resolution;
Fulbright says Cong passed resolution after 'absolute misinterpretation of
facts' by Johnson and his aides; says he saw his wholly separate decision to
retire from office as valuable announcement to get more 'steam' out of his peace
offers in his Mar 31 '68 s; CBS reptdly has paid $300,000 for his recollections;
other details on Johnson remarks; Johnson illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 13 words

New Mobilization Com to End the War in Vietnam to focus on civil rights in Mar

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 108 words

Defense Dept repts more than 12,000 draftees have been killed in Vietnam,
roughly 1/3 of all Amer fatalities; Army repts that 1 out of every 2 soldiers
killed in combat have been draftees, even though draftees comprise only 40% of
Army forces in Vietnam; figures were made available in response to newsmen's
queries about Feb 8 article on NY Times noting that as war lengthens more and
more draftees are being trained as inf; Defense Dept spokesman denies there is
deliberate policy of assigning more draftees to inf, but Army spokesmen note
that process of selection, which allows volunteers to choose type of assignment,
is unfavorable to draftees

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 108 words

Defense Sec Laird, in Vietnam, says Amer warplanes will continue to take
whatever steps are necessary to protect themselves during reconnaissance flights
over N Vietnam; explains policy of 'protective reaction' applies to action over
N Vietnam as well as to ground action by Amer troops in Laos and Cambodia; says
he remains implacably opposed to pub announcement of any specific timetable for
troops withdrawal despite wishes of some members of Nixon Adm; says withdrawals
will proceed steadily until only Amer presence will be mil assistance group
composed primarily of advisers; makes other comments; meets with Gen C W Abrams
and Amb Bunker

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 74 words

More than 3 dozen Congressmen, former mil officers, profs and other war critics
meet in Washington to discuss Amer involvement in Vietnam war; details on
meeting; say racial divisions in Amer armed forces increase in areas away from
front, with black and white soldiers reptdly firing at each other; Pentagon
spokesman says there has been no rept of recent racial incidents in S Vietnam;
say alleged Songmy massacre is not isolated incident

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 3

LENGTH: 63 words

Gen M W Clark, Comdr of UN forces who signed '53 Armistice, in article on
options open to US in Vietnam, says he felt then, and does now, that Communists
should have been defeated, that such move would have avoided US involvement in
Vietnam; supports Pres Nixon's Vietnamization policy under present conditions,
article; says US must be strong militarily and unafraid politically

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 96 words

New information held by Nixon Adm shows rate of enemy infiltration in S Vietnam
in Jan and so far in Feb is considerably below that of same '69 period and that
Feb rate is even lower than Jan rate; 1 N Vietnamese regiment in Mekong Delta
has inexplicably withdrawn into Cambodian territory; N Vietnamese command has
increased movement of supplies into S Vietnam; Washington experts believe N
Vietnam is emphasizing quality rather than size of mil effort; Nixon Adm
believes enemy has settled down to new strategy of 'protracted warfare' and
'economy of forces'; other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 165 words

Sen Mathias charges US Exec branch flouts Cong by US involvement, s, Sen; holds
Nixon Adm is turning Laos into 'an arena for our mistakes in Vietnam'; Sens
Mansfield, Gore, Symington, Cooper and Percy criticize Adm secrecy over what
they term is deepening US involvement, ss; Mathias says US mil commitments
violate spirit of '69 Natl Commitments Resolution and are in conflict with
amendment to Defense Appropriations Act prohibiting use of Amer troops in Laos;
queries whether withdrawal from Vietnam implies escalation of mil activities in
Laos; Gore and Mansfield demand Adm publish secret testimony taken by Sen subcom
in Oct on US involvement; Symington, in exch with Sen Goldwater, says there has
been heavy escalation of Amer mil activity; sends lr to Sec Rogers demanding
Godley be recalled from Laos to testify; State and Defense Depts silent on US
involvement; Souvanna Phouma announces that he will ask GB and USSR to call conf
of 14 signatories of '62 Geneva accord on Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

Allied and enemy forces expected to resume full-scale offensive operations
following expiration of New Yr's truces; US command charges enemy with 111
violations; 6 Amers, 123 enemy and 20 S Vietnamese soldiers and civilians reptd
killed in incidents; details on action; more than 40,000 Amers have been killed
in Vietnam war; casualty figures for last wk released

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 6

LENGTH: 54 words

Lr, commenting on James Reston Dec 17 article saying N Vietnamese Communists
have been struggling for 23 yrs to clear 'peninsula' of foreign troops, says it
would be more accurate to say that Vietnamese Communists, from both North and
South Vietnam, have been struggling for 23 yrs to fasten totalitarianism upon
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 69 words

Premier O Palme's planned visit to receive hon degree in May seen move to
improve Swedish-US ties by clarifying Sweden's stands on Vietnam, including Soc
Dem Govt's outspoken criticism of US policy in Vietnam; demands for action to
improve relations come from business interests and labor; US econ threats to
Sweden noted; Nixon Adm has still not sent amb to Stockholm to replace W W
Heath, who resigned a yr ago

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 57, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

Negro soldier Billy H Terry Jr, killed in Vietnam, becomes lst Negro buried in
Elmwood Cemetery, Birmingham, Ala, previously rigidly restricted to whites; ct
ordered burial there in Dec; mil funeral described; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 121 words

Vice Pres Agnew confs with Thailand Premier Thanom Kittikachorn; advises him not
to be concerned about criticism in US Cong or press over US involvement; reptdly
says 'some people back home are so anxious to make friends of our enemies that
sometimes they even make enemies of our friends'; Min Thanat Khoman repts Agnew
says there will be no change in Amer policy and no lessening in US commitment to
Thailand; reptdly said that any negotiated settlement of war in Vietnam must
include withdrawal of all N Vietnamese troops from Laos; says he assured Thais
that views expressed or statements made by Amer Cong circles as well as by mass
media were personal ones aimed at creating disunity between Thailand and US;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 62 words

US reconnaissance helicopter struck by enemy fire while flying over southern
edge of zone; returns safely to S Vietnam; US spokesman says US found 151
indications of enemy presence in zone in wk ending Jan 3; enemy soldiers kill 11
marines, wound 59, in attack on camp S of Danang; 5 enemy killed; map; Vietcong
announces 4-day cease-fire in Feb for lunar new yr (Tet)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

Prof T Taylor, in article on alleged Mylai massacre in Vietnam, discusses
question whether obedience to superior's order may be defense against criminal
charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 5

LENGTH: 12 words

Lr scores Vice Pres Agnew's 'patriotic pep talk' to US troops in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 54 words

US command, after investigation of Robert Lawrence's charges, denies censorship
of unfavorable news by Armed Forces Vietnam Network; says only repts prohibited
are those giving valuable information to enemy or offending S Vietnamese Govt;
says prohibition does not preclude some items offending S Vietnam, US and armed
forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 31, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 368 words

Pres Nixon says he will decide within a mo how many more arms to sell Israel,
news conf; says he will weigh arms request against threat to Israel from
neighboring Arab states; denies US is pro-Israel or pro-Arab; is expected to
meet at least part of Israel's request for 100 more Skyhawk jets and 50 more
Phantom jets; seen not convinced that Israel needs as much econ help to make
purchases as has been asked; Pres Nixon says sale by Pompidou has aggravated his
concern about mil build-up in Middle East, news conf; says he will discuss his
objections with Pompidou during Feb meetings in Washington; Nixon says
infiltration of N Vietnamese into S Vietnam increased again in Jan, but not in
proportions that indicate long and uncontainable enemy offensive, news conf;
says his plan to withdraw all Amer combat troops is irreversible, even without
progress in Paris talks; says he hopes withdrawal can be completed by end of yr;
warns N Vietnamese that he will react, and even more strongly than in past, to
any effort to take advantage of Amer withdrawals; says he still hopes to match
withdrawal timetable suggested last yr by former Sec Clifford; makes other
comments; Nixon, in news conf statement on plans to expand US ABM system, says
he does not expect any attack by China and will, in fact, continue to try to
improve relations; stresses, however, that over period of 10 yrs US must acquire
defense against China and possibly others if its policy in Pacific is to be
'credible' and secure against 'nuclear blackmail'; Nixon confirms he has decided
to proceed to 2d phase of Safeguard system; program will include 2 types of
defense, the close-in type for US ICBMs and area defense to protect cities
against weaker nuclear powers such as Communist China; declines to go beyond
earlier statements on US activities in Laos; Nixon says US is seeking to
persuade Nigerian Govt to permit increased relief shipments to Biafran region
without involving US in pol dispute over who is to blame for delaying aid; Pres
Nixon says decision will be made within 30 days on Israel's request for 150
fighter craft; Nixon says greater support given his policy has not persuaded N
Vietnam to negotiate in good faith

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

Harris poll finds Amer experience in Vietnam war has brought forth new form of
isolationism; finds war has made Amers weary and even bitter; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 50 words

Lt J B Duffy to go on trial in S Vietnam for premeditated murder of suspected
Vietcong agent; charged with conspiring with Sgt J Lanasa to murder deserter
from S Vietnamese Army; Duffy's lawyer, H Rothblatt, gives account of incident;
Lanasa has not been ct-martialed, is not available for comment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 90 words

Pentagon studies proposal to provide enough modern sensing devices so that S
Vietnam could seal its entire 900-mi border against sizable enemy infiltration;
idea, advanced by senior Defense Dept scientists, meets strong skepticism from
several mil planners, who contend it would cost too much and that S Vietnam does
not have enough troops to spare for assignment; proposal calls for quadrupling
50,000 S Vietnamese troops now assigned to watching infiltration routes and for
provision of $300-million to $1-billion worth of sensors; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 172 words

US pacification chief W E Colby says despite 'some illegal killings', Operation
Phoenix, which is ostensibly designed to weed out Vietcong agents, cannot be
regarded as 'counter-terror' orgn, Sen Foreign Relations Com hearing; rejects
Fulbright suggestion that Phoenix is program for 'assassination of civilian
leaders'; says he is neither optimistic nor pessimistic about future of Vietnam
and pacification program, Sen com hearing; Nixon, after meeting with Laird, says
Vietnamization is on schedule and that non-mil aspects of war are 'most
encouraging'; Fulbright announces present phase of hearings will cover
pacification, mil advisory effort, econ aid program and information activities;
Sen Case asks Colby whether it is proper to describe operation as 1 of
counter-terror; Colby says Vietcong captured under operation have not been
'legally executed'; repts that in '69 total of 19,534 suspected Vietcong 'pol
cadres' were 'neutralized', or arrested and dealt with; operation is part of
pacification effort; Colby illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 25 words

14 Amers killed, 29 wounded in enemy ambush S of Danang; 4 N Vietnamese killed;
details on fighting; B-52s bomb Ho Chi Minh Trail; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 72, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

Group of profs and students from colls in Minneapolis area buy 39 shares of
Honeywell Inc stock so they can attend co annual meeting to protest co's mfr of
weapons used in Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

Sen E M Kennedy joins critics who charge that Nixon Adm is misleading country by
saying funds have been shifted from defense to domestic needs, s, panel; charges
most of '69 defense cuts result from reduction in Vietnam war; demands further
defense cuts; Sen E M Kennedy suggests Cong candidates study production of
proposed Main battle tank as possible program where major savings in defense
budget can be made; suggests Cong examine 320,000 troops US has stationed in
Eur; calls for exam of fleet of 15 attack carriers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 3

LENGTH: 83 words

Thai Min Thanat Khoman expresses bitterness at antiwar critics' suggestion that
US could be drawn into a Vietnam situation because of its presence in Thailand,
s, NYC; say Govt has not requested US manpower and will not do so; sees no
immediate threat from N Vietnam's victory in Laotian thrust; stresses need for
Asian nations to develop regional security, s, UN Correspondents Assn, NYC;
holds their collective efforts may succeed in dealing with Communist China and
eventually win its cooperation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 107 words

Defense Sec Laird says Pres Nixon will not send ground troops to fight in Laos
without Cong consent, HR com; reiterates Nixon contention that there are no
ground troops in Laos and that air power is used only to interdict N Vietnam's
supply line to S Vietnam; top Nixon Adm officials doubt N Vietnamese troops will
advance beyond previously held postions or that greater intervention by US
troops is warranted now; Sec of State Rogers tells Thanat Khoman that Nixon Adm
intends to fulfill its commitments to Govt, Washington conf; reptd to have been
'emphatic' in reassurances; Thanat Khoman reptdly urges expanded US aid, not
ground troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 101 words

N Vietnam bn reptd sighted 12 mi from new hq of Amer-backed clandestine army at
Long Cheng; capture of former hq reptdly was turned into rout when 1,300
defenders fled before attacking force believed to number 400; 3 reporters who
visited Long Cheng say there are many Amers based there but they do not appear
to engage in battle; Premier Souvanna Phouma holds current situation justifies
meeting of '62 Geneva conf participants; N Vietnam calls on US to end bombing in
Laos; charges raids killed many civilians; Thai troops step up sweeps on
northern border with Laos after N Vietnamese mil thrust; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 7 words

Casualties for wk and total in Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 2

LENGTH: 105 words

US rept (as of Dec 20, 1969) of 9 yrs of Vietnam fighting lists 39,893 Amers
killed, 261,969 wounded and 1,350 missing and captured; rept lists 584,578 enemy
soldiers killed during same period; lists 68,309 S Vietnamese soldiers killed
since '65; details on recent action during 3-day New Yr's cease-fire declared by
enemy; allies have declared 1-day cease-fire; proclaimed 24-hr New Yr allied
cease-fire shattered by 30 significant violations that claim lives of 5 Amers
and 40 enemy; since enemy began its 3-day cease-fire, battles initiated by both
sides have claimed lives of 221 enemy and 16 allied soldiers; details on action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 126 words

Vice Pres Agnew visits wounded US soldiers at Longbinh hosp; says his visit to
Vietnam confirms to him 'wisdom' of US policy; says US follows right path in
seeking negotiated settlement while giving S Vietnamese time to gather strength
to demonstrate to Communists that they have nothing to gain by prolonging the
fighting; says his conversations with Nguyen Van Thieu and Bunker touched on
both strengths and weaknesses; visits with wounded soldiers at Longbinh hosp,
visits US soldiers at 2 arty sites; presents Nguyen Van Thieu with plaque
containing 4 tiny chips of moon and Vietnamese flag that was carried on Apollo
11 moon flight; Agnew congratulating US troops; says they should not be misled
by what they see and read in certain publications; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 40 words

Vietcong issues communique describing mil situation as 'very good' and
instructing its troops to kill as many Amers and S Vietnamese Govt soldiers as
possible; issues communique calling on S Vietnamese soldiers to desert and join
Vietcong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 199 words

George C Wallace, who headed 3d party movement in '68 Pres election, sees '70s
as time when he will have his greatest impact, int, Montgomery, Ala; says
'unfashionable' ideas he put forward several yrs ago are suddenly finding
acceptance everywhere; holds he represents majority viewpoint in country; views
outlined; he says Pres Nixon's Southern strategy will fail because Nixon will
not be willing to move Repub party far enough in direction Southerners and
others who think like them want it to go; predicts tax revolt by working class,
lower middle class and farmers against tax exemptions for oil men and against
low tax rates for very rich; says increased militancy on part of
'Marxist-Communist-led' protest groups will lead to counter-militancy from
right, including demands for measures so repressive that they will infringe on
rights of law-abiding citizens; says US is not prepared to lose in Vietnam, and
therefore no Pres will be able to 'cut and run'; sees US in '70s trying to avoid
involvement in a war in which US natl interest is not clearly at stake; sees
some relaxation of tensions between US and USSR; doubts any US Pres will find it
necessary to use nuclear weapons; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 104 words

Vice Pres Agnew arrives, Taipei; gets tumultous reception; confs privately with
Pres Chiang Kai-shek; presents moon rocks to him; illus; in talks with newsmen
en route to China says he hopes to convince Chiang that US plans to seek
'meaningful dialogue' with Communist China will not diminish US posture of
support for Nationalist Govt; makes like pledge in s on arrival; says attempt to
increase trade is part of Amer policy to lessen tension; predicts enemy will
time any new offensives to help stir up antiwar protests in US; says he wishes
everyone in US could have chance to 'look around' in Vietnam; leaves for
Thailand

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 54 words

N Vietnamese troops attack Amer field camp near Ducpho and kill 7 Amers, wound
11; 29 enemy killed; other details; enemy gunners in buffer zone shell targets
in S Vietnam 3 times; other recent action discussed; S Vietnamese Govt repts 10
civilians killed, 50 wounded, in enemy shelling of 2 refugee camps near Anhoa;
map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 52, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

Pres Nixon thanks Bob Hope for his Xmas tour of Amer mil bases in Vietnam; Nixon
confs with B Hope at latter's estate near Burbank, then golfs with him, James
Stewart, Fred MacMurray; occasion is his golfing debut before newsmen; other
working activities noted; confs with Budget Bur Dir Mayo, San Clemente; says all
major budget decisions have been made

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

Lawyer Carl McAfee, representing 28 families of US soldiers missing or captured
in Vietnam, arrives in Moscow to seek 'humanitarian gesture' from USSR

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 77 words

US Vice Pres Agnew leaves Thailand and arrives, Katmandu, on 22-hr visit;
greeted at airport by Premier Bista and Amb C L Bunker; expresses satisfaction
with Nepal's ability to live peacefully with Communist China and India; is
accompanied by 2 Apollo 10 astronauts, Col T P Stafford and Comdr E A Cernan,
who present moon rocks to King Mahendra; small demonstration against US
involvement in Vietnam staged at USIS office; Agnew leaves for Kabul,
Afghanistan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 2

LENGTH: 39 words

Ed on censorship issue; notes conflicting policies of Defense Dept and US Army
in Vietnam; says censorship of news involving mil operations is understandable
in war zone, but notes problem of keeping Amer troops out of 'news cocoon'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

Pathet Lao and N Vietnamese forces reptdly fire rockets into Pakse, 2d largest
city; kill 1 person, wound 2; strike US AID compound but cause no serious
damage; Premier Souvanna Phouma scores N Vietnam's role in war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 1; (GP)

LENGTH: 61 words

Gallup Poll finds Dems tend to favor withdrawal of Amer troops from Vietnam
immediately or by end of yr, while most Repubs favor withdrawal only when S
Vietnamese are able to handle war themselves; says views of Dems previously
paralleled those of Repubs; details from poll, which includes opinions gleaned
from subdivisions as to sex, educ level, age and region

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHS & CHARTS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 12; Page 30, Column 7

LENGTH: 14 words

Aerospace indus officials hold peace in Vietnam would spur business throughout
'70s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Lr criticizes Vietnamization concept, urges US-N Vietnamese mil accord while US
announces all US troops will be withdrawn by '71

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 107 words

Rand Corp aide, who asks not to be identified, says that ints he conducted in
Vietnam in late '66 turned up 'hearsay evidence' of S Korean troop atrocities
against civilians; says allegations were made to Amer researchers who were under
US Govt contract to conduct study of war's progress; Cong source D S de Haan
says Sen subcom has been aware of Rambo rept for some time, but has not been
able to obtain copy; says rept is classified as 'secret' by Pentagon; Pentagon
spokesman says Pentagon is trying to 'put pieces together' and 'see if there is
a rept'; S Korean spokesman Col Kim Byung Kwon denies Korean soldiers committed
massacre

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 148 words

Defence Sec M Laird says alleged atrocities by S Koreans are not responsibility
of US command, TV int; says matter should be handled by S Korean and S
Vietnamese Govts; concedes Defense Dept has received 'certain repts' of alleged
atrocities; says repts have been called to attention of S Vietnamese and S
Korean Govts; F West, researcher for Rand Corp project funded by Defense Dept,
says he received 'hearsay information' of S Korean brutality during several
trips to S Vietnam, telephone int; says he is 'pretty convinced' instances of
brutality did occur; says he presented his information in written rept to
'highest levels' at Defense and State Depts and Natl Security Council; says his
rept was made 'at direct urging' of Asst Defense Sec and an admiral; Pentagon
spokesman says there are repts and documents bearing on situation, but says he
is not familiar with West's rept; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 80 words

US mil command announces 1st Inf Div will be major combat element to leave
Vietnam in 3d phase of Pres Nixon's withdrawal program; other combat units
scheduled to be pulled out by April 15 listed; none of troops will leave before
early Feb; authorized US troops level will be 434,000 by April 15; some details
on combat role of units to be withdrawn; allied troops have killed 130 enemy
soldiers in last 2 days of fighting near Laotian border and Danang; 6 Amers
killed, 20 wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 21 words

Wives of 4 Amer pilots missing in Vietnam abandon attempt to enlist aid of USSR
officials in getting news of their husbands

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

2 teams of American & French scientists rept US defoliation efforst in Vietnam
Velasco regime is either oblivious or indifferent to; lauds journalists' fight
against decree

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

Sen Eugene McCarthy confs with Xuan Thuy, N Vietnam's chief delegate to peace
talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 79 words

2 teams of Amer and French scientists rept US defoliation efforts in Vietnam
have cut back Cambodian rubber production 10% with about 1/3 of all rubber trees
damaged and have injured various kinds of plant life; most trees expected to
recover rapidly but some damage might persist for over 20 yrs; 1 team of US
scientists visited in July after agreement between US and Cambodia stemming from
Cambodian protests; 2d team of 3 scientists visited at private inv of Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 10 words

Vietnam's allied and enemy casualty figures for wk reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 100 words

Sen Tran Van Don and 14 other S Vietnamese Sens announce formation of pol bloc
they say will become nucleus of wider opposition front; Tran Van Don says group
is dedicated to finding pol solution to reunification of N and S Vietnam under
non-Communist Govt, news conf; says group will seek supporters in all major pol
and religious groups and will decide by next yr whether to enter candidate in
Pres election in Nov '71; new group will be called People's Bloc; group issues
7-page manifesto charging Nguyen Van Thieu Govt has failed to cope with problems
facing country; agrees with Govt's war policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 101 words

Defense Sec M Laird announces 1,250,000 mil and civilian workers will lose jobs
as result of cuts in mil spending already made or planned in fiscal '71 defense
budget, news conf; details cuts in defense spending; says driving force behind
cuts is concern over inflation and desire to provide more funds for domestic
programs; says even after US withdraws more substantial number of troops from
Vietnam and turns over major responsibility for fighting war to S Vietnamese,
roughly half remaining Amers will be combat troops, news conf; stresses their
mission will be to protect remaining US support forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 108 words

S Vietnam mil hq announces replacement of Brig Gen Nguyen Thanh Hoang as comdr
of 7th Div by Col Nguyen Khoa Nam, and replacement of Brig Gen Pham Van Phu, who
is promoted to comdr of S Vietnamese Special Forces, as 44th Special Tactical
Zone comdr by Col Vo Huu Hanh; move reptdly is designed to improve mil
leadership; shifts described as beginning of major shake-up in S Vietnamese
Army; sources say Amer advisers were not happy with performance of 7th Div;
changes seen as victory for Amer advisers; Pham Van Phu replaces Brig Gen Lam
Son; S Vietnamese mil hq also announces replacement of 14 prov chiefs in move to
make Govt adm more efficient

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 57 words

US command repts finding bodies of 2 Amers (Capt D R Devers and M Sgt J H
O'Neill) who were captured by Vietcong, put on exhibition and shot to death in
'66 near Hue; bodies of 3 S Vietnamese soldiers also found in grave; US
spokesman says there are other repts of Amer POWs being executed by Vietcong; 42
enemy killed in scattered action map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

United Ch of Christ pres Rev R V Moss repts he will spend Easter Holiday in
Vietnam to min to combat troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

Lr on US involvement in Vietnam stresses world yearning for peace; deplores L B
Johnson's disclosure (in Dec 27,1:6 TV int) that he did not want to run for Pres
in '64 but was persuaded to do so by wife

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 63, Column 2

LENGTH: 32 words

Article on S Vietnam's urgent need for foreign investment; some Amer cos have
unsuccessfully tried to take advantage of investment opportunities, 1 co's
investment has come to fruition; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 62, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

S Vietnam's '69 econ revd; econ, at end of yr, said to be still trying to adapt
to austerity measures imposed in Oct by Nguyen Van Thieu; bumper rice crop
noted; '69-70 S Vietnamese crop put at 5-million metric tons, 17% above '68-69
level; Govt officials see nation achieving self-sufficiency this yr; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 36 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu orders shifting of 3 more S Vietnamese gens; 10 cols will
be promoted to brig gen soon; studies plan to divide S Vietnam's 4 mil zones
into 6 zones, thereby reducing power of gen of each zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Sec Gen Thant discusses war with French Pres G Pompidou; says S Vietnam's top
priority is 'broad-based govt'; S Vietnamese delegation to peace talks says
present Govt represents will of great majority of S Vietnamese; Sec Gen Thant
ends African tour; in NYC

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 2

LENGTH: 49 words

Ed, saying shifts in S Vietnamese Army personnel by Pres Nguyen Van Thieu bring
critically needed changes, says success of Vietnamization hinges on efficiency
of S Vietnamese armed forces more than any other single factor; says replacement
of some prov chiefs indicates consolidation of power

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 65 words

N Vietnamese aide in Laos Vu Tien says N Vietnam will not pub list of Amer
pilots it holds; says pilots are not considered POWs, but criminals; meets with
wives of 3 pilots; says US POWs are being treated humanely; scores Nixon Adm for
raising POW question 'in order to confuse world opinion'; US official says
families of 70 Amer prisoners, during last 4 wks, have received lrs from them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

S Vietnam gets $50-million from US to aid in financing imports bringing total
funds to $130-million for current fiscal yr and $900-million since mid-'65

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 53 words

51st session Vietnam Peace Talks; Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh accuses S Korean and S
Vietnamese troops of massacring more than 700 villagers last Nov in pacification
sweep commanded by Amers; Habib and Pham Dang Lam reject allegation as
propaganda; each side repeats its long-standing position on conditions for
settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 1

LENGTH: 144 words

Ed lauding Pres Nixon statement, in State of Union Message, that there should be
no contradiction between prosperity and a healthy environment and quality of
life but holding unless program is combined with effective legis to curb private
indus polluters, it may fall short of objective; criticizes Nixon for limiting
his prescription against inflation to cut in Fed expenditures to balance budget;
holds Nixon 'exuberant happiness' in State of Union Message with what he has
achieved abroad does not make for confidence when his record is so mixed and in
so many ways discouraging; questions Pres Nixon's claim that his policies have
given US 'best chance since World War II' for peace; says there have been more
signs of slowdown in Vietnam peace talks than of speed-up during Nixon Adm; says
Nixon has produced more 'motion than movement' in foreign affairs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 140 words

Amer officials in Bangkok follow up Agnew's visit with renewed assurances to
Thai leaders on high US esteem; Thais welcomed Agnew's comment on Amer critics
of US involvement, presumed his targets were Sen Fulbright, Washington Post and
NY Times; Amb Unger, in much publicized s, criticized Amer press and pleased
most Thais; Foreign Min official resents Unger's interference in internal
affairs by voicing hope that Thai Govt would soften new curbs on Amer
businessmen and visitors; Amer business confused and irked by new visa
requirements; view them as indicating more assertive nationalistic attitude in
dealings with US; That Govt angered by Dec 1 (1:8) article on high cost to US of
maintaining Thai troops in Vietnam; Thai officials assume Vice Pres Agnew
referred to Times when he commented on critics of US involvement in SE Asia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 5

LENGTH: 81 words

Grace Glueck comment on Art Workers' Coalition and Guerilla Art Action Group
demonstrations at Museum of Modern Art to back demands ranging from free
admission at all times to estab of sec devoted to work of Negro and Puerto Rican
artists; museum staff members have been meeting informally with coalition reprs
since last spring; 3 recent coalition actions protested museum staff's failure
to keep pledge to help coalition produce poster on alleged Songmy massacre in
Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 85 words

Sen J Javits leaves Vietnam; says visit confirms his view that US should
withdraw its troops at earliest possible date, news conf; says conversation with
Nguyen Van Thieu persuades him Nguyen Van Thieu understands need for Amer
disengagement; concedes Nguyen Van Thieu prefers slower timetable than 1 he
advocates; meets with members of non-communist pol opposition; says he finds
their views interesting, but makes clear he sees little prospect of broadened
pol representation in Govt in near future; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 13 words

Beach at Vungtau, S Vietnam, untouched by war, is haven for many people; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 68 words

US Gen Acctg Office finds US makes payments to other govts on US defense
activities overseas through property, local or munic, business, trade, excise
and import taxes; cites payment of some $28- to $34-million in S Vietnam and
$4-million in Thailand, fiscal '67-68; calls for new systems for adm of such tax
matters; State Dept agrees US spending for common defense should not be subject
to foreign taxation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2; (GP)

LENGTH: 65 words

Gallup Poll repts 65% of Amers approve way Pres Nixon handles war; 24%
disapprove; high vote of approval said to not necessarily represent total
endorsement of Nixon policy; recent poll showed 41% in favor of immediate
withdrawal of all troops or their withdrawal by end of yr; 40% favor withdrawing
troops at rate commensurate with S Vietnam's ability to take over fighting;
other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 31, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 82 words

US command acknowledges there have been periodic air-to-ground engagements in N
Vietnam since bombing halt that were not made pub because they were considered
'insignificant'; spokesman says such strikes were made 'from time to time' and
were in response to N Vietnamese AA fire or missiles; source says search for 8
downed airmen has been abandoned; former Sec Clifford says N Vietnamese
officials were believed to have understood that bombing pause would not halt
reconnaissance flights

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 2, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 130 words

Enemy stages more than 70 attacks during weekend, inflicting heaviest casualties
on Amer forces in a mo; 19 Amers killed, 119 wounded; 11 S Vietnamese soldiers
killed, 86 wounded in 20 clashes; S Vietnamese bn comdr reptd killed; more than
400 enemy killed; leaves for S Vietnamese troops canceled despite cease-fire
announced by Vietcong for Tet; US mil spokesmen stop short of calling
intensified enemy action start of offensive; US command acknowledges Amer and
enemy gunners waged brief arty duels twice last wk across Cambodian border;
Cambodia charges before Un Security Council that 5 allied helicopters killed 2
persons and wounded a 3d in strafing of Cambodian village in Jan; S Vietnamese
Govt news agency repts 2 Vietcong POWs released last wk; details on action; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 2, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 48 words

Rept conclusions listed; Sen com says S Vietnam pacification program produces
'considerable evidence of progress', but many Amers in field believe gains are
fragile says most frequently heard criticism is that Nguyen Van Thieu is
becoming 'increasingly autocratic, secretive and isolated'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 18 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu announces 1,324 pol prisoners will be released
in hon of Tet (lunar new yr)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 73 words

Paris Peace talks 53d session; N Vietnam hints it might not be willing to meet
with US privately so long as Habib heads Amer delegation; denies Habib and Le
Duc Tho have met privately; charges US lowers level of conf with view toward
sabotaging it; Habib charges other side refuses to abide by Geneva conv on POWs;
other side charges US seeks to prolong war; shows lr said to have been received
from Amer POW saying Vietnamese love peace

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 60, Column 3

LENGTH: 88 words

Globe, Ariz, residents hold several people exposed to 2,4,5-T, 2,4-D and Silvex
sprayed by US Forest Service in Tonto Natl Forest have become ill; charge
spraying has caused extensive environmental damage in region; map; forest
supervisor R Courtney suspends spraying program but denies that herbicides are
harmful; rising incidence of miscarriages among women in area surrounding Tonto
Natl Forest, Ariz, inconclusively linked to spraying of forest with combination
of chem herbicides used to defoliate trees in Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 9, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 1

LENGTH: 80 words

Ed notes that Nixon Adm fiscal '71 defense budget does not take monetary acct of
prospects for restraining nuclear missile race through SALT; holds budget
continues major build-up of offensive and defensive weapons; says projected cuts
in defense spending reflect savings in Vietnam alone; sees budget coming under
heavy Cong criticism; ed says costly weapons systems must be measured against
urgent domestic needs if rational priorities are to govern use of nation's
resources

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 118 words

Dem Policy Council adopts foreign policy com resolution; calls for 'firm and
unequivocal commitment' to withdraw all Amer forces from Vietnam on definite
timetable of 18 mos; J H Rowe Jr and Reprs Wright and Brooks are thwarted in
their effort to soften resolution with amendment stating council 'hoped and
believed' that withdrawal could be made in 18 mos; antiwar leader G Steinem
advocates stronger statement; council softens resolution's description of Pres
Nguyen Van Thieu Govt; Humphrey supports position paper, but does not cast vote;
Dem party Policy Council scores Pres Nixon on HEW veto while approving more
money for nuclear arms race; says it shows Adm lacks deep conviction about
priorities

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 50 words

HR subcom headed by Repr Byrne repts pacification program substantially
increased security in S Vietnam last yr but did not seriously counter Vietcong
pol activity; repts measure of program's success is that terrorist disruption of
program has been made higher priority of Vietcong than in past yrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (AFP)

LENGTH: 34 words

N Vietnam pub resolution concerning opening of 'productive labor movement'
designed to put into effect '70 econ plan; movement is aimed at arousing
increased effort in production and construction; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 326 words

Judge Hoffman convicts defense atty Kunstler on 24 counts of contempt of ct and
sentences him to 4 yrs, 13 days in prison; also sentences defense atty Weinglass
and defendants Rubin, Froines and Weiner to prison for contempt; legal sources
cannot recall as long a sentence for contempt ever given atty; Hoffman finds
Weinglass guilty on 14 counts and sentences him to 1 yr, 8 mos; finds Rubin
guilty on 15 counts and sentences him to 2 yrs, 1 mo, 23 days; Froines gets 6
mos, 15 days on 10 counts; Weiner gets 2 mos, 18 days on 7 counts; Hoffman stays
sentences of Kunstler and Weinglass until May 4 so they can work on any appeals
by their clients; jury continues deliberations; hundreds of demonstrators hold
rally scoring Judge Hoffman in front of Fed bldg in which courtroom is located;
joined by over 100 New Dem Coalition members; unusually tight security within
and outside courtroom noted; only incident involves interruption of ct
proceedings by Froines's wife as Hoffman is scoring Weinglass for his behavior
during trial; statements made by Kunstler and Weinglass before sentencing noted;
Hoffman links rise in crime, in part, to attys willing to go beyond
'professional responsibilities' in defense of clients; holds knowledge that such
attys are available has 'stimulating effect' on potential criminals; rebukes
Kunstler for quoting NY Times ed criticizing him for banning ex-Atty Gen Clark
as defense witness; says he has many eds lauding his decisions; 7-man legal team
formed by defense to plan appeals on contempt sentences; Hoffman denies requests
for bail; appeal will say that judge cannot give over 6 mos for contempt without
jury trial; will contend that trial judge at end of trial cannot be allowed to
hand out contempt sentences but should let case be assigned to another judge;
past cases of attys' conviction for contempt recalled; mother of defendant L
Weiner hospitalized after taking apparent overdose of tranquilizers; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Article on Operation Phoenix; Amer officials privately call it 1 of most
important and least successful programs in S Vietnam; way in which Vietcong
suspects are rooted out and dealt with discussed; program said to look best on
paper

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 35 words

US reptdly has diverted B-52 bombers from S Vietnam raids for use against N
Vietnamese and Pathet Lao troops; US Command silent; N Vietnamese troops mount
4th major attack against airfield in plain; details; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 201 words

Gen Orgn (GO) Council, official student govt body of NYC hss, adopts proposal
giving students major voice in determining school policies and practices;
council pres D Reeves describes proposal as negotiable and says it represents
effort by students to detail what they see as const rights and their role in
school; council calls for establishment in each hs of 20-member school liaison
bd consisting of 10 students, 4 teachers, principal and 5 parents, whose
decisions would be binding on teachers, principal and students; also calls for
truly representative student govt to be estab in each school, free from
domination by adm and faculty advisor, with right to act on all matters
concerning students; other provisions detailed; members of 3d World Com and
Student Mobilization Com to End War in Vietnam chapters at City Coll work with
students on proposal; proposal rejects proposed policy statement on student
rights prepared by Dr S P Lachman and issued last fall by Educ Bd; pub hearing
on bd statement to be held, at which GO Council proposal will be formally
submitted to bd; Asst Supt J B Zack calls council's meeting on proposal rigged
and says it was steered by militant student orgns who aided GO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

AP asst gen mgr D De Luce dispatch on tour he was given of northern side of
buffer zone, N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 35 words

Gen B Palmer Jr testifies before Army bd on Songmy incident; Sec Resor told Cong
last Nov that Palmer's rept to superiors on incident never got as far as Army or
US commands in Vietnam or Army Dept in Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

56th session; Vietcong chief delegate Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh joins chief N
Vietnamese delegate in boycotting talks; Habib continues to try to demonstrate
US is eager to negotiate end to war; Communists refuse to discuss POWs; N
Vietnamese officials tell wife of Amer pilot who has been missing for 3 yrs that
he is not prisoner; other details on session; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Army announces it will try Sgt D Mitchell on charges of assault with intent to
murder in connection with alleged massacre by US troops of S Vietnamese
civilians in '68 at Songmy; announces trial will be open to pub; notes mil judge
will be authorized to close portions of it; previously announced ct-martial will
be held to try Mitchell's platoon leader, Lt W L Calley Jr; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 105 words

S Vietnamese House of Reprs, by narrow majority and after 2 days of boisterous
debate, votes that 3 members (Tran Ngoc Chau, Hoang Ho and Pham The Truc) are
guilty of engaging in pro-Communist activities; vote constitutes limited victory
for Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, who originally charged 3 with Communist affiliations
and asked House to remove their immunity from prosecution; House action leaves
immunity intact; Nguyen Van Thieu spokesman says Govt will try again next wk to
muster necessary votes for impeachment of 3; about 50 opposition reprs leave
hall and denounce vote; other details; group of opposition members illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 8

LENGTH: 38 words

S Vietnamese militant Buddhist faction pub account of alleged massacre
containing charges that almost 600 people were killed; says it will seek
$125-million in compensation from US Govt for victims; US officials decline
comment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 45 words

US troops kill 16 enemy in sharp clash near Cambodian border; enemy shells 12
targets; Vietcong's 3-day New Yr's truce ends; US B-52s resume raids; US command
says there were 115 enemy attacks on allied forces during 1-day allied truce;
repts 6 Amers and 167 enemy killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 14 words

S Vietnamese servicemen and civil servants to receive bonus for lunar new yr
(Tet)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Comment on S Vietnamese House vote against 3 members and Pres Nguyen Van Thieu's
efforts against opposition

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Comment on N Vietnamese mil strategy shift recently outlined by Min Vo Nguyen
Giap; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 57 words

US command repts significant increase in enemy activity in northernmost mil
region; 2 Amers killed, 18 wounded in 3 ground attacks; 12 civilians killed, 72
injured in enemy shelling of 2 refugee camps near Anhoa; US helicopter downed in
Mekong Delta, all 4 crewmen killed; activity in northernmost region discussed;
other action reptd; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 129 words

S Vietnamese Sen adopts resolution describing alleged massacre as 'isolated act'
by Amer unit and not US policy; declines to label incident as a massacre or even
a killing; refuses to assign ultimate responsibility for incident to Pres Nguyen
Van Thieu, as proposed by Sen Tran Van Don; calls on Govt to provide better
security for civilians living in insecure areas and to improve coordination
between S Vietnamese and Amer mil commands so that such incidents do not occur
again; resolution seen as victory for Nguyen Van Thieu; charges against Govt by
Tran Van Don noted; several Sens say they consider Tran Van Don's allegations
more of an effort to embarrass Nguyen Van Thieu than to shed light on incident;
some conclusions in rept made by com under Tran Van Don noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

Some specific instances of Vietcong terrorism noted; Vietcong terrorists have
killed 32,000 S Vietnamese civilians in 9 yrs, have wounded 129,000 and
kidnapped 60,000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 6 words

Group of S Vietnamese recruits illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 41 words

Defections by people with connections with Vietcong dropped sharply in Dec to
less than 1/2 number of those who switched sides in Oct; 47,023 persons reptdly
turned themselves over to S Vietnamese officials in '69; listed '68 number is
18,171

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 56 words

Enemy gunners down 3 Amer helicopters in new fighting near Danang; 45 enemy
killed in fighting, 18 Amers wounded; Amer officials reveal savage N Vietnamese
attack on heavily fortified USMC bn hq 26 mi S of Danang; 13 marines and 38
enemy killed, 63 marines wounded; 2 civilians reptd wounded in enemy shelling of
Danang air base; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 53 words

New fighting reptd near Danang and Cambodian border; field repts say enemy tries
to maneuver into position for attacks on allied bases in new phase of
winter-spring offensive; 39 enemy killed near Tamky; 5 Amers killed, 16 wounded
in same battle; 2 more US helicopters downed; 32 enemy killed near Cambodian
border; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 129 words

A T Rambo, former dir of private research project concerning refugees made by
Human Sciences Research Inc in '66, says his interviewers turned up evidence
that S Korean forces murdered 'hundreds' of S Vietnamese civilians while on
tactical duty in Phuyen Prov; says he was ordered by Amer Army officer to stop
making inquiries and not to mention allegations in rept; says his interviewers
were so angered that they wanted to mount protest, but he persuaded them that
matter should be handled 'through regular channels'; says he submitted rept, but
has heard nothing of it since; Pentagon spokesman confims Defense Dept
commissioned study, but says rept has not been rendered; Rambo says he has heard
that Rand Corp study confirms his own research; corp spokesman denies this

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 67 words

US troops, supported by tanks, arty and air strikes, kill 109 enemy in 2 days of
fighting near Tayninh; 2 Amers killed, 10 wounded; 1 US helicopter downed; US
marines kill 8 enemy in northernmost mil region; 2 more US helicopters downed; S
Vietnamese troops kill 19 enemy near Quangngai, kill 26 in Mekong Delta; US
repts enemy covered its retreat from position near Tayninh by using tear gas;
maps

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 35 words

2 Army medics tell mil investigators that Amer troops fired into village for
target practice last June and killed S Vietnamese civilians; Army officials
acted after incident was disclosed by Repr Van Deerlin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 76, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

Sen E J McCarthy, visiting USSR, attends play at Taganka Theather based on poems
of A Voznesensky, Moscow; discusses writing and poetry with Voznesensky and
theater dir Y Lyubimov; Voznesensky says Russian poets have an advantage because
of country's cultural tradition; McCarthy sees performance of Antiworld; visits
N Vietnamese Embassy to talk about need for making known names of US prisoners

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

US troops continue to apply pressure in Tayninh Prov; 15 enemy killed in area;
61 were killed yesterday; map; 1 Amer and 4 S Koreans killed in helicopter crash
at Danang; 3 other Amers and 18 Koreans injured; Amer machine gunner taking aim
during battle at Nuibaden illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 16 words

Sen McCarthy confs in Paris with Philip Habib and Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh, Vietcong
delegation head

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

Thai Army Comdr repts 16 terrorists, believed to be N Vietnamese, attacked Ubol
air base at which Amer Air Force personnel is based, wounded 1 Amer airman; 6
terrorists killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 75 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says he expects to announce reorganization of S Vietnamese
armed forces later this yr, informal news conf marking S Vietnamese Govt's
declared victory over enemy forces around Special Forces camps of Buprang and
Duclap in '69; says move will involve territorial forces and redeployment of
some units; says increase in regional forces and provincial militia is planned;
links reorganization to expected change in enemy's strategy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

Army's investigation of Songmy incident widened to include 13 soldiers and 18
former soldiers, 5 more men than were previously known to be under scrutiny;
Mitchell to be ordered to face ct-martial on charge of committing assault with
intent to murder 8-yr-old Vietnamese male

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 15 words

Col Dang Toa, chief of staff of N Vietnamese Army's 2d Div, defects to S
Vietnamese side

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

S Vietnamese student says in '66 he interviewed at least 100 refugees who told
him stories of indiscriminate killings and destruction by S Vietnamese soldiers
in Phuyen Prov; says he and 7 other students were hired by Rambo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

N Vietnamese bns overwhelm Govt force, capture strategic hill on Plaine des
Jarres

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

Vietcong guerrillas kill 16 Vietnamese and wound 21 in attack on hamlet near
Songmy; 1 Amer killed, 1 wounded in assault

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

Wives of 4 missing Amer fliers fly to Laos to seek assistance of N Vietnamese
and Pathet Lao officials in obtaining information; Moscow radio says broadcasts
to US will include messages from POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Comment on recent Ha Van Lau statements and N Vietnamese stand; lr suggests more
democracy and other reforms as antidote to violence

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 62, Column 5

LENGTH: 52 words

S Vietnamese output rise attributed partly to increasing use of high-yield,
'miracle' rice IR 8-5, which was grown on 6% of rice land in '69; Pres Nguyen
Van Thieu land reform bill expected to become law in '70; under bill, farmers
would become owners of land they now till; landlords currently own 75% of farms

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Col J M Jennings killed by Vietcong sharpshooter while flying in observation
helicopter in Quangtri Prov

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Gen ct-martial acquits Capt R W Poolaw of murder of N Vietnamese POW; another
ct-martial opens to try Lt F B Bonvillian on similar charge; judge postpones
argument of case until March 2; no plea entered, but defendant's atty says
Bonvillian will plead not guilty; details on both cases; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Defense wins 6-wk delay in ct-martial of Sgt B A Knerr, charged with murdering S
Vietnamese man last Sept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 94, Column 7

LENGTH: 21 words

Army tells Repr L Van Deerlin it is investigating charges that US inf co used S
Vietnamese village for 'target practice'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 16 words

Vietcong attack on S Vietnamese troops delays bicycle race being staged by S
Vietnamese Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 27 words

7-man S Vietnamese delegation, led by Sen Tran Van Don, arrives in Israel to
study tech aspects of Israeli defense forces; Tran Van Don stresses mission is
private

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Article on effects of stepped-up enemy activity in Mekong Delta; pacification
has been slowed; US mil official estimates 8,000 of enemy have made their way
into delta in last 8 mos; casualties among S Vietnamese troops in area have
risen sharply; some allied moves against enemy effort noted; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 11 words

US officials debate impact of Vietnamization on S Vietnamese econ

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 42 words

US command repts increased action by both sides in all 4 mil zones; enemy shells
29 targets; 175 enemy killed in various actions; 9 Amers killed, 5 wounded; 7 S
Vietnamese wounded; some details on action; B-52s raid N Vietnamese supply
depots in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Testimony in '68 murder trial of Capt J J McCarthy Jr, who was convicted of
killing S Vietnamese natl, says US used Cambodian sect dedicated to overthrow of
Cambodian Govt for covert missions in Cambodia in '67; McCarthy lawyers file
motions with mil rev ct charging Army deliberately ordered 1 prospective witness
not to show up at trial and failed to compel appearance of 2 others; make other
charges; McCarthy illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

Allied hq repts half dozen clashes ranging from Mekong Delta to areas near
Cambodian border; 59 enemy killed, 3 Amers and 5 S Vietnamese killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 41 words

Sec R C Seamans discloses plans to double combat strength of S Vietnamese Air
Force in less than 2 yrs; lauds quality of S Vietnamese airmen and gives most
explicit account to date of air force's role in program to Vietnamize war; plans
detailed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnamese civilians cite slayings by Korean troops, but accounts are often
contradictory and cannot be confirmed or disproved independently; 1 case
confirmed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

US plans evacuation of thousands of civilians in Plaine des Jarres in
expectation of counteroffensive by N Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces no later
than mid-Feb; 10,000 to 15,000 people, settled in Plaine des Jarres in '69
during fighting near Xiengkhouang, will be moved; Govt puts number of homeless
at 600,000, over 1/5th of entire population; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 9 words

S Vietnamese and US troops during joint operation illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 28 words

4 Amers killed, 4 wounded in downing of US helicopter by enemy forces near Hue;
enemy attacks 2 US mil bases; 60 enemy killed by S Vietnamese in long battle
near Camlo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Former US aide L H Gelb lr sees shift in N Vietnamese position; says US should
not consider talks a forgotten chapter of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Ed on former Acting Deputy Asst Sec L H Gelb lr, which sees shift in N
Vietnamese position at peace talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

S Korean command acknowledges 4 Vietnamese civilians were killed by Korean
marines last April in incident S of Danang, but says deaths were accidental

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 61 words

S Vietnamese Govt says its troops will observe 24-hr cease-fire for Tet; Us
command says its troops will comply; more than 500 enemy, 21 Amers and 20 S
Vietnamese killed in action over weekend; make heaviest raids in more than a wk;
US command repts Amer troop strength increases for 2d successive wk to 472,500;
says increase reflects normal flow of replacemtnts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 98 words

Color of Vietcong flag becomes issue in Chicago 7 trial; Chicago Today reporter
J Murray, testifying as rebuttal witness for Govt, says he saw Vietcong flag
carried by demonstrators during 1968 Dem Natl Conv; incorrectly identifies flag,
which sets off clash between Attnys Kunstler and Foran; in other testimony, he
corroborates police version of events; concedes that many of Police Dept's
top-ranking officers are his friends and that this is essential to his work as
police reporter; Kunstler tells ct Abernathy is unable to return to Chicago to
testify; reads Abernathy statement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnamese policeman wins medal of hon and natl recognition for refusing $10
bribe offered by Chinese man in whose house 2 unregistered young men were living

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 74 words

Allies resume offensive operations at end of their 24-hr cease-fire; US command
repts 112 enemy-initiated incidents; Vietcong cease-fire remains in effect;
Vietcong accuses allies of violating cease-fire; allies rept 133 enemy killed in
cease-fire encounters; at least 3 Amers and 6 S Vietnamese reptd killed; US
marine killed, 62 wounded when grenade explodes at Danang enlisted men's club;
investigation of incident is aimed at Amers; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 63 words

Dem Policy Council will be asked at forthcoming meeting to advocate withdrawal
of all Amer troops within 18 mos; foreign policy subcom unanimously adopted at
closed meeting on Jan 31 '69 draft proposal sharply critical of Nixon Adm's
conduct of war, its relations with S Vietnamese Govt and its handling of Paris
talks; some com members noted; details on draft proposal; text

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

USMC officials say explosion in Danang club may have been set off by Amer

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 22 words

Police intercept truck carrying enemy equipment into Danang; S Vietnamese forces
uncover large enemy weapons cache in Longkhanh Prov

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32, Column 6

LENGTH: 80 words

Collectors Club of NY 75th anniv exhibition, known as ANPHILEX LTD (Anniv
Philatelic Exhibition), to be held in NYC, Nov 1-7, '71; 4 multicolored
triangular items illus birds issued; comment on F Staff's book The Valentine and
Its Origins; Canada will issue block of 4 stamps on Mar 18 to commem fair;
stamps, which reflect Canadian participation, described; Amer Airlines offers
special postal cachet commeng inaugural flight of Boeing 747 between NYC and
Calif on Mar 2; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 9, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 30 words

Australian entertainers who were performing at Danang club say they saw grenades
lobbed from each side of club; say 2d Amer-made grenade did not explode; other
details on incident

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 13 words

Defense Sec Laird and Gen Wheeler illus before leaving US for S Vietnamese tour

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 40 words

US hq repts USN river patrol boat, which had been moving along Mekong River,
strayed in dark into Cambodian waters last wk and was seized by Cambodian
forces; vessel and 5-man crew are being held; US reptdly seeks release of crew
and boat

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Pretrial hearings on defense motions to dismiss case against Lt Calley on
charges of killing Vietnamese civilians resume; Maj Gen O C Talbott and 2 other
Ft Benning officers deny that Nixon and Pentagon influenced decision to bring
Calley before gen ct-martial; Latimer says he is still hopeful of proving
'command influence'; testimony of Col R M Lathrop and Brig Gen O E Davis noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 9 words

US helicopter crashes at Danang, 12 men aboard killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Amer staff in Mekong Delta dist consists of 1 civilian adviser, who holds
feeling of self-reliance in dist has grown since departure of other Amers last
yr; dist is comparatively wealthy and is 1 of most secure areas in country;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 24 words

Mil ct orders Tran Ngac Chau and Hoang Ho to face questions on alleged
pro-Communist activities; their wives say their whereabouts are not known

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 10 words

S Vietnamese Govt frees 176 POWs to mark lunar new yr (Tet)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Capt W R Hill, who signed Vietnamese civilian murder charges against Lt Calley,
testifies he led 'sort of rebellion' among Ft Benning's young law officers last
Sept when it appeared to them that Nixon Adm and Pentagon officials might be
trying to cover up alleged massacre; says he urged Col L D Marlowe to go ahead
with trial in defiance of Pentagon stop order; his other testimony noted;
Lathrop says he was never told of Pres Nixon's interest in case and that he had
no knowledge that Nixon had revd case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 46 words

N Vietnamese Paris talks delegation chief Xuan Thuy scores US policy; confirms
there will be no secret talks as long as Habib remains acting head of US
delegation; former UN aide Mrs O B Lord is rebuffed after seeking apptmt with N
Vietnamese officials in Paris to discuss POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 49 words

Montagnards, with cooperation of S Vietnamese Govt and by legal means, are
taking greater share of responsibility for their own affairs in Phubon Prov in
central highlands; they make up 95% of population; prejudice of S Vietnamese
citizens against montagnards still exists; other details; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 107 words

Lt. Col. Reid W. Kennedy rules Army has jurisdiction to try Lt Calley for murder
of Vietnamese civilians; dismisses argument that Calley can only come under
jurisdiction of S Vietnamese cts; keeps alive motion for dismissal based on
argument that Pres Nixon and leading Pentagon officials exercised 'command
influence'; rules against subpoenaing now of Secs Laird, Resor and Gen
Westmoreland; prosecution surprised at Kennedy's action; Daniel asks if Kennedy
doubts Talbott's testimony; Col J D Kiersey testifies he received orders from
Gen J K Woolnough to hold up any decision to discharge Calley; other details on
hearing; Kennedy illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

13 US marines killed, 12 wounded in enemy ambush near Danang; 6 enemy killed;
other recent action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 90 words

Lt Col Kennedy sets tentative date in mid-May for Lt Calley ct-martial on
charges of killing Vietnamese civilians; hears defense argument that fair trial
will be impossible because of publicity; announces attempts to empanel fair and
impartial jury will start May 18; to hold final pretrial hearing May 15 on
motion concerning Pres Nixon and other officials; details on Latimer's plea
concerning pretrial publicity; Latimer cites statements by Meadlo, Bernhardt and
others; Daniel attacks dismissal motion; Calley, Latimer and Raby illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 8

LENGTH: 62 words

Army charges Capt T K Willingham with unpremeditated murder of Vietnamese
civilians in Songmy on March 16, '68; he was scheduled to leave active service 2
days ago, but is retained in Army while charges are investigated to determine
whether he should be ct-martialed; Defense Dept links incident to earlier
charges of mass murder in Songmy on same day by different inf unit

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 68 words

Laotian Govt repts elements of 2 N Vietnamese divs have driven Govt forces from
several important positions and have advanced into NE quadrant of Plaine de
Jarres, 2d full day of large-scale fighting; repts Laotian defenders, though
supported by US air strikes, have been driven from strategic crossroads at
village of Nong Pet on NE rim of plain; says Govt forces have repulsed 2d attack
at Xiengkhouang; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 16 words

Enemy downs 2 more US helicopters, injuring 7 Amers and 16 S Vietnamese;
scattered action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 73 words

Willingham's atty R McKinley says Willingham is accused of killing 20 Vietnamese
civilians, telephone int; says co under Willingham's command sustained 'heavy
fire from numerous rifles' on search-and-destroy mission near Songmy; says
Willingham denies he killed anyone; charge against Willingham of murder 'in
violation of the Laws and Customs of War', in addition to charge under mil
justice code, complicates legal difficulties of case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 41 words

Article on US AID project to improve genetic bloodlines of Vietnamese pigs by
crossbreeding them with 510 imported US purebred swine and to teach Vietnamese
farmers modern pig-raising techniques; sharp decline in swine production since
'64 noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 41 words

S Vietnamese Govt to open entertainment center offering legalized gambling and
dancing in effort to close budget deficit; Pres Nguyen Van Thieu approves
project, authorizes Min Tran Nguon Phieu to begin accepting bids from potential
operators

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

8 US soldiers killed in ambush by N Vietnamese soldiers near Cambodian border; 2
US tanks destroyed, 30 Amers wounded, 31 enemy killed; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 22 words

Sp 4 R Gearity, accused of shooting to death 14-yr-old S Vietnamese boy and
allegedly attempting to shoot another, to be ct-martialed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 41 words

Repts attacks on Plaine des Jarres have been repulsed, doubts N Vietnamese have
begun an offensive; repts 80 N Vietnamese killed in 2 battles; 7 captured N
Vietnamese soldiers say no Pathet Lao comrades participated in battle on plain,
news conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

Time Inc asks Boston Fed Dist Ct to dismiss $110-million libel suit filed by
Capt E Medina against Time magazine for story on his role in alleged massacre of
Vietnamese civilians

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              260 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

S Vietnamese troops, with aid of US firepower, kill 145 enemy and capture 12 of
enemy bn apparently planning to attack Danang; kill 37 more enemy soldiers
nearby; 4 S Vietnamese killed, 26 wounded; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              261 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 18 words

Sp 4 R Gearity and Lt J B Duffy go on trial before separate cts-martial on
charges of killing 2 S Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              262 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7

LENGTH: 20 words

N Vietnamese troops reptdly have driven Laotian Govt troops from more then 20
positions in and around Plaine des Jarres

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              263 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 13 words

Accidental S Vietnamese shelling of Bienhoa air base kills 3 Amers, wounds 20

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              264 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 42 words

Pacification aide J P Vann says he has 'become increasingly convinced' since '68
that allied pacification objectives will be achieved, Sen com; says attitude of
S Vietnamese population has changed; Sens Case and Fulbright comment on
testimony; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              265 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

US B-52s continue attacks against suspected N Vietnamese supply depots

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              266 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 45 words

About 6,000 N Vietnamese soldiers, with tanks in lead, seize Plaine des Jares,
Laos airstrip and control nearly all of strategic plain; Govt troops, mostly Meo
tribesmen, continue to withdraw toward west; US officials say no Amers were
involved in ground fighting; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              267 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

4 Amers killed, 28 wounded in clash in Queson Valley area S of Danang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              268 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

US formally apologizes to Cambodian Govt and provides payments totaling $11,400
for 35 persons killed or wounded last Nov in air strikes directed at Vietcong
positions in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              269 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 11 words

Comment on Sen Foreign Relations com hearings and Phoenix Operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              270 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 91, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

Ford Foundation makes 2 grants totaling $785,000 to Harvard U for Vietnamese
studies chair and studies in Chinese law; makes grants totaling over
$2.5-million for internatl research, with special emphasis on Asia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              271 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 82 words

S Vietnamese defense officials plan major shift of village-based professional
soldiers into contested areas, leaving defense of villages considered relatively
secure to unpaid local militiamen and police; planners say many soldiers who are
now tied down with territorial defense will be freed to conduct offensive
operations against guerrilla groups where enemy remains threat; move will allow
S Vietnamese main force to direct more of its efforts against main enemy units;
details on shift

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              272 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 3

LENGTH: 59 words

Antiwar students open campaign against Southern Ill U Vietnamese studies center;
contend US Govt will use center's expertise to perpetuate US involvement in war;
univ officials say they will not allow encroachment on acad freedom by pol
agitators; antiwar students are aided by Amer Friends Service Com organizers;
details on center and opposition to it

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              273 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 58 words

Pathet Lao demands GB and USSR, as co-chmn at Geneva conf on Laos, act to end US
bombings; Muong Soui and its airstrip captured by N Vietnamese; Laotian and
other officials rept strength of N Vietnamese attacking plain was exaggerated;
put number of soldiers at only 400; drop 1,500 tons of bombs along trail in 7th
consecutive day of heavy bombing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              274 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7

LENGTH: 80 words

Tran Ngoc Chau makes surprise appearance in Natl Assembly and announces he will
stage sit-in there until his trial ends; trial postponed for reasons Govt does
not disclose; Tran Ngoc Chau says he and his bro were discussing peace formulas
and other issues, with knowledge of Amer intelligence agents, when their talks
were broken off by his bro's arrest; repeats and elaborates on previously made
assertions that CIA agents knew about and encouraged meetings with his bro, ints

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              275 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 116 words

S Vietnamese police seize Tran Ngoc Chau in his Natl Assembly sanctuary and
arrest him; Govt spokesman concedes ct appeal should entitle him to freedom
pending decision; witnesses say police knocked Tran Ngoc Chau to floor;
opposition elements express outrage at affair; 16 lower house members term
arrest an illegal and oppressive measure; details on case; Fulbright scores
arrest; scores Nixon Adm for not coming to defense of Tran Ngoc Chau; Maj Gen E
G Lansdale lauds Tran Ngoc Chau; Fulbright cites recent testimony to Sen com by
US aide J P Vann that Tran Ngoc Chau is not Communist; former US aide D Elsberg
charges arrest signals beginning of new dictatorship; lauds Tran Ngoc Chau;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              276 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 52 words

5 US marines arrested and charged with murdering 11 S Vietnamese women and 5
children during action on Feb 19 around hamlet of Sonthang village 27 mi S of
Danang; names of marines withheld pending notification of their families;
investigation scheduled; US spokesman depicts area as heavily infiltrated by
enemy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              277 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 9 words

S Vietnamese Govt grants Tran Ngoc Chau a new trial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              278 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 42 words

Vietnam-bound ship, delayed when dockers refused to handle mil cargo as protest
against Vietnam war, arrives Vungtau S Vietnam with shipment, including
1,632,000 cans of beer, after Govt commissioned freighter into Navy and used
sailors to load ship

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              279 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 38 words

Business Execs Move for Vietnam Peace charges rejection of its antiwar messages
either as pvt service messages or paid ad by WTOP is denial of free speech and
violation of FCC fairness doctrine; files formal complaint with FCC

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              280 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 2, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 4

LENGTH: 66 words

Natl and local antiwar groups lay plans for another yr of pol activism despite
lack of natl leader on whom they can focus their energies and financial
problems; many peace-oriented candidates said to face difficult election fights;
S Brown discusses plans of Vietnam Moratorium Com; plans of other groups noted;
Repr Lowenstein's office has become 'mecca' for antiwar activists; Lowenstein
por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              281 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 1

LENGTH: 81 words

Ed, noting Sen com hearings on Vietnam War and rept to com on war, says shifting
by Nixon of emphasis from negotiation toward Vietnamization as preferred
mechanism to achieve Amer disengagement raises many questions; says apparent
progress in war appears, in fact, to reflect shift in Communist tactics from
large-unit mil offensives back to small-unit guerrilla activity and strategy of
'protracted war'; says shift is confirmed by Le Duan's s; urges re-evalution of
Vietnamization

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              282 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 8

LENGTH: 66 words

Pres Nixon, in foreign policy rev, reveals intensive studies conducted by Adm in
S Vietnam and private repts from area have led him to see 'tangible progress' in
Vietnamization; warns past US claims of progress 'have often proved too
optimistic'; expresses caution concerning assessments of situation; says special
Vietnam study group has been formed under his special asst Prof H A Kissinger

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              283 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

Laotian troops reptdly have been driven from last remaining positions on plain
and are being pursued by enemy into hills near Ban Thang, 8 mi from airfield;
top Laotian officer says garrison retreated in confusion with 1/3 of its force
dead or missing; sources in Saigon say US fighter-bombers flew over 200 sorties
trying to stay N Vietnamese advance; Western diplomatic sources see loss of
plain involving US even deeper into Laotian war; Sen Mansfield scores escalation
by US; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              284 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 25 words

Unusual methods used by US brigade commanded by Brig Gen H S Cunningham in
providing security for pacification in Bongson area of S Vietnam discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              285 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 82 words

James Reston on continued indifference and feeling of helplessness about
problems and outrages despite all the 'noisy' indignation and defiance of
demonstrators, officials, preachers, judges, teachers and parents; Reston says
Vietnam war is longest in Amer history and has taken 40,044 Amer lives in 8 yrs;
wounded 263,003 in 8 yrs; notes rept that US casualties for wk are lowest in 3
yrs; J Reston notes State Dept rept on infiltration; notes Time (pub) poll on
Vietnam atrocity charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              286 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 12; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

All industries, except defense industries, optimistic about outlook following
end of Vietnam war; defense industries concerned about conversion problem when
Vietnam war ends; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              287 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 5

LENGTH: 95 words

Rev M L King's birthday to be observed, NYC, with special programs and memorial
services by many orgns; city's pub and parochial schools to be closed; UFT has
provided special kits for ps students which are based on important events in
King's life; position of retail stores on marking birthday is unclear; Natl
Urban League dir Young urges Fed, state and local govts to observe Jan 15 as
official holiday; NY Vietnam Moratorium Com announces at joint news conf with
city com for observance of M L King Jr's birthday that Jan 15 will be official
moratorium day for Jan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              288 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

Lr from W A Tidwell Jr sees Communists backing Amer opponents of Vietnam war to
make it difficult for US to intervene militarily on behalf of Israel holds
USSR's policy depends on continuation of US 'peace' campaign

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              289 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 40 words

Sen E J McCarthy campaign aide Samuel W Brown testifies that his staff and
antiwar protest leaders discussed possibility of calling off demonstrations if
on Mon or Tues of conv wk McCarthy appeared to have good chance of defeating
Humphrey

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              290 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 94, Column 0

LENGTH: 18 words

W Goodman lr says 3 captions in layout of his Nov 30 article on New Mobilization
Com are not quite correct

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              291 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 70, Column 1; (GP)

LENGTH: 31 words

Gallup Poll finds inflation topped only by Vietnam war among most important
problems facing Amer people; yr ago inflation was topped by Vietnam war, race
relations and crime; table

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              292 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 68 words

Sen McGovern charges Pentagon has dispatched Maj J N Rowe to attack him and
other Sens for criticizing Vietnam policy, Sen subcon hearing; charges pol
motivation; Fulbright scores Army program that provides Vietnam veterans as pub
speakers in support of war; criticism centers on s made by Sgt C V Dewees on Jan
15 in Ark; Pentagon spokesmen comment on statements by both Sens; Repr Dickinson
defends Rowe

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              293 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

Nixon attends annual Pres prayer breakfast; State Dept urges N Vietnam to allow
mail privileges to US prisoners in Laos and S Vietnam similar to those the
Communists allegedly are granting to prisoners in N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              294 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 110 words

Leading Nixon Adm officials are confident that mil situation in S Vietnam is now
good enough to permit uninterrupted withdrawal of most US ground combat forces
over next 18 mos; believe N Vietnam is unable and perhaps unwilling to mount
kind of mil challenge that would seriously delay planned troop reductions; Sec
Laird and Gen Wheeler, who leave US for tour of war zone, will consider whether
monthly withdrawals can be increased; pub optimism about war said to be out of
fashion in Washington; policymakers remain skeptical about ability of S Vietnam
to cope with major mil and pol challenges; are concerned about several
developments; their views discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              295 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 36, Column 0

LENGTH: 33 words

Lr, commenting on Nov 30 articles by W Goodman and T Meehan on Nov 15 antiwar
demonstrations in Washington, says Goodman seems biased against radical leaders
of New Mobilization Com; Goodman replies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              296 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 66 words

Group of assocs and ex-campaign workers of Sen McCarthy, H H Humphrey and late R
F Kennedy form orgn called Referendum '70 to make '70 election referendum on
Vietnam war; they will use their expertise to elect Dem, Repub and ind
candidates who share their concern over war and other problems; Prof Galbraith
is hon chmn; other members include F G Dutton, R N Goodwin, Mayor C Evers, G
Steinem

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              297 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 80 words

Vietnam Moratorium Com announces it will sponsor nationwide 'taxpayer rallies'
on April 15 and will start campaign service to help pol candidates opposed to
war; says it will concentrate for next 3 mos on attempts to convince Amers that
Pres Nixon policy will not end the war; focus on issue of mil spending as cause
of high taxes; says 15th of each mo will be designated as peace action day; says
it does not expect 'major events' in next 3 mos; student leader S Brown comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              298 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 23 words

Bklyn Fed Dist Judge throws out suit by Walter G Pietsch, who sought to have
Vietnam war declared unconst; holds ct lacks jurisdiction

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              299 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 22 words

Sweden allocates $775,000 to IRC for humanitarian aid to Vietnam; orgn will
decide how sum is to be divided between N and S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              300 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 15 words

B-52s press raids on Ho Chi Minh Trail despite presence of enemy surface-to-air
missiles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              301 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

Pro-Communist Laotian Patriotic Front opens information bur in Hanoi

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              302 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 3

LENGTH: 14 words

Lr says lesson of Songmy is that Vietnam war is too important to be left to gens

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              303 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Nassau County Exec Nickerson requests investigations by NYS Supreme Ct Appellate
Div and NYS Atty Gen into treatment of Mrs Hubner

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              304 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 31 words

Vice Pres Agnew, in Auckland, NZ, says allies must stand firm on Vietnam war and
not be swayed by antiwar factions; antiwar demonstrations staged; he prepares to
leave for Honolulu

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              305 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 49, Column 1

LENGTH: 137 words

Forum held, Syracuse U; NYS Gov, Sen, Atty Gen aspirants attend; Dem Sen
aspirant O'Dwyer charges Gov Rockefeller's series of Latin-Amer fact-finding
missions for Pres Nixon produced little more than 'greetings from dictators',
lauds Goodell for Vietnam antiwar efforts; W S Greenwalt, who seeks to unseat
NYS Atty Gen Lefkowitz, charges Lefkowitz's reputation as friend of consumer is
founded mainly on pub relations; Dem gubernatorial aspirant County Exec
Nickerson scores S Mall project as wasteful; Dem gubernatorial aspirant H J
Samuels scores Legis operation as 'disaster,' charging there is frequent
conflict of interest, inefficient staff operations by pol appointees; urges
unicameral system for longer terms; opponent Dean A K Campbell disagrees;
William vanden Heuvel, Dean A K Campbell participate in forum

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              306 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 118 words

Many Congressmen, returning to Washington for 91st Cong 2d session, rept
inflation is voters chief concern; Sens E Kennedy, Cook, Hughes and Repr
Galifianakis comment; econ dissatisfaction replaces Vietnam war as principal
complaint of voters, foreshadowing '70 Cong election keyed to inflation and
recession; Dems said to be in basic grudging agreement that Nixon has succeeded
in easing pub concern over war during his 1st yr in office; Reprs and Sens rept
their constituents are not concerned that econ slowdown will cause sharp
unemployment rise; Sens Eagleton and Saxe see crime as major domestic problem;
Sens Percy and Nelson rept environmental improvement is most important issue to
their constituents

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              307 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 3

LENGTH: 6 words

Lr on 'illegality' of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              308 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 110 words

US Sup Ct rules Selective Service System lacks authority to accelerate induction
of men who turn in draft cards to protest Vietnam war; overturns '67 conviction
of D E Gutknecht who rejected order to rept for induction 5 days after he threw
draft card at feet of Fed marshal during antiwar protest, Minneapolis; opinion
holds system of 'delinquency' regulations used by Selective Service System since
World War I was not authorized by Selective Service Law; Ct did not specifically
rule on draft bds' power to take away deferments from those turning in cards and
to classify them 1-A; Gutnecht calls decision 'ltd victory for draft resistance
movement'; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              309 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 4

LENGTH: 105 words

Dem Party Minn; youthful supporters of Sen McCarthy who won control of party
apparatus in Minneapolis-St Paul in '68 seen weak and disorganized now; purge of
anti-McCarthy and pro-Vietnam war elements deprived party of experienced
organizers, is linked to '69 election losses and problems of '70 local
cmapaigns; '69 mayoral election defeat of Dem incumbent Hegstrom recalled,
linked to party loss of experienced organizers and split with labor in wake of
purge by Sen McCarthy supporters who won control in '68; supporters back R North
for Mayor; face counteroffensive by Mayor Byrne, other supporters of ex-Vice
Pres Humphrey

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              310 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 24, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 78 words

State Dept officials rept N Vietnam continues mil build-up on edge of Plaine des
Jarres, has about 15,000 soldiers apparently ready to attack forces of Maj Gen
Vang Pao, leader of clandestine army trained and supplied by US; transcript of
Dec 15 exec session indicates that US is spending about $190-million in mil and
econ aid to Laos in '70; N Vietnam and Pathet Lao soldiers reptdly gain ground
against Laotian defenders in 3-pronged drive to take Plaine des Jarres

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              311 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 42 words

Brit Prime Min Wilson in Ottawa on way to NYC and Washington; illus saying
goodbye to wife at London airport; 3 policemen injured, 10 persons arrested
outside 10 Downing St in demonstration against visit by Vietnam war protesters;
NYC itinerary; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              312 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 2

LENGTH: 120 words

Howard Samuels announces candidacy for NYS Dem gubernatorial nomination, news
conf; illus with family; plans $1.4-million primary campaign, noting opportunity
is 1st he has had to appeal directly to voters; has twice lost bids in party
convs; assets, liabilities discussed; latter include coolness of county leaders,
resentment of some liberals for past support of Johnson Adm Vietnam policies;
Samuels rejects Nixon Adm plan for Vietnam withdrawal, says he erred in not
voting for peace plank at Dem natl conv in '68; vows to remain in race even
without endorsement of State Dem Com or New Dem Coalition; develops heavy TV
drive, aided by J Napolitan; he, Nickerson, Mackell, vanden Heuvel s, Village
Ind Dem (NYC) forum

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              313 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 58 words

Sec G W Romney disclaims ambition to make US Sen race but says he or wife might
run if Repubs cannot agree on 'consensus' candidate to oppose Sen Hart; party
leaders to meet; says his remark about having been 'brainwashed' on Vietnam war,
believed by some politicians to have killed his chances of winning Repub
nomination, was service to nation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              314 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 3

LENGTH: 56 words

New NYS Dem Coalition forum for pol aspirants, Albany; Rosenthal, McCarthy,
Ottinger, Sorensen, O'Dwyer score Nixon Adm on Vietnam war, other issues; scores
Sen Goodell's 'late conversion' to antiwar movement; Repr Rosenthal says Goodell
deserves no credit for his stand on war; Nickerson, Samuels, vanden Heuvel s;
Greenwalt, Walinsky s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              315 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 103 words

UN Assn of USA panel of prominent citizens under A J Goldberg proposes 5-point
program to improve manner in which Pres, Cong and concerned citizens take part
in policy formulation following Vietnam war; proposals include creation of Joint
Cong Com on Foreign Policy, a natl polling comm to determine pub attitudes and
nonpartisan comm to help define policy goals; annual Pres message to Cong on
policy also suggested; communications media urged to offer in-depth coverage of
foreign affairs; panel includes E W Barrett, J C Daly, J Dickey, G Peck, B
Roper, W Ruder; Prof D A Kay is project dir; other members listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              316 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 99 words

W Sullivan comment on concern of delegates to Amer Physical Soc annual meeting
with Sen Mansfield amendment to defense appropriation bill calling for mandatory
end to mil support for basic research; present budget squeeze will force
elimination of research programs, which will not be taken over by other
agencies; discussion of paper delivered by Dr S Schwartz, which included pledge
against war research; pledge text; Dr L Alvarez recalls similar pub opinion in
GB in '33; roots of acad-mil alienation seen resting in abhorrence of Vietnam
war and unacceptable nature of modern warfare; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              317 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 530 words

Pres Nixon, presenting fiscal '71 budget to Cong, says it 'begins necessary
process of reordering natl priorities'; Message; budget combines cuts in defense
and space with start of new soc programs in 7 major areas; Nixon says that for
1st time in 20 yrs, Fed Govt will spend more money on human resource programs
than on defense; says budget shows significantly different set of priorities
than those contained in Pres Johnson's last budget; asks $71.8-billion for
defense; sum is about 46% of total natl budget; quotations indicating Nixon's
domestic-oriented priorities cited including $310-million to improve law
enforcement measures, $764-million appropriation for expanded food aid programs,
$352-million appropriation for Fed manpower training programs; proposes 1st-qr
payment to states and localities under sharing plan of $275-million; calls for
rise in Fed spending on environmental problems; Nixon urges Cong enact
additional user charges in transportation field; calls for no new taxes in
fiscal '71; budget revenue estimate anticipates Cong approval of $700-million in
'user charges' and $1.2-billion gained by adm speed-up in collection of some
existing taxes; budget is 1st to contain projection of revenues for 4 yrs; Nixon
implies tax rise would be needed if he were to start any big new programs in
fiscal '72; cites reducing and realigning tax burdens further as future claim on
Fed resources when prudent in light of all other natl priorities; most Repub
members of Cong hail budget, noting sharp cuts in defense spending will afford
greater priority to domestic programs; Mansfield notes Cong may seek to cut
about $5.6-billion from appropriations as it did in fiscal '70 budget; holds new
budget contains 'seed money' for weapons systems that could cost tens of
billions in future yrs; Nixon announces that US will sell $750-million worth of
strategic metals from US natl stockpile; Sec Kennedy pledges Adm will not
request extension of surcharge, which expires at midyear; Nixon budget message
contains projections on impact of new tax reform and reduction law for fiscal
'71-75; Nixon sees mass transit as major area for new initiatives; allocates
$3.1-billion to cover 1st 5 yrs of 12-yr, $10-billion program of urban transit
grants; budget contains no estimate of cost of Vietnam war; Budget Dir Mayo says
true accounting of cost of war proved all but impossible; budget proposes funds
for start of $10-billion water pollution control program; proposes new
environmental Financing Auth to help avoid overstraining munic bond mkt by
$6-billion local share of pollutiion program; Auth will buy local share of
taxable bonds to raise money; urges $500-million appropriation for Nixon's
welfare plan; bases for Nixon's budget include forecast of personnal income rise
of $53-billion in calendar '70 to $800-billion; include forecast of $985-billion
GNP in calendar '70, implying no recession, but slow growth; include forecast of
corp profits before taxes of $89-billion in calendar '70, down $5.3-billion;
Nixon says US foreign aid program will stress reduced role in econ planning for
developing countries while adding to US contributions to internatl insts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              318 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 48 words

Clergy and Laymen Concerned About Vietnam and Fellowship of Reconciliation plan
70 days of fasting in Washington to protest war; protesters, most of whom will
limit fasts to 1-day period, will stand in front of White House from 1st day of
Lent (Feb 11) to last day of Passover (April 27)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              319 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 5

LENGTH: 29 words

Prof R Abelson lr corrects error in Dec 29 account of passage by Amer
Philosophical Assn of resolution on Vietnam war; says passage of resolution was
victory for moderate left

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              320 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 43 words

Article on impact of Vietnam war on ordinary people of Laos; finds most wish for
peace but do not expect it; holds war has not so much transformed life of Laos
as it has deepened existing ills and delayed achievement of real Laotian
nationhood; refugee illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              321 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Repr Brown announces candidacy for Dem US Sen nomination; statement stresses
opposition to Vietnam war and environmental pollution; Tunney charges he refuses
to compromise on such key questions to achieve some legis results

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              322 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 91 words

Nixon reptdly has refused release of anything more than heavily censored version
of Sen subcom transcript of Adm's testimony on US involvement; decision seen in
keeping with his earlier statements that US does bomb Ho Chi Minh trail in Laos;
subcom chmn Symington reptdly has refused to issue such watered-down transcript
because it would mislead pub on US role in Laos; Adm's fears on impact of
disclosures discussed; Sen Gore says he had access to transcript and that it
shows that US participation has been secretly but greatly escalated

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              323 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 78 words

Unorthodox Ash Wednesday service in Washington Methodist ch begins 75-day
antiwar protest from Lent to Passover; group pickets White House; Clergy and
Laymen Concerned About Vietnam says purpose of demonstrations, which include
fasting, is to incorporate 'traditional re-dedication' of Christian and Jewish
fast periods into need for immediate US withdrawal; Revs R R Fernandez and J
Harmon and S Rose begin fasts which will be continued throughout 75-day period;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              324 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 58 words

More US wives get lrs from their husbands proving they are alive and confirming
they are being held as prisoners by N Vietnam; by official count of State Dept
and Pentagon, only 170 of 800 airmen missing or captive in N Vietnam have been
heard from; peace groups are credited with adding 70 names to confirmed list of
POWs since Xmas; other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              325 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 12 words

Lr from Dr A Szent-Gyorgyi scores Vietnam war and Pres Nixon's policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              326 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

Repr Lowenstein to offer to resign if NY Gov Rockefeller will set special
election within 60 days so he can run again; would use occasion as referendum on
Vietnam war, hoping to mobilize antiwar sentiment; argues antiwar forces in Dem
party suffer from 'paralysis of will'; says that with right tactics Dems could
bring enough pressure on Pres Nixon to force speed-up in disengagement;
announces plans in s to New Dem Coalition and in int; has recently been accused
of no longer representing dist views on subject; would probably face Repub Sen
Lent in contest

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              327 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 19 words

Reply to Feb 2 lr says analogy between Vietnam war and US Govt attitude to
Confederacy in US Civil War is tenuous

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              328 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 5

LENGTH: 7 words

Lr urges Dem party act to stop Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              329 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 193 words

Pres (Gates) Comm on an All-Volunteer Armed Force submits rept to Pres Nixon
urging formation of all-volunteer army to replace Selective Service System by
mid-'71, when present draft law expires; urges increasing pay and other fringe
benefits for servicemen in first 2 yrs of service to about $437 a mo; officers
with comparable service time would receive $869; rept confronts virtually every
objection to an all-volunteer force, including arguments that it would
constitute a risk to natl security and consist largely of poor blacks; calls its
proposal feasible and morally correct; rept does not attempt to estimate how
large a force would be needed but puts additional gross cost of well-paid
2.5-million-man force at $3.3-billion for fiscal '71; major obstacles to timing
of plan are continuation of Vietnam war and possibility that Nixon may not wish
to undertake additional expenditure during period of inflationary pressures;
rept recommendations detailed; Nixon meets with comm members, thanks them and
appoints White House team headed by Dr M Anderson to examine rept, check its
findings and feasibility and rept to him on costs; comm members listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              330 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 62, Column 4

LENGTH: 139 words

US Marine Lab acting dir Clark says sludge dumping should be halted at present
site near Ambrose Light because area is within narrow coast band of ocean that
is richest in sea life; holds dumping grounds should be moved to beyond
20-fathom depth, which would mean hauling sludge 30 mi from land; says changing
ground to 'virgin area' farther out will allow scientists to check what happens
from time waste is 1st dumped and possibly enable them to find better way of
handling it; Sen Goodell warns against concentrating on 'sexy, popular issues of
air and water pollution', s, Student Council on Pollution and Environment
meeting, Columbia Univ; notes there are no Fed standards or enforcement
procedures in 'number of vital environmental fields'; holds none of problems
will be solved until mil spending is cut and Vietnam war ended

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              331 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 136 words

Cambodian Govt, in unusual move, insists on examining all incoming and outgoing
diplomatic pouches; move believed intended to forestall an attempt by Communist
China, N Vietnam and Provisional Revolutionary Govt of S Vietnam to introduce
large quantities of illegally held or counterfeit Cambodian currency; most
Western diplomats, including US Embassy in Pnompenh, instruct their capitals to
send no pouches until Mar 7 when inspection measure will be lifted; 3 pouches
that have arrived for US Embassy since curb became effective will be returned to
Bangkok rather than be submitted to Cambodian inspection; persistent but
unconfirmed repts circulating among diplomats say Chinese Embassy is hoarding
large quantities of Cambodian currency for eventual use for its pol ends in
country; US State Dept silent on curb

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              332 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

3 Amers killed, 22 wounded in 4 scattered enemy attacks; B-52s bomb Ho Chi Minh
Trail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              333 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

Official USSR sources take strong exception to Pres Nixon's criticism of USSR
policy in State of World Message, int; score Nixon stand that USSR seeks
predominance in area; hold USSR seeks implementation of Security Council
resolutions; hold US approach is really pro-Israeli; stand seen reinforcing view
that diplomatic deadlock has developed; score recent Nixon remarks on war,
response to foreign policy rev; say Vietnamization means continuation of war;
USSR officials indicate they will take no steps to press N Vietnam to make
compromises in talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              334 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Sen H Williams makes unannounced visit to S Vietnam partly to investigate black
mkt currency manipulations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              335 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 79 words

Internatl Press Inst '69 press freedom survey says Vice Pres Agnew's attacks on
press and TV were most serious threat to press freedom in West; says most
serious aspect of attacks is implication that they were inspired by Pres Nixon;
Agnew, in Nov, scored TV networks for immediate analysis of Nixon's Nov 3
Vietnam s and later scored handling of news by some newspapers and magazines; in
rev of '60s, says underdeveloped nations are falling further behind in press
freedom

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              336 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 32 words

Deserted ammunition ship Badger State still burning 1-wk after being rocked by
explosion while enroute to Vietnam with cargo of bombs and rockets; USN abandons
salvage plans; 26 dead or missing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              337 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

H Ross Perot expresses disappointment over failure of his quest but says he is
not giving up, news conf, NYC; says he will seek from Amers 'millions and
millions of lrs' of support to induce N Vietnam to provide better treatment for
prisoners; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              338 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 30 words

C L Sulzberger holds Laos is most significant Amer policy failure in past
decade; stresses Laos's strategic importance as main mil hwy from N to S
Vietnam; revs US policy 'mistakes'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              339 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

RC nuns rehabilitate homeless and troubled girls at Home of the Good Shepherd,
Vinhlong, S Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              340 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Nixon Adm officials are concerned that pol and econ situation in S Vietnam is
deteriorating and this could affect pace of Vietnamization; keep close watch on
situation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              341 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 94 words

Associated Press survey of world censorship in '69 repts Greek Govt imposes no
censorship on outgoing news but sometimes attempts to distort or repress it;
heavy domestic censorship in Peru but no restrictions on outgoing news; Greek
papers must adhere to strict controls; foreign correspondents have no difficulty
in transmitting news from Poland but dispatches are circulated among Communist
officials and phones are tapped; S Vietnam Govt suspended 14 papers in '69;
foreign correspondents generally transmit news freely but a few have been
restricted in field

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              342 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

Vietnam-bound ship, delayed when dockers refused to handle mil cargo as protest
against war, arrives Vungtau with shipment, including beer, after Govt
commissioned freighter into Navy and used sailors to load ship

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              343 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 39 words

Communist Chinese charge d'affaires Chen Chao-yuan charges USSR gives India econ
and mil aid at expense of Communist China, N Vietnam reception, New Delhi; USSR
Amb Pegov replies USSR wants India to be self-sufficient in both spheres

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              344 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 40 words

Nixon Adm Communications Dir Klein says network TV camera crews will get
priority over Govt camera teams in covering trips overseas by all Govt
officials, result of TV networks charges over coverage of Vice Pres Agnew visit
to S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              345 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 3

LENGTH: 56 words

C L Sulzberger says greatest success of Nixon Adm at end of '69 may be defusing
of war; says Nixon Adm, by Vietnamization and other moves, appears to follow
less dangerous course; says prospects look assuring; says US prestige around
world begins to rise; notes relative speed with which 'storm' over Songmy
incident has started to fade

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              346 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 39 words

Lt Gen W Peers group leaves Vietnam after 12-day inquiry into Songmy incident;
says inquiry has uncovered some things that will have bearing on current
ct-martial proceedings; Peers says he will rept to Sec Resor and Gen
Westmoreland

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              347 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

Vietnam Peace Talks session; acting chief of Amer delegation Philip C Habib
proposes 'restricted' sessions that would consist of discussion of concrete
proposals to alternate with formal sessions as 'way of ending sterile debate';
other side rejects proposal, counters with its standing proposal for private
US-NLF meetings; Habib reads statement saying US prefers to follow path of
negotiation; other details on session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              348 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

John Hightower named Museum of Modern Art (NYC) dir; Hightower, who has been
exec dir of NYS Arts Council for last 6 yrs, seen having earned reputation as
skilled admr and sponsor of innovative programs, notably in area of ghetto arts
projects; he sees museum role to develop 'in broadest of all possible contexts
the sense of community,' int; illus; biog sketch; por; Art Workers Coalition
stages lie-in before Picasso's Guernica, Museum of Modern Art, NYC, to protest
what they charged was museum's failure to keep promise to collaborate with them
on poster protesting alleged massacre in Songmy, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              349 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 4

LENGTH: 25 words

Reply to Dec 31 lr by Truong Dinh Dzu's son on recent spy trial and S Vietnam
Pres Nguyen Van Thieu regime says he confuses ambition with patriotism

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              350 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

C L Sulzberger sees pact as casualty in '70s; revs its history and objectives;
evaluates its success; details role of Sec Dulles; holding SEATO has never
worked, says it did enable US to aid S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              351 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 99 words

Pres Nixon's 57th birthday; he, wife, daughter Patricia fly to Northampton Mass,
where they attend dinner for Nixon given by daughter Julie and son-in-law David
Eiwenhower at their apt; Eisenhowers unable to attend planned White House fete;
Nixon greeted by small crowd of townsfolk; illus; crowd hushes small group of
demonstrators; party returns to White House; earlier, Nixon got phone greeting
from Mrs D D Eisenhower and humorous present from White House staff; Press press
sec says Cardinal Cooke, recently back from Xmas visit to Vietnam, repts to
Nixon that troop morale is pretty high

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              352 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Ed credits Vice Pres Agnew with having adhered more closely to Pres Nixon policy
formulations, in some instances, than did Nixon himself; sees Agnew tour raising
new questions on Adm determination to avoid future Vietnams

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              353 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 11 words

Comment on S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu statement on offensive

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              354 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

Defense witness M Simons testifies 2 Justice Dept reprs told him 2 wks before
conv that Daley was blocking permits for demonstrators to sleep in pks;
testimony is 1st directly tying Daley to decision on permits; Chicago officials
contend that Mayor has nothing to do with issuing permits and that that is
handled by depts concerned; defense contends that in practice Daley controls
issuance of major city permits; Judge Hoffman upholds Govt's objections to
defense's efforts to introduce documents showing Mobilization Com's 'peaceful
intent' in going to Chicago

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              355 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 5

LENGTH: 26 words

Mrs L Hubner to be tried for flying US flag upside down as part of Nov '69
antiwar moratorium; is released in $500 bail; details on case; Mrs Hubner illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              356 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 3

LENGTH: 44 words

Tom Wicker says Pres Nguyen Van Thieu is likely to cause more trouble for Pres
Nixon's Vietnamization plan than US war critics; comments on former Pres Johnson
confirmation that Nguyen Van Thieu, in fall of '68, delayed US bombing halt to
help Nixon defeat Humphrey

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              357 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

Tex Ritter, former Western singing star and candidate for Repub nomination for
Sen from Tenn, says he backs Pres Nixon's Vietnam policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              358 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (CP)

LENGTH: 24 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu scores advocates of coalition or neutralist
govt, s, Vungtau; says coalition is 'suicide and self-poisoning'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              359 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 29 words

Lr, noting assurances by Sen H Scott that all US combat troops will be removed
from Vietnam within a yr or 2, leaving only 200,000 support troops, urges
complete US withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              360 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 23 words

Sen Foreign Relations Com plans to open pub hearings on Vietnam on Feb 2; Sen
Fulbright reptdly plans to build hearings on 10 resolutions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              361 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 31 words

Amer Legion members begin natl fund-raising drive to collect $200,000 for legal
defense fund for Lt W L Calley; Dr G T Beck is drive chmn; Calley hearing set on
Vietnam atrocity charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              362 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 97 words

Article on workload facing Cong; Dems seen suddenly bereft of issues at time
when they seek issues for Cong elections; pol balance and control of legis
course seen having passed from Cong to White House; 5 issues examined as example
of how Adm has seized initiative; comment on neutralization of Vietnam issue
which has been brought about by Pres Nixon's Vietnamization program; Dems now
applaud Nixon's peace efforts; Adm charges of Cong inaction on its crime pkg
noted; comment on pollution issue; Nixon welfare reform plan seen taking welfare
issue away from Dems in '70 elections

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              363 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 14 words

Comment on possibility that enemy will launch offensive in Feb at Tet, Vietnam;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              364 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 58, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Dr Howard Rusk on development of prosthesis (body parts) mfg facilities in
Africa, Latin Amer and Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              365 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 51, Column 1; (GP)

LENGTH: 94 words

Gallup poll finds Pres Nixon is backed by 61% of Amers on eve of 1st anniv in
office, disapproved by 22%; 17% have no opinion; Gallup orgn calls popularity
during 1st yr remarkably stable; Nixon's high point was 68% following Nov 3
Vietnam s; low point was 56%, recorded in Oct during period of deep depression
over war; his 12-mo avg is 62%, based on 19 nationwide Gallup polls; 1st-yr avg
is well below that for last 3 Dem Pres; unusual number of persons withheld
judgment about Nixon during 1st yr; tables show latest results and trend since
he took office; gph

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHS & CHARTS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              366 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

S Vietnam Govt stages 500-mi, 6-day bicycle race to emphasize its assertion it
exercises virtually complete control over countryside and that road security is
greater now than it has been in yrs; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              367 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 45 words

POW liaison com opens NYC office; Mrs Cora Weiss says numerous families of POWs
have been contacted; Peace with Hon Com begins drive to collect million
signatures on lrs asking N Vietnam to pub list of Amer POWs and allow inspection
of prison camps by Internatl Red Cross

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              368 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

Pres Nixon's Nov 3 Vietnam s in which he asked for support of 'silent majority'
for his policy was largely passed over in assessments of Nixon's 1st yr but
aides say it represented his greatest gamble and greatest triumph of yr; s seen
indicating that on major occasions he is likely to disregard advice of staff in
favor of own instincts and judgments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              369 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 2

LENGTH: 86 words

Albanian Govt announces signing of new trade accord with Communist China under
which China will extend new credits to Albania and both countries will expand
trade; Albanian trade with China is estimated at 70% of its total vol, about
$200-million; Albanian party head E Hoxha and Premier M Shehu attend dinner
marking signing of accord; Albania accuses Nixon of trying to turn Asians
against each other; says he orders increased mil involvement in some Asian
nations while speaking of withdrawing troops from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              370 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Mil investigators; in answer to charges that Amer Forces Vietnam Network censors
news, say Army network has not violated Defense Dept policies; US command says
conclusion was made in rept forwarded to Washington after 2-wk study; says
Lawrence is being transferred to advisory group in Kontum; says network
exercises editorial judgment; newcaster Sp 4 L Packer, who has complained about
censorship, says he has been ordered transferred to paratrooper div

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              371 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 131 words

Pres Nixon commits self and challenges nation to rescue environment from yrs of
indifference and to display, in '70s, deeper concern for quality of Amer life,
1st message which he delivers before joint Cong session; places 1st priority on
world peace and just Vietnam settlement; major preoccupation is with domestic
rather than foreign affairs; central theme is appeal to match resources of 1970s
with vision of 1770s; sketches por of nation rich in resources but confused in
purpose and concerned about forces seemingly beyond its control; gen proposals
he offers to achieve his goals for '70s outlined; reptdly composed most of s
himself; interrupted by applause 26 times; wife and family watch from galleries;
philosophical tone of s noted; Nixon illus being greeted in HR chamber

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              372 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7; (UPI)

LENGTH: 23 words

Sen J Javits arrives in S Vietnam on his 1st visit in 4 yrs; says he plans to
study Vietnamization program and other aspects of US policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              373 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 18 words

S Vietnam Govt bans Jan 19 issue of Life, says article on alleged Songmy
massacre included violent pictures

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              374 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 24, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

Bui Hoang wins; about 60 cyclists finish race without harm from Vietcong; S
Vietnamese soldier guarding route killed in skirmish; race ends with no
casualties

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              375 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnam protests to Internatl Control Comm that 4,619 civilians were killed
and 14,412 were injured by enemy terrorist acts in '69; charges 1,879 were
kidnapped

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              376 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 11 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu plans to order cease-fire for Tet

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              377 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 4

LENGTH: 8 words

Replies to Jan 22 lr on Vietnam atrocity charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              378 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 2

LENGTH: 197 words

26 NYS Assembly Dems introduce resolution urging immediate withdrawal of US
troops from Vietnam; Assembly recessed minutes after Assemblyman Leichter
introduced bill; Assemblyman Lerner urges ban on sale of candy cigarettes to
'deglamorize smoking in the eyes of children'; Assemblyman Russo succeeds in
restoring to calendar complicated bill that would change law governing
investments by assns in trust cos; NYS Sen approves bill to raise maximum
interest rate for borrowing on life ins from 4.8% to 5.7%; approves proposal to
let policeman making misdemeanor arrests skip initial personal appearance in ct;
approves bill to require restaurants that are sold to notify creditors; Sen
Lentol proposes minimum penalty for sniper-wounding of policemen be 15 instead
of presetn 3 yrs; Sen Lewis accuses NYCTA of 'gross negligence' in Dec 29 subway
derailment, Bronx; C F Stockmeister apptmt confirmed by Sen; Sen Ohrenstein
restates '69 Dem charge that apptmt was Gov Rockefeller payoff to Stockmeister
for supporting fiscal legis; Sen approves proposal to eliminate need for
competitive bidding on pub works contracts of less than $3,500 and on purchase
contracts of less than $2,500

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              379 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 2

LENGTH: 25 words

Capacity crowd attends Madison Sq Garden benefit for Vietnam Moratorium Com;
Harry Belafonte, Richie Havens, D Brubeck, Judy Collins and others perform

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              380 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 13 words

Lr backs Pres Nixon's Vietnam withdrawal policy; says US has already 'lost' war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              381 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 13 words

Comment on incident involving 4 agents who masqueraded as newsmen, Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              382 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Comment on recent attack on AA site in N Vietnam by US planes and on US policy
regarding reconnaissance flights and air strikes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              383 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 2, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 20 words

Lr says talks are stalemated because of US insistence on non-negotiability of
right of S Vietnam to self-determination

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              384 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 32 words

White House, responding to questions about Sen com rept, says Vietnamization
program is 'progressing well'; says Nixon Adm is making similar studies about
all aspects of war and in more detail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              385 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 18 words

Former US negotiator H C Lodge and Pres Nixon aide Prof H A Kissinger meet to
discuss Vietnam peace talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              386 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 61 words

Pres Nixon sends annual space rept, outlining NASA's accomplishments in '69, to
Cong; Robert H Cannon Jr apptd Transportation Asst Sec; Nixon meets with Repr
Dickenson to receive lr signed by 5,000 Ala U students supporting his Vietnam
policy; HR com approves bill permitting $38-million increase in spending for Pt
Reyes Natl Seashore Pk; other precedings listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              387 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 132 words

Sen Scott defends Nixon Adm Vietnam policy, Sen com hearing; says Pres Nixon's
program of troop withdrawal is irreversible; urges Sen adoption of Adm-supported
resolution endorsing Nixon's efforts to achieve 'just peace'; Repubs and Dems
raise objections that resolution could be construed as vote of confidence in Adm
policy and thus cause division rather than unity in Sen; it is also argued that
resolution could be interpreted as granting new Cong authority to Pres for
carrying out his own policies in SE Asia; Scott disputes this; Fulbright again
presses questions about Vietnamization; Scott expresses doubt that Adm would
respond to new enemy attacks by bldg up troop strength again; Sens Church and
McGovern score Adm policy, Sen Cooper backs it; details on hearing; some Sens
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              388 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 26 words

US Embassy, Bangkok, repts US plane headed on Vietnam mission inadvertently
dropped 30-ton bomb on sparsely populated region of Thailand injured 2 persons

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              389 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 24 words

Communist party 19th Cong meets, Nanterre; delegates include A P Kirilenko
(USSR), Le Duc Tho (N Vietnam), R Proctor and G A Meyers (US); illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              390 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 198 words

Sen Harris resigns unexpectedly as Dem Natl Comm chmn, press conf, Washington;
says he wants to free self from 'restraints' of job; rebuilt Washington staff
and articulated party positions on major issues but was unable to solve many of
party's long-range problems; told friends he was weary of factional sniping,
with conservative Dems calling him too far left and militants calling him too
conservative; also annoyed by charge that he was using post to promote his
'dark-horse candidacy' for '72 Pres nomination; denies he will run for Pres;
friends say many of proposals he made as Sen were misconstrued as party
positions and many of his party pronouncements were mistaken as his private
views; Sen Harris says he does not believe Nixon policy will work or that it
will get US out of Vietnam fast enough; says there is no way to get out but to
get out; Humphrey and other party leaders laud him; major problem in picking
successor will be to find man acceptable to all potential '72 Pres candidates
but not too closely identified with any of them; those mentioned as successors
include L F O'Brien, Gov Dempsey, Ohio Chmn O'Grady; problems that will face
successor outlined; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              391 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 46 words

US State Dept spokesman repts 1st 3,000 of 18,000 refugees have been evacuated
from Laos by Amer aircraft under contract with AID; Laotian mil officials rept
evidence of N Vietnam build-up SW of Plaine des Jarres that could indicate
planned attack on army hq at Long Cheng

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              392 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

US command announces US Army will assume over-all command from US Marines in 5
northern provs; Lt Gen M L Zais will be new comdr of area (I Corps), Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              393 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 17 words

US repts airlift of refugees nears completion; N Vietnam again denies it has
troops operating in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              394 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 10; Page 6, Column 0

LENGTH: 28 words

Lr urges Americans not visit Sweden and boycott Swedish goods to protest
Sweden's allotting $45-million to aid N Vietnam, other Govt actions deemed
unfriendly to US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              395 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 0

LENGTH: 22 words

Article on life and attitudes of Vietnam front-line Amer soldiers (grunts);
experiences and views of several soldiers detailed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              396 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 9, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

Former Vice Pres Humphrey concedes Pres Nixon makes 'pol points' with his
policy, but says Adm needs to establish timetable for Vietnam withdrawal, TV int

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              397 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Secs Laird and Wheeler arrive in S Vietnam; Laird says current pace of
Vietnamization is adequate, but that ways to improve it and push it forward are
being looked for; says Vietnamization is irreversible; discusses pace of
withdrawals; says Us is still hopeful progress can be made in talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              398 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 38 words

Deputy US Army Information Officer in S Vietnam Lt Col W B Stallings, in
recommendation made Jan 9, suggests that Army unit publications stop emphasizing
'hard combat news' and replace it with progress repts in various fields

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              399 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

54th session of Paris Vietnam peace talks; meeting is shortest on record; allies
try to interest Communists in 'restricted' sessions as means of getting down to
serious negotiations; Pham Dang Lam proposes secret meetings; Communist
delegations insist US change its policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              400 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 45 words

Defense Sec Laird confs with S Vietnam pres Nguyen Van Thieu; affirms Pres Nixon
decision to continue withdrawal of US troops; is accompanied by Wheeler, Bunker
and Abrams; group also meets with Nguyen Cao Ky and Premier Tran Thien Khiem;
Nguyen Van Thieu and Laird illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              401 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (GP)

LENGTH: 35 words

Latest Gallup Poll shows majority of those polled (55%) continue to oppose
immediate withdrawal of US troops from Vietnam, but those who favor it have
increased to 35% from 21% in Nov poll; details; figures

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              402 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 10 words

Comment on Defense Sec Laird's Vietnam visit and statements

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              403 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

Es-Sen Gruening scores Pres Nixon's policy on Vietnam, rally, Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              404 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

4 NYC clergymen representing 4 faiths seek Pope's support for their attempt to
visit Amer POWs in N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              405 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 3

LENGTH: 66 words

Lefcourt and Panther defendant A Shakur, free on $100,000 bond, s at Hunter Coll
rally called to condemn charges against Panthers; meeting was sponsored by 5th
Av Vietnam Peace Parade Com and Bklyn-Harlem Fight Back Com; Murtagh reserves
decision on defense motion to suppress as evidence guns found in Tabor's home;
defense also files similar motion regarding guns seized in another Panther apt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              406 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Pres Nixon gets petition supporting his Vietnam policy from Repr Dickinson;
accepts gavel made of Neb wood from Repr Denny; Natl Humanities Endowment annual
rept; Nixon meets with L J Bowen, '70 Easter Seal poster child, Natl Easter Seal
Soc chmn G A Haas and Reprs Devine and Wylie; names Asst Sec Mazan to direct
intergovt activities of White House Conf on Children and Youth

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              407 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 8

LENGTH: 39 words

World Council of Churches calls on US to refrain from methods of warfare 'which
by long-term damage to the soil and vegetation further endanger the life of
human beings'; urges N Vietnam to pub POW list and show it treats POWs humanely

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              408 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 303 words

Defense Sec Laird warns that if USSR build-up continues at present pace US will
be in 'second-rate strategic position' by middle of decade, rept on defense
programs and budgetary decisions to joint session of Sen Armed Services and
Appropriations Coms; says expansion of Safeguard would enable Nixon Adm to defer
for at least a yr 'hard decisions about adding to our offensive systems' and to
pursue arms limitations talks; says in each of last 5 yrs US intelligence
community has underestimated rate of Soviet deployment of ICBMs and
submarine-based missiles; says that as of Sept '69 USSR had 1,060 ICBMs and 110
submarine-based missiles; says there is virtually no margin for error now that
US missile lead over USSR has become precarious and Communist China is on way to
becoming nuclear power; says activity at major Communist Chinese missile
launching site had convinced intelligence community that there would be an ICBM
test launching in '67, but that tech difficulties and internal turmoil may have
caused launching to be postponed repeatedly; says China has made rapid progress
in last several yrs; says if China fires ICBM this yr it could have fully
operational missiles within 6 yrs, including force of up to 25 ICBMs; says
Safeguard could intercept all of these; illus; says '70 draft calls are expected
to fall to 90,000, a reduction of 75,000; says Vietnamization is on schedule and
that US expects to withdraw 'additional thousands' of Amer troops this yr; hints
Nixon Adm may ask for funds beyond $350-million ceiling imposed by Cong last yr
in area of mil assistance and arms sales abroad; calls budget a 'rock bottom'
one and urges Cong not to make cuts that might jeopardize security, rept on
defense programs and budgetary decisions to joint session of Sen Armed Services
and Appropriations Coms

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              409 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 11 words

Norway to contribute $140,000 to IRC Com for aid in N and S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              410 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 15 words

USN craft crashes during approach to carrier Constellation off Vietnam; 1 of 11
aboard lost

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              411 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 79 words

Amer Bar Assn House of Delegates votes, 130-126, to reaffirm its '49 position
opposing pact; ability of individual to bring charges against his own Govt,
which would have to answer them before internatl tribunal, and fear that Amer
soldiers might face genocide charges in N Vietnam are basis for opposition; vote
seen defeat for Pres Nixon, who hoped to get bar to reverse its position; N deB
Katzenbach and Solicitor Gen Griswold were among those urging approval of pact

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              412 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 2

LENGTH: 39 words

Over 1,000 demonstrators march in parade sponsored by Vietnam Peace Parade Com
to protest Chicago 7 trial, NYC; Kunstler, wives of Hoffman and Dellinger s at
Madison Sq Pk rally; parade illus; some youths, after rally, smash windows

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              413 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

Lt Gen J Ewell to leave S Vietnam to become mil adviser to US delegation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              414 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

US bombers continue heavy attacks, especially around Muong Soui; official
sources confirm loss of base; N Vietnam reptdly has made it clear in recent days
that Amers use of B-52s will be met with counterforce; Souvanna Phouma confs
with Godley; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              415 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 285 words

French Pres Pompidou addresses joint session of Cong and gets courteous welcome;
HR officials say level of attendance is normal or even higher than usual for
such a reception; about 285 of 433 HR members and 60 of 100 Sens present;
Pompidou touches on Vietnam and Mideast issues, latter of which has become
principal theme of discussions; confs separately with Sec of State Rogers,
Defense Sec Laird, Treas Sec Kennedy and a Cong group at Blair House, his
official residence; chats privately with Pres Nixon after dinner at French
Embassy; Nixon acceptance of return dinner inv from visiting head of state is
1st such instance in his term of office; Repr Wolff, during Pompidou s, carried
out threat to walk out, but departure was hardly noticed; Podell claims success
for boycott, but few other members agree; Speaker McCormack, after protests by
several Cong members, rescinds inv to Burro Club, orgn of Dem staff members, to
attend session; Pompidou calls on Israel to renounce mil conquest and solve
refugee problem to reach entente with Arab world, s to joint session of US Cong;
holds Big 4 members of Security Council should define and propose gen conditions
for settlement and provide guarantees for it; reaffirms Israel's right to
existence and security; conflict has been main theme of talks between Pompidou
delegation and Nixon Adm; Pompidou's talks with Nixon and Rogers reptdly have
not bridged basic differences in viewpoint; France wants Israel to commit self
to withdrawal from occupied areas before accords are reached on guaranteed
frontiers and other safeguards; US holds all moves should be taken
simultaneously; French press notes boycott of s, stresses warmth of welcome
Pompidou recd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              416 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 19 words

Thai Govt troops step up sweeps in northern border areas as part alert ordered
after N Vietnam thrust into Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              417 of 417 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

Scene of alleged killings in S Vietnam by 5 marines is old battleground; USMC
officials issue few details on case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
