
                               1 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 1, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

Article on problems Thailand has in attempting to house 80,000 Indochinese
refugees temporarily until other countries, including US, can resettle them.
Thailand has been most hospitable country in Asia for refugees, who arrive daily
from Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.  Japan, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia and
Philippines show little readiness to accept refugees, even temporarily.
Interior Min Samak Sundaravej comments.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 182-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 4, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 156 words

Ed comments on Carter Adm decision to defer aid to Chile, noting that linking
econ aid to pol considerations is risky because citizens are punished as much as
govts.  Suggests Pres Carter was forced to act on issue by HR amendment to
foreign aid legis that 'unwisely' prohibits direct and indirect aid to
objectionable regimes of its own choosing, including Cuba, Vietnam, Laos,
Cambodia, Angola, Mozambique and Uganda.  Suggests Pres Carter acted to reassure
liberals, who thought he saw econ aid as unsuitable instrument of foreign
policy, and to regain leadership in aid decisions.  Claims by deferring aid to
Chile 1st, rather than to countries proposed by HR, Pres Carter enhanced his
credibility by singling out 1 of worst violators of human rights and regained
leadership in aid decisions.  Notes different regimes move toward more humane
govt in different ways and claims their degree of effort should guide aid
decisions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 18

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 4, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Article on Vietnamese refugees who are trying to adapt to new homes in S Korea.
About 200 have settled permanently since '75.  Korean Labor Affairs Office took
responsibility for finding jobs for refugees, often by asking cos that had once
done business in Vietnam to hire them (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 185-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 4, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 115 words

State Dept, in potentially controversial move, asks White House to approve
emergency admission of 15,000 Indochinese refugees stranded in Thailand and
throughout SE Asia.  Many of refugees are living on vessels they used to escape
from Vietnam.  White House is said to be sympathetic to request, but has not
responded to request.  Adm is aware of Cong opposition, and of promise that had
been extracted from Ford Adm by major critic, Pa Repr Joshua Eilberg, not to
admit more refugees without specific legis.  State Dept officials describe
refugees' situation as desperate, because many refugees are not being allowed to
emigrate anywhere except to Australia and some Eur countries (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 185-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 5, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS E MULLANEY

SECTION: Page 47, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

Int with Textron Inc chmn G William Miller focuses on his civic contributions
and newest apptmt as chmn for Labor Dept's Help Through Industry Retraining and
Employment (HIRE).  Miller says HIRE is $140 million Fed project aimed at
interesting businesses in hiring about 100,000 Vietnam veterans in 20-24 yr old
age brackets.  Says Natl Alliance of Business Men's Orgn will handle
job-training programs and seminars for veterans.  Miller's civic contributions
noted.  Photo of Miller (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 18

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 6, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 62 words

Dr Edmund O Matzal, '76 Vice Presidential candidate of Amer Party's NJ ticket,
sentenced to 3 yr's probation for Fed income tax evasion.  Ordered to work 8 hrs
a wk without pay at hosp needing his services.  During trial, Matzal said he did
not pay taxes because he opposed foreign aid to nations aiding N Vietnam and
because income tax is 'involuntary servitude' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 187-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 9, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

ASEAN foreign mins agree to work for peaceful relations with Communist states in
Indochina, communique issued after talks in Singapore for wider discussions with
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.  Call Communist insurgents threat to Asian security
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 190-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JEAN LACOUTURE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7

LENGTH: 18 words

Herbert Y Schander book The Unmaking of A President.  Lyndon Johnson and Vietnam
revd by Jean Lacouture.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 19

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JEAN LACOUTURE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7

LENGTH: 16 words

William Burchett book Grasshoppers and Elephants.  Why Viet Nam Fell revd by
Jean Lacouture.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 19

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JEAN LACOUTURE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7

LENGTH: 14 words

Joseph Buttinger book Vietnam.  The Unforgettable Tragedy revd by Jean
Lacouture.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 19

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FRANK THOMPSON JR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 35 words

Repr Frank Thompson Jr lr suggests Cong should not deny funds for upgrading of
mil discharges or re-entry of draft evaders resulting from Vietnam War.  Holds
Cong should display charity rather than malice.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 19

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 13, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 5

LENGTH: 104 words

HR Judiciary Com and Integration Subcom chmn Repr Joshua Eilberg calls on Pres
Carter to convene internatl conf on Indochinese refugees.  Avoids taking
position on whether Adm should approve State Dept proposal to admit 15,000
refugees on emergency basis.  About 79,000 refugees from Vietnam and other
Indochinese countries, including Laos and Cambodia.  And 7,500 'boat people' are
seeking asylum.  State Dept seeks to take all boat people and 7,500 others in
Thai camps.  Adm official, commenting on proposal to convene conf, says Adm
would probably support it but it would not be substitute for emergency action
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 194-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 13, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 22 words

Vietnam renews request for UN membership.  Admission by Security Council seen
assured in light of US pledge to drop opposition (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 194-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 13, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY SAMPSON

SECTION: Page 19, Column 6

LENGTH: 94 words

Anthony Sampson examines Western aerospace indus 'crisis'.Points out competition
between companies for world market became greater with advent of jumbo jets and
peak of Vietnam boom 9 years ago.  Maintains new wealth of Middle East provided
outlet for business with orders for weapons.  Wonders whether Pres Carter can
cutdown on arms exports without giving aerospace indus alternate source of
business.  Suggests Concorde SST production is attempt to sell planes for
peaceful, rather than mil, purposes.  Offers arguments for supporting new
supersonic project.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 19

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 15, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

World Bank notifies US that it will reject future Amer aid if Cong passes bill,
already approved by HR, that prohibits use of Amer funds for loans to Vietnam
and 6 other countries.  Adds that if bill becomes law and World Bank rejects
Amer aid, it would not be able to continue operations.  Notification, sent to
Treasury Sec W Michael Blumenthal, was released as part of joint Adm and World
Bank effort to build up support in Sen in hopes of nullifying controversial
bill.  Additional dtls of bill noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 196-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 15, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 25 words

UN Security Council consultations on admission of Vietnam as member, and Conf on
Law of the Sea, are cancelled because of NYC power failure (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 196-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 16, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 102 words

Sen Subcom on Foreign Operations supports Carter Adm and strikes provisions from
pending foreign aid bill that would have barred World Bank from using US funds
in loans to Vietnam and 6 other countries.  HR passed $67 billion appropriations
bill containing such restrictions.  Subcom eliminated 5% cut in appropriations
bill voted by HR and dropped ban on use of US funds to aid countries in
development of citrus, palm oil or sugar industries.  HR bill contained
'stringent' measures directed against countries accused of human rights
violations.  Adm opposed mandatory cuts in aid on human rights issue (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 197-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 16, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 194 words

Pres Carter approves State Dept request to admit 15,000 of 80,000 Indochinese
refugees stranded in Southeast Asia to US, including 7,000 'boat people' still
living on vessels they used to flee from Vietnam.  Also asks Atty Gen Griffin B
Bell to use his emergency 'parole authority' to admit 15,000 Laotians,
Cambodians and Vietnamese during '77 and '78.  Issue is potentially
controversial because many members of Cong oppose having more Indochinese
admitted to US.  HR Subcom on Immigration chmn Repr Joshua Eilberg, who
sponsored legis allowing additional refugees into US on quota basis, withholds
judgment on proposal pending hearing by his subcom and internatl conf on issue.
Pres Carter orders State Dept to form interagency task force to develop
long-term program on issue.  Officials note that consultation with Cong is
beginning immediately but that cost of admitting 15,000 additional refugees will
not be known until OMB study is completed.  State Dept plans to choose 15,000
primarily from boat cases and remainder Thai refugees, with preference to be
given to Laotians with close ties to US.  Numbers of refugees in individual
countries noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 197-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 18, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Vietnam and Laos sign pact, at end of visit to Bangkok by Vietnamese leaders,
reviving 'special relationship' in which Vietnam has traditionally played role
of elder brother.  Vietnam announced recently that it will open former seaport
of Danang to Laos, which is landlocked, for sea trade (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 199-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 19, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DONALD E JOHNSON and ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Page 28, Column 4

LENGTH: 37 words

Former Veterans Adm head Donald E Johnson condemns Carter's attempts to 'reward'
draft resisters who failed to serve during Vietnam War and those whose service
was less than exemplary, speech, Iowa Amer Legion conv (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 200-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 19, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

US, in goodwill gesture to Vietnam, agrees at private meeting that Security
Council should recommend its admission to UN by consensus, without formal vote
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 200-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 19, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

US, in good will gesture to Vietnam, agrees at private meeting that Security
Council should recommend its admission to UN by consensus, without formal vote
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 200-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 20, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 33 words

Former Sec of State Henry A Kissinger, in Quotation of Day during testimony
before HR Internatl Relations subcom about unfulfilled Amer pledge of postwar
aid to Vietnam, says 'We owe them nothing'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 201-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 20, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 101 words

Former US State Sec Henry Kissinger says N Vietnam's '73 violation of Paris
peace agreement relieved US of promise to provide up to $4.75-billion in postwar
reconstruction aid, testimony, HR Internatl Relations Subcom hearing.  Denies
any aid commitments to Vietnam were kept secret from Cong and Amers.  Calls
'totally untrue' allegation that Carter Adm officials negotiating with
Vietnamese were 'surprised' by secret agreements he had made.  Doubts existence
of unpublished message on aid from former Pres Nixon that Vietnamese negotiators
hinted would be made public 'when it is necessary'.  Por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 201-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 20, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

US offers restrained support for Vietnam's admission to UN.  US Deputy Repr
Donald F McHenry says US looks forward to 'new era of peace,' Security Council
speech.  Urges Vietnamese Govt to respect human rights (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 201-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 21, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

Security Council approves Vietnam's admission to UN membership.  Vietnamese
official Dinh Ba Thi urges US assistance in 'healing wounds of war'(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 202-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 22, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 37 words

US House passes and sends to Sen 2 foreign assistance bills that contain
restrictions on mil aid to Ethiopia, Argentina and Turkey.  Also prohibits
humanitarian aid or reparations to Vietnam, Cuba, Laos and Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 203-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 23, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 6

LENGTH: 27 words

Jane Alpert is found guilty of criminal contempt for refusing to testify in '75
bombing conspiracy case against anti-Vietnam War activist Patricia Swinton (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 204-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 14 words

UN Security Council endorsement of application for admission by Vietnam revd
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 205-1

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Sen Robert J Dole says Security Council decision to admit Vietnam to UN is
unfortunate step in premature effort by US to normalize relations with Hanoi
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 205-1

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 25, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 93 words

Ed lauds reduced US role in SE Asia despite anxieties within Assn of SE Asian
Nations (ASEAN).  ASEAN members are apprehensive about future role of Vietnam,
whose mil forces are largest in region.  Vietnam has been calling for regional
cooperation and external noninterference, even though it has been supplying
weapons and training to insurgents in Thailand, and possibly in Malaysia.  Ed
urges US to use its influence to induce ASEAN members to press for econ and
cultural ties with Vietnam in effort to develop intraregional cooperative
relationships.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 20

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 25, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY LINDA CHARLTON

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Campaign to Stop the B-1 Bomber's 4-yr, $50,000 effort discussed.  Lobbyists
Steve Pearlman and Bob Brammer worked through about 150 community groups and
individuals in 46 states, many of which had previous anti-Vietnam war
affiliations.  Photo of Brammer in Washington office (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 206-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 26, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 96 words

Comment on making of Francis Ford Coppola film Apocalypse Now, about Vietnam.
Film was originally budgeted at $12-million and has so far cost $25.5-million.
United Artists invested $7.5-million in exch for Amer-Canadian distribution
rights.  Coppola sold certain foreign-distribution rights for about $8-million.
Balance, about $10-million, had been lent to Coppola's production co by United
Artists, NY based financing-distribution co.  Coppola, as collateral for loan,
posted San Francisco home and variety of commercial bldgs and other properties.
Coppola por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 207-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 27, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JOHN K FAIRBANK

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

John K Fairbank article on US-Chinese relations in view of State Sec Vance's
upcoming trip to China.  Holds misconceptions about Chinese foreign policy led
US into wars in Korea and Vietnam.  Holds Carter Adm should accept China's
principles of 'One China' while insuring continued trade, investment and
cultural contact with Taiwan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 20

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 27, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Asst Sec of State for E Asian Affairs Richard Holbrooke, testifying before HR
internatl relations subcom examining status of human rights in Cambodia and
Vietnam, says up to 1.2-million people may have been killed under Communist
rule.  Contends US can do little to help situation.  Panel approves resolution
condemning killings and calls on Pres Carter to seek to rally internatl support
to end repressive measures.  Diplomat Charles Twining says US has 'moral
imperative' to speak out.  Refugee Nguyen Cong Hoan testifies (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 208-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 28, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

US State Dept says Vietnam has agreed in principle to send experts to Hawaii to
observe Amer methods for identifying remains of missing servicemen.  Move would
be 1st time Vietnamese reprs enter US.  Officials are expected to visit Joint
Casualty Resolution Center and lab.  Asst Sec of State for E Asian and Pacific
Affairs Richard Holbrooke comments (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 209-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 29, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Page 10, Column 2

LENGTH: 31 words

Role in My Lai, Vietnam war incident, and William L Calley case of Col Oran K
Henderson who is now Pa CD dir and supervisor of recovery efforts in flooded
Johnstown area, recalled (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 210-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 29, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 292 words

NYT-CBS News Poll finds that after 6 months in office, 62% of Amer people
approve of Pres Carter's general performance but are less confident that he can
achieve specific goals.  Poll finds he wins greater favor for his style than for
substance of his legis programs.  55% of 1,447 persons interviewed between July
20 and 25 agree with Carter's position against financing of abortions while 38%
favor such support.  63% favor funding of contraception.  Only 33% of public
know enough about neutron bomb to form opinion and that group is evenly divided
over issue of its production.  60% were either unaware of Amb Young's statements
on racism or Cuban involvement in Angola or had no firm opinion.  Among those
with opinions, sentiment was evenly divided although blacks support Young by 5
to 1 margin while whites are critical by margin of 5 to 4. 53% oppose Pres
Carter's planned troop withdrawals from South Korea.  66% favor humanitarian aid
to Vietnam while 70% oppose grant of outright loans or credits.  Like most
Presidents in 1st year of office, Carter enjoys strong approval rating of
overall performance, 62%.  Just over 60% expect him to restore trust in Fed
Govt.  Only perceptible decline in overall popularity has come among blacks,
down from 83% 3 months ago to 69%.  Perception of his ability to handle energy
legis effectively is down from 50% in Apr to 40%.  Number of those who believe
Carter can reduce unemployment declines from more than half in Jan to 37%.
Similarly, in Jan 34% of public expected him to balance budget by end of his
4-year term while only 23% now expect him to do so.  Confidence that Carter can
control inflation and streamline Govt also declines.  49% approve of Carter's
handling of economy.  Graphs (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 21

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 30, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 6

LENGTH: 34 words

NJ Gov Byrne signs bill sponsored by Essex Sen Carmen Orechio appropriating
$15,000 for Amer Veterans of WW II, Korea and Vietnam natl convention, scheduled
to be held in Atlantic City later in '77 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 211-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 31, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD C BURKS

SECTION: Section 11; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 112 words

Edward Burks discusses how GI Bill providing Fed aid of $2,628 per yr for
veterans' college education does not take into account regional variance in
costs.  Cites variance as reason NJ ranks 47th among 50 states in proportion of
veterans who take advantage of bill.  Details findings of Northeast-Midwest
Research Institute showing how Southern, Southwestern and Western states have
more low-tuition junior college spaces available per 1,000 Vietnam veterans than
Midwestern and Northeastern states.  Notes Sen Veterans Affairs Com has failed
to take regional differences into account in its proposal to give bill gen 6.6%
increase in benefits across the board (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 21

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 1, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 115 words

Soviet commentator Vladimir Bolshakov, writing in Pravda's weekly rev, accuses
US and other Western nations of waging psychological war on Communist world.
Says these attempts are obvious and cannot be concealed with references to
'moral values' of US and West.  Says these moral values were symbolized in
Vietnam war, Watergate scandal, CIA activities and imprisonment of Amer civil
rights workers.  Commentary, written to mark 2d anniv of Helsinki conf on Eur
security, praises USSR and its allies for carrying out Final Act of conf while
not interfering with internal affairs of other nations.  Cites US 'noisy
propaganda show' over human rights as principal tool of interference (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 213-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 2, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 74 words

At least 6 films are being prepared about Vietnam War and its veterans.  About
same number are being produced about blue-collar workers.  Films about war
include Apocalypse Now, Last Days, Dog Soldiers, The Boys in Company C, Coming
Home, Heroes and Rolling Thunder.  Alan Ladd Jr (20th Century-Fox), producer
Lawrence Turman and Mike Medavoy (United Artists) comment.  Films about workers
include F.I.S.T. And Blood Brothers.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 214-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 5, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY JAMES M NAUGHTON

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 149 words

James M Naughton analysis of Amer disaffection with Govt since cold war, caused
in part by Vietnam war, Watergate and disclosures of Govt misdeeds and lying to
public.  Notes Justice Dept inquiry into illegal burglaries by FBI agents,
revelations about secret drug experiments on unwitting subjects by CIA and
recent rept that ACLU officials collaborated with FBI in 50's has only deepened
public disillusion and altered attitudes toward natl insts.  Holds that
rationale of FBI and CIA personnel, that they are being judged by retroactive
moral standard since their activities took place in different era, is not
acceptable.  Notes alleged misdeeds were purposely kept secret out of
recognition that they were illegal or improper.  Notes White House press sec
Jody Powell's observation that 'credibility of all insts has suffered,' and his
plea that insts not be dismissed out of hand (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 21

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 6, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

Sen adopts $7.1 Billion foreign aid bill and removes restriction that would have
barred World Bank loans to Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and and Uganda.  Restores 5%
cut imposed by HR.  Votes to eliminate another HR restriction barring US
contributions from being used for loans by internatl agencies to Vietnam, Laos,
Cambodia and Uganda.  Carter Adm hopes to get restriction dropped from bill in
Sen-HR conf that will reconcile Sen and HR versions of bill (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 218-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 7, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 9

LENGTH: 92 words

Flora Lewis article on how Eur views US.  W Eur is settling down now with some
relief and satisfaction to new and yet nostalgically familiar image of Amer.  W
Eur leaders have been surprisingly quick to reach favorable consensus on Pres
Carter.  What they like best is that he listens to them.  What they like 2d-best
is that Carter gave his Eur peers feeling that he is definitely in charge.  US,
despite its traumatic passage through assassinations, Vietnam, racial conflict
and Watergate, has come out looking solid and reliable.  Cartoons (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 219-0

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 7, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE H FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 190 words

Clyde Farnsworth discusses development of World Bank.  Notes Bank lends annual
$6 billion to developing nations, about 1/5 of all aid flowing to those nations.
Repts US pays 1/4 of capital and receives 1/4 of all foreign procurement that
results from bank lending.  Notes traditional domination of bank by Amer
citizens.  Recounts how pres Robert McNamara has reduced portion of loans for
heavy indus development in favor of money for rural development, education,
water supply, sewage and population control.  Details bank projection that such
loans will amount to 40% of total new commitments in '79 compared to negligible
figure in '60.  Sees new emphasis as controversial with bank lending officers,
who feel new strategy involves unaccountable risks.  Describes HR amendment to
Adm appropriations bill barring use of US funds allocated to any internatl
lending institution for loans to Angola, Mozambique, Uganda, Cambodia, Laos,
Vietnam or Cuba.  Sees HR efforts to control World Bank decisions as reaction to
internationalization of institution that McNamara has brought about.  Chart of
World Bank loans for rural development (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 21

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 7, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROGER COPELAND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 21 words

Comment on making of Michael Cimino film The Deer Hunter, about Vietnam,
currently being filmed in Mingo Junction, Ohio (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 219-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 7, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 187 words

Fed inspectors, after extensive exams of 155 Velsicol Chem Corp employees and
former employees, reptdly will determine soon whether explsure to pesticide
leptophos caused nervous disorders among workers.  Have cited co for dozens of
health and safety regulations, many of which have been challenged by co.  13
former employees have sued co.  Natl Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
official Dr Charles Xinataras plans to follow up study with annual checks, but
concedes that limited finances could impede effort.  AFL-CIO indus hygienist
Victor Alexander echoes concern while criticizing inst for failing to follow up
most investigations.  Co halted production of chem, which is produced solely for
export, in Jan '76 but EPA inspectors found 'discharge of quantifiable amts' of
pesticide outside plant and ordered co to pave extensive areas to prevent
run-offs.  Co reptdly continues to store thousands of gals of chem at
undisclosed location.  Spokesman refuses to comment.  US AID reptdly helped
finance chem export to Indonesia and S Vietnam, '72-75, without informing
countries of potential dangers (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 219-2

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 11, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY WAYNE KING

SECTION: Section 2; Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 130 words

Implementation of Pres Carter's $1.3 Billion job program for 200,000 veterans
has been very slow.  Causes are bureaucratic sluggishness, slow indus response,
inflexible regulations and indifference of many vets.  Veterans' groups say
program is 'band-aid'.  States rept that unemployment has dropped among
registered unemployed veterans, but feel that situation is result of veterans
failing to register that they are actively seeking jobs or else simply 'dropping
out' of job market.  Efforts are being made to inform vets of new public service
jobs under CETA.  State employment officials in La and Ill note that Vietnam vet
is often insecure or defiant, or has defeatist attitude.  Calif employment
officials complain that eligibility restrictions bar vets from jobs (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 223-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 11, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Ed supports Carter Adm plan to admit 15,000 more refugees from Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia into US over next 16 mos.  Contends US has moral duty to admit even
more.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 22

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 11, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 6

LENGTH: 44 words

Fed Appeals Ct Judges J Skelly Wright, Harold Leventhal and Malcolm Wikley rule
that 27 Quakers arrested illegally in '71 prayer vigil protesting Pres Nixon's
Vietnam war stance should receive more than $100 each in damages.  Decision
overturns '74 ruling (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 223-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 14, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MARIAN WRIGHT EDELMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 2

LENGTH: 122 words

Children's Defense Fund dir Marian Wright Edelman article on severe food
shortages in Vietnam.  Notes she asked, while with Pres comm dealing with
missing-in-action in Vietnam, to be informed about orphans and child-care
problems.  Says Vietnamese have informed her that most pressing problem is lack
of adequate food.  Cites bad weather for shortages.  Notes '77 rice shortage is
estimated at more than 1-million tons, more than double normal annual rice
deficit.  Notes intl effort underway, through Red Cross, UN High Comr for
Refugees, private groups, UNICEF, Switzerland, EEC and Scandinavian countries,
to alleviate problem.  Notes recent NY Times/CBS News poll repts 66% of Amers
want food and med support for Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 22

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 15, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Page 20, Column 3

LENGTH: 115 words

ADA Natl Dir Leon Shull accuses Cong of backsliding on civil rights by
supporting restrictive amendments on appropriations bills aimed at poor, racial
minorities, Vietnam war resisters and homosexuals.  Says his orgn will try to
get Congressmen to resist pressures of 'small but well-organized right-wing
groups'.  Claims recent votes on abortion amendments would deny poor women
medical service that other women would still get.  Compares '76 and '77 voting
on civil rights issues, and finds HR more conservative on civil rights issues
than on broad range.  Finds Sen more supportive of liberal positions.  Says most
'startling change' in Sen was switches of position on abortion (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 227-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 18, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 61 words

Labor Sec Ray Marshall announces a $661,170 agreement with Chicago & North
Western Transportation Co to train 432 Vietnam veterans in rr jobs.  Hiring
agreement is in response to Natl Alliance of Businessmen's effort to get HIRE
(Help Through Indus Retraining and Employment) program, sponsored by Carter Adm,
into operation to put unemployed vets to work (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 230-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 19, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

Rear Adm Jeremiah A Denton, 1st POW to return from Vietnam, says he will start
movement to revive and strengthen 'traditional values of the country' upon his
retirement in Sept.  Effort will be aimed at threatening boycotts of products of
TV sponsors who do not portray Amer religious, ethnic, labor and business
traditions in positive light (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 231-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 20, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 167 words

Repr Bruce Caputo, in lr to Defense Sec Harold R Brown and State Sec Cyrus R
Vance, alleges that former US prisoners of war in Vietnam, including retired Air
Force Col Jack W Bomar and 11 cellmates, were tortured in small camp outside
Hanoi during war by Cuban mil officer.  Retired Air Force Col Leo R Thorsness
related details to Caputo also.  Bomar, recalling experiences, says cellmate Col
Earl Cobiel died in camp.  Other torture victims identified.  Bomar says he and
others who had been abused by Cuban officer were urged in debriefings by US
State and Defense Dept officials not to disclose possible participation of
Cubans in torture lest it adversely affect situation of Amers still captive in N
Vietnam.  Thorsness and Bomar say they told Caputo in effort to expose
involvement of Cubans in war because of recent Carter Adm moves to improve
relations with country.  Castro reptdly acknowledged in Jan '76 that number of
Cuban mil men were sent to N Vietnam to fight 'imperialists' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 232-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 21, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD B FISKE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

Article on peace studies programs that are gaining popolarity across US at all
levels of educ.  Estimated 500 colleges and univs offer at least 1 course in
field, and there are reptdly at least 60 undergraduate and 25 graduate programs
offering majors or minors in peace studies.  1st college course in peace studies
was reptdly created shortly after World War II by Manchester Coll in Indiana,
but it was war in Vietnam that gave movement biggest boost as serious academic
dimension of antiwar movement.  Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 233-0

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 22, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 2

LENGTH: 19 words

Ed on 9 films that are being produced dealing with Vietnam war.  Hopes some
lesson can be learned from them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 23

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 25, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ARTHUR W GALSTON

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 30 words

Prof Arthur W Galston lr on Marion Wright Edelman's Aug 14 article on need for
food for Vietnam.  Favors US agr and reconstruction aid based on recent visit to
country.  Drawing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 23

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 25, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 115 words

Groups of Vietnamese 'boat people,' refugees who have fled country by boat,
reptdly are being refused help by passing ships.  While some ships approach and
are willing to pass along food, med and water, others simply ignore distress
signals.  Refugees temporarily sheltered in Japan comment on their plight.
Since heavy refugee flow from Vietnam began in '76, there have been increasingly
frequent repts of violations of traditional requirement that all ships
encountering others in distress come to rescue.  In shipping circles it reptdly
is recognized that violations are everyday occurrences and suspicions are voiced
that some cos have ordered capts not to pick up 'boat people' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 237-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 27, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Labor Dept establishes guidelines to determine if state agencies are complying
in giving veterans preference in public service posts and will require 'good
cause' or corrective action plan from any agency which fails to meet numerical
levels.  New regulation creates 3 groups composed of veterans, Vietnam veterans
and disabled veterans (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 239-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 27, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 44 words

Saigon, Vietnam, still crowded with unemployed but scarce monthly food rations
may drive people to rural areas where rations seem to be regularly available.
In 2 years, only 300,000 to 400,000 of Saigon's 4 million people moved to fields
and rice paddies (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 239-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 27, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 72 words

Vietnam's Central Com of Communist Party attributes food shortage to 'big
mistakes' in leadership, technical backwardness, war, 'poor material,' and
reliance on small-scale production, press release.  Min of Agr was recently
dismissed.  Notes agr production is insufficient for people, stock breeding, raw
indus materials and export.  Resolves to mount 'productive labor movement' to
produce food, raw materials and exports (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 239-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 28, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JAMES BARRETT RESTON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 5

LENGTH: 100 words

James Reston comments on Ronald Reagan's speech to Young Amers for Freedom in
which he proposed that Sen reject proposed Panama Canal treaties.  Notes Reagan
ignored possible dangers of rejecting them, including probability of guerrilla
war and crippled canal.  Finds 'depressing' old men crying for world that is
gone and risking wars young men would have to fight.  Questions why Reagan is
taken so seriously when he does not seem to take himself very seriously.  Revs
Reagan's arguments, noting same arguments prolonged Vietnam War by playing on US
fear of seeming 'pitiful, helpless giant'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 24

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 28, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY GUY FLATLEY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 17 words

Article on upcoming fall film season.  Many films concern new roles of women and
Vietnam war (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 240-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 29, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 34 words

Vietnam News Agency says Hanoi has failed to achieve several munic production
targets slated for '77, citing adverse weather and power and raw material
shortages, lack of coopeation and planning (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 241-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 3, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY JOHN E MCCARTHY

SECTION: Page 14, Column 5

LENGTH: 25 words

US Catholic Conf migration and refugee services exec dir John E McCarthy lr
scores cruelty of sea capts who refuse to aid boat refugees from Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 24

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 3, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 27 words

State Dept spokesman Hodding Carter 3d says Amers will travel to Vietnam Sept 30
to get bodies of 22 servicemen killed during war under June '77 agreement (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 246-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 3, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 146 words

Malaysia, reptdly spurred by US Pres Carter's decision to admit 15,000 more
Indochinese refugees into US, is no longer pushing Vietnamese fleeing in fishing
boats back out to sea as frequently as before.  Of 8,000 'boat people' in
transit camps from Japan to Indonesia, 3,000 are in Malaysia, many after having
been sent back to sea several times until they scuttled craft and had to be
sheltered.  Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Belgium and Denmark also plan to
take some refugees.  France currently is admitting up to 1,000 monthly.
Thailand is giving temporary asylum to 87,000 from Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam,
but no Asian country has ackowledged obligation to give permanent asylum.  UN
officials fear new US stopgap measures may hinder long-term solution, which they
believe has to be in Thailand.  Reasons for Thai unwillingness to accept burden
noted.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 246-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY WARREN WEAVER JR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 157 words

Warren Weaver Jr claims campaign against proposed Panama Canal treaties is
widespread and emotional phenomenon that seems to be out of all proportion to
facts.  Suggests rhetoric on issue reflects shift from isolationism to militant
internationalism embraced by conservative movement when liberal support for
Vietnam deteriorated.  Notes pol analysts contend many Amers felt unconscious
sense of shame over US defeat in Vietnam and are unwilling to accept what they
see as another retreat.  Also notes such Amers are seen as having no guilt about
way in which US obtained rights to Canal Zone.  Notes social historians contend
many Amers exhibit highly-developed psychological need to maintain control over
property once acquired.  Cites other issues that are seen as acquiring pol
meaning far beyond their intrinsic importance.  Notes there is no convenient
escape from issue and that Pres Carter must take pol consequences.  Photos (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 24

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JAMES M NAUGHTON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 214 words

Former Pres Richard M Nixon admits in final TV interview with David Frost that
he had instructed then Chief of Staff H R Haldeman to destroy most of Watergate
tapes in April '73.Notes he could have been spared 'agony' of resignation if
Haldeman had followed his orders, yet continues to deny any personal wrongdoing.
Claims Watergate scandal could have been avoided if Atty Gen John N Mitchell had
not been preoccupied with his wife's mental and emotional problems.  Also
maintains his personal sec Rose Mary Woods did not purposely erase 18 1/2 mins
from Watergate tape, noting she 'always told the truth'.  Nixon also discloses:
he was leaning toward bombing of North Korean mil airfields in April '69 in
retaliation for downing of Amer reconnaissance plane, but was persuaded from
doing it in interest of diplomatic relations with China and to avoid possible
new Korean war.  Concedes that it had been mistake to try to push through
nomination of G Harrold Carswell to Supreme Ct in '70.  Claims greatest
concentration of power in US is in hands of major Eastern news media orgns, and
contends such orgns drove Lyndon Johnson from Presidency because of Vietnam.
Details of other disclosures cited.  Photo of Woods demonstrating how she may
have accidentally erased tapes (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 247-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 5, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 318 words

Cong investigators claim to have documentary evidence that Henry Kissinger was
aware of allegedly improper Korean lobbying as early as '72 when he was natl
security adviser.  Also claim that Gen Alexander M Haig Jr, formerly Kissinger's
deputy and later chief of White House staff, knew about covert Korean action.
Sources doubt that Pres Nixon was informed about Korean attempts to influence US
policy but rept that sr officials of Nixon Adm knew about Korean plans almost
from their inception in '70.  Rept former Sec of Defense Melvin R Laird warned
State Dept of Korean attempt to reverse his '71 decision to withdraw 20,000 of
60,000 US troops in South Korea.  Also rept that former State Dept official in
charge of Korean Affairs, Donald L Ranard, claimed that former Sec of State
William P Rogers was informed about at least part of Korean lobby.  Rogers
denies knowledge of bribes or other improper activity by Koreans but concedes he
knew South Koreans were anxious to please US Congressmen.  Sources assert Nixon
Adm largely ignored lobbying because sr officials were concentrating on Vietnam,
Middle East and Watergate.  Ranard claims Adm wished to avoid antagonizing South
Korea while South Korean troops were fighting in Vietnam at US request.
Investigators claim to have evidence that Kissinger and Haig left matter to
subordinates.  Some claim documents are from CIA, which is reptd to have agents
in Korean exec mansions, while others claim documents are from Natl Security
Agency, which is reptd to have intercepted cables between Seoul and Washington.
Nixon and Ford Adms are seen as having done little about Korean lobby until '75,
when Under Sec of State Philip A Habib recommended that Kissinger turn rept of
alleged bribes taken by US Congressmen over to Justice Dept.  HR Subcom on
Internatl Orgns is slated to hold hearings on exec branch officials' knowledge
of Korean lobby (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 248-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 101 words

Amnesty Internatl publishes list of 62 legislators it says have been imprisoned
or have 'disappeared' in 17 countries.Appeals to legis bodies to campaign for
their release.  Says most of those imprisoned have not been charged or tried.
17 countries named are Bahrain, Brazil, Chile, Ghana, Indonesia, Kenya,
Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, Somalia, S Korea, Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vietnam and Yugoslavia.  Says 21 of legislators named are being held
without trial in Indonesia.  List of 62 legislators includes Erich S Silva from
Chile and Kim Dae Jung from S Korea.  Others noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 249-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 6, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 6

LENGTH: 17 words

Thousands of people daily reptdly are undertaking beautification projects in
Hanoi, Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 249-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 7, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

Canadian Wheat Bd plans to sell 120,000 tons of winter wheat to Vietnam under
3-yr credit arrangement guaranteed by Canadian Govt (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 250-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 7, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 17, Column 4

LENGTH: 252 words

Analysis of Carter Adm's efforts to counter opposition to Panama Canal treaty.
Adm seen moving with extreme caution on whole range of internatl issues to avoid
offending legislators whose votes will be needed to insure canal pkg's passage.
Trend toward deferring sensitive foreign policy issues amts to new departure for
Carter Adm, which began its term of office by moving so rapidly on so many
different questions that it was criticized.  Now Adm is leaving itself open for
criticism that it is putting too many issues on back burner.Issues that have
either been put off indefinitely or deferred include Pres Carter's vow to 'work
closely' with Cong to secure ratification of UN Genocide Conv, decision before
Sec Vance's trip to China to label mission 'exploratory' and to take no actions
that might antagonize conservatives sympathetic to Taiwan, decision not to seek
supplemental mil aid request for S Korea this yr because of conservative
unhappiness with Adm's decision to withdraw US ground troops from S Korea,
decision to defer taking necessary legal steps to cut off funds from Rhodesia
for Rhodesian Information Office in Washington and in other capitals and Adm
preference to extend US-USSR agreement on limiting strategic arms, which expires
Oct 3, by formal understandings that would avoid Cong debate during this period.
Adm officials acknowledge that early enthusiasm for pressing ahead with
diplomatic relations with Vietnam and Cuba has been tempered by strong
opposition in Cong (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 25

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 9, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

Sen approves bill, 87-2, to enable some Vietnam veterans who received upgraded
discharges to receive veterans' benefits.  Bill aims to insure that vets whose
undesirable discharges are upgraded under pardon or amnesty cannot receive
benefits by that program alone.  Persons who received upgraded discharge under
standard provisions used by discharge review boards could qualify for benefits.
Bill also gives VA discretionary authority to provide health care for disability
incurred in line of duty (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 252-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 9, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY MAX H SEIGEL

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 118 words

Fed Dist Judge Jack B Weinstein, in unusual hearing at Columbia Law School,
issues temporary restraining order barring Fed Govt from changing status of some
mil personnel designated as missing in action in Vietnam to killed in action.
Says order will apply only in cases where there are no designated recipients of
benefits or where beneficiaries do not oppose change in status in order to
protect rights of missing men themselves.  Order is in response to lawsuit filed
in behalf of 21 servicemen listed as missing.  Defense Dept spokesman says armed
services had been instructed to temporarily halt status revs until ct situation
is clarified.  Dermot G Foley, lawyer representing missing, comments (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 252-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 11, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 138 words

Foreign Sec Carlos P Romulo, speaking on behalf of 5 members of Assn of
Southeast Asian Nations, declares himself 'fully satisfied' that US will remain
present in region 'in a manner that will be helpful'.  Speaks at end of 3-day
meeting between reprs of assn and Amer delegation led by Under Sec of State
Richard N Cooper.  It was 1st time US had met with 5 nations as group--Thailand,
Indonesia, Philippines, Malaysia and Singapore.  US is aware of fact that Amer's
traditional allies in Southeast Asia, badly shaken by Amer debacle in Indochina,
had their confidence further upset by Carter's decision to withdraw Amer gound
troops gradually from S Korea.Philippine Pres Ferdinand Marcos expresses concern
over balance of forces in region.  Emphasizes his unease, shared in Southeast
Asia, over Vietnam's intentions (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 254-1

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 11, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Philippine Pres Ferdinand E Marcos, during meeting with ASEAN and US reprs,
Manila, comments on unease, shared by other SE Asian nations, over Vietnamese
Govt intentions in area.Says he is worried over Vietnam's maintenance of army on
war footing and with vast quantities of captured US war materiel and its
apparent dominance over Laos (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 254-1

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 12, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY THEODORE JACQUENEY

SECTION: Page 32, Column 4

LENGTH: 32 words

Theodore Jacqueney lr on Marion Wright Edelman's Aug 14 Op-Ed article and Arthur
W Galston's Aug 25 reply on humanitarian concern for Vietnam's starving children
and those in re-educ camps.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 25

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 14, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 95 words

With Soviet mil attache Maj Gen Aleksandr V Knyrkov watching NATO maneuvers for
1st time under provisions in '75 Helsinki accord allowing nations to observe mil
maneuvers of other signers, about 59,000 US troops join their allies for start
of annual Reforger war games.  Knyrkov was invited by W Ger Army to observe NATO
maneuvers in which US Army's 1st Armored Brigade is taking part.  Reforger,
which stands for Restationing of Forces to Ger, is annual exercise to test
readiness of NATO forces since 35,000 US troops were withdrawn from W Ger during
Vietnam War (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 257-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 16, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6

LENGTH: 34 words

Mark Rudd appears in ct in Chicago to face charges of battery, mob action and
obstructing police officer stemming from '69 'Days of Rage' protest against
Vietnam war.  Is released after posting bond (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 259-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 19, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 19 words

Article relates tales by Vietnamese refugees, enroute to US from Philippines, of
boat escapes from Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 262-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 19, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 71 words

Former Vietnamese policeman and engineer describe their experiences in fleeing
from Vietnam, noting preparations for escape took almost 1 yr.  Men and 100
other Vietnamese refugees will arrive in San Francisco (Calif) Sept 19, as part
of 1st group under Pres Carter's refugee program.  Approx 15,000 Indochinese,
including 7,000 from Vietnam who fled country in small fishing boats, will be
admitted to US under program (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 26

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 20, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 38 words

99 Vietnamese 'boat people' in Thai refugee camps are 1st to leave for US under
US Pres Carter's new admittance program.  8,000 such refugees will enter US.
Refugee Dr Nguyen Huynh Anh comments on conditions in Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 263-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 20, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

Article on conditions in Vietnam as told by refugee 'boat people' who have fled
country and are seeking asylum in Western countries.  Reasons for leaving
country most often cited by refugees are pol pressures, fear of being uprooted,
unemployment and mounting hardships in material life.  Shortages of rice and
other staples reptdly are widespread.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 263-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 21, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 257 words

32d UN Gen Assembly opens and approves admission of Vietnam to UN with 105
countries co-sponsoring its application for membership.  Djibouti is also
admitted, raising UN membership to 149.  Yugoslav Deputy Foreign Min Lazar
Mojsov is elected Pres of '77 Gen Assembly.  Says Vietnam, having suffered from
30 yrs of war, deserves outside assistance to help in its recovery.  Cambodia's
voting rights disputed because Govt has refused on principle to pay $36,984 in
contributions owed by former Govt of Prime Min Lon Nol, which was ousted in '75.
US delegate Andrew Young says US looks to future in developing constructive
relations with Vietnam.  Recalls that yrs ago he came with late Rev Martin
Luther King Jr and others to demonstrate near UN against war.  Says it is
particularly fitting that Mrs Coretta King is member of Amer delegation as well
as Repr Charles W Whalen, who also opposed US involvement.  Concern about Middle
East situation deepens with rept from UN truce observers in southern Lebanon
that fighting there between Israeli-backed Lebanese Christians and Palestinian
guerrillas has increased.  UN Sec Gen Waldheim directs appeal to all parties for
restraint.  Delegates, closing 31st Assembly on Sept 19, turn over records of
so-called north-south conf in Paris, which ended in June, to 32d session for
another debate rather than push matter to vote and demonstrate their
disagreement.  Illus of Vietnamese delegation, headed by Foreign Min Nguyen Duy
Trinh, being led to seats by UN Protocol Chief Pedro Churruca (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 264-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 21, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY WALLACE TURNER

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

108 Vietnamese 'boat people' refugees arrive in San Francisco, Calif, from
Thailand, in 1st wave of refugees under US Pres Carter's new refugee admittance
program.  Total of 15,000 refugees are to be admitted.  Experiences of Cuu Do
and family in escaping Vietnam and seeking asylum in other SE Asian countries
recalled.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 264-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 21, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

Discussion of growing threat of food shortage in Laos.  Shortage is attributed
to lack of sufficient rainfall, drought, 60% shortfall in rice production and
generally weak econ.  Laotian and UN Development Program officials are making
internatl plea for 367,500 tons of rice and 2,000 tons of seed to aid country's
food supply which will be exhausted by March '78.  Govt officials are trying to
combat effects of drought and to prevent any further crop damage by floods from
late-fall rains.  Vietnam also faces food shortage due to harsh weather
conditions and is expected to need at least 1.5 Million tons of donated or
imported grains to prevent widespread starvation (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 264-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 22, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 6

LENGTH: 38 words

US Appeals Ct, in case involving law suit filed by group of Vietnam War veterans
against Fed Prosecutor Guy Goodwin, holds that private citizens can, under some
circumstances, sue Fed prosecutors for courtroom misconduct (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 265-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 22, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY PRANAY GUPTE

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 119 words

UN Sec Gen Waldheim, Djibouti Pres Hassan Gouled, Vietnam's Deputy Prime Min
Nguyen Duy Trinh and Gen Assembly Pres Lazar Mojsov attend flag-raising ceremony
outside Assembly bldg.  Vietnam and Djibouti, who were formally admitted to UN,
have their flags displayed for 1st time on 'flag row'.  UN security head Harold
A Trimble comments.  Flags are made by Annin Flag Co of NYC.  Frank Reickert,
manager of UN catering, says UN menu will soon carry culinary features from
Vietnam and Djibouti.  Manfred Lachs, member of Internatl Ct of Justice at The
Hague, has been awarded Wateler Peace Prize, which is given by Netherlands.
Illus of flags and of US Amb Andrew Young with Coretta Scott King at UN session.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 265-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 25, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS BUTSON and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 11 words

Comment on Vietnam's admission to UN, becoming 149th member (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 268-1

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 25, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 1

LENGTH: 80 words

Former James Madison Univ univ Prof James McClung and students Jay G Rainey and
Stephen Rochelle begin 6-mo jail terms for part in '70 demonstrations protesting
Vietnam war, violations of student rights and refusal by school, then called
Madison Coll, to renew contracts of some profs, including McClung.  Sentences
imposed after Judge Joshua Robinson refused to overturn '70 jury decision on
grounds of upholding integrity of judicial process.  McClung comments.  His
illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 268-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 25, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

Survey finds that majority of gens who served in Vietnam war from '65 to '72
say, in retrospect, that US should have avoided involvement.  Survey was
conducted by ex-Brig Gen Douglas Kinnard, who served in Vietnam, and appears in
his book The War Managers.  Finds gens criticized way war was run, termed
so-called 'body count' exaggerated, viewed US tactics as poor and ineffective,
and believed TV coverage tended to be sensational.  Kinnard comments, int.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 26

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 26, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY PRANAY GUPTE

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 73 words

Thousands of Amers who opposed US involvement in Indochina greet Vietnamese UN
delegation, ceremony, NYC.  Supporters of former S Vietnamese Govt demonstrate
outside bldg.  Antiwar activist Cora Weiss and Deputy Foreign Min Ngo Dien
speak.  Ramsey Clark and Action Dir Sam Brown comment.  Friendshipment,
coalition of US peace and religious groups, sponsors fete.  Clark illus with
delegation member Le Anh Kiet.  Protest illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 269-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 27, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Page 51, Column 5

LENGTH: 39 words

Ex-POW Richard M Brunhaver, whose A-4C attack bomber malfunctioned and crashed
in N Vietnam, sues McDonnell Douglas Corp, plane's mfr, for damages because of
malfunction for injuries he recd and for incarceration by N Vietnamese (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 270-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 27, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Gen William C Westmoreland says he agrees with majority of gens who fought in
Vietnam that US should not have gone to war there.  Qualifies opinion by saying
'we weren't allowed to win it'.  Views of gens were made known in survey by
Douglas Kinnard in book The War Managers.  Westmoreland's comments on other
survey findings noted (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 270-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 30, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 98 words

Laos gives new stimulus to its close ties with Vietnam by sending mil delegation
to Hanoi.  Laotian Defense Min Khamtai Siphandon pays tribute to Vietnamese
troops who fought in Laos.  Delegation meets with Prime Min Pham Van Dong and
with Defense Min Gen Vo Nguyen Giap.  Vietnam's influence in Laos now appears to
be greater that USSR's.  Western sources say thousands of Vietnamese troops are
believed to be still stationed in Laos.  Laotians deny that Vietnam's influence
relegates Laos to status of semi-protectorate.  Laotian Foreign Min aide Soubanh
Srithirath comments, int (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 273-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 30, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

US mission on its way to Hanoi to recover remains of 22 Amers who died in
Vietnam arrives, Manila.  State Dept aide Frank Sieverts, mission head, comments
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 273-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 30, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 174 words

Cambodia's newly identified principal leader Pol Pot says in Peking that
situation in Cambodia is 'excellent,' contrary to repts by refugees, and that
border clashes with Thailand and Vietnam grew out of disputes over territory
lost by Cambodia in 19th century, speech at banquet in his hon.  Phom Penh radio
broadcasts recorded speech by Pol Pot announcing for 1st time inside Cambodia
that Communist Party was guiding force behind revolution.  In his banquet
speech, Pol Pot says evils he attributes to imperialism and exploitation have
been basically abolished.  He makes no mention of repts by refugees of continued
mass executions, forced migration of virtually all urban residents to
countryside and brutal rule by local Anka reprs since end of war.  Instead, he
paints picture in which indus, agr, educ and public health are flourishing.
Main points he makes outlined.  Countering views as reptd by refugees noted.
Pol Pot says his trip to China coincides with Cambodian Communist Party's
decision to make public its existence (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 273-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 30, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 41 words

US Defense and State Dept mission arrives in Manila en route to Hanoi to recover
remains of 22 Amers who died in Vietnam.  Mission head Frank Sieverts says
mission concentrates on 1,800 missing in action in Vietnam, int.  Expresses
optimism (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 27

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 1, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY TANNER

SECTION: Page 7, Column 4

LENGTH: 160 words

Pope Paul VI opens 5th synod of Roman Catholic bishops with call for energetic
propagation of Catholic faith in a world which he sees as convinced that
'immense progress of rational civilization, the result of technology and
science, removes the need for religion'.  Holds key theme of bishops'
deliberations will be theme of evangelism.  Pope's solemn emphasis on
inescapable God-given nature of his office is seen as confirmation that he does
not have right to relinquish office despite suffering from severe arthritis.
Among delegates attending synod are those from Vietnam and Eastern churches,
including Copts of Egypt, Melchites and Lebanese Maronites.  In later address,
Pope Paul stresses need for unity of Cath Ch and lauds increased collaboration
between Pontiff and world bishops, apparent allusion to their support in face of
challenge to his authority by Abp Marcel Lefebvre of France, who rejects recent
church reforms.  Photo of Pope Paul (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 274-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 1, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 22 words

Background data on Tucker P E Gougelmann, civilian whose remains are among those
of 22 Amers being flown to US from Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 274-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 1, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 90 words

Remains of 21 Amer servicemen who died during Vietnam war and of civilian,
Tucker P E Gougelmann, who died in '75 in Saigon, are turned over to US
officials in Hanoi ceremony.  Illus.  Ceremony, 5th of its kind since war,
brings to 61 number of bodies released by Vietnam.  US lists 2,500 Amers still
unaccounted for from Indochina war, 700 of them listed as missing in action.
Vietnamese aide Vu Hoang, State Dept aide Frank Sieverts comment.  Gougelmann's
is only name disclosed.  Sieverts gives Vu facts on 30 other missing Amers (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 274-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 2, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD R LINGEMAN

SECTION: Section 7; Page 55

LENGTH: 21 words

Ruth Selden, vp and exec editor of Frederick Ungar, NY publishing house,
comments on co's Vietnamese language books (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 275-0

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 2, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 169 words

Fox Butterfield discusses Vietnam's food shortage and other problems.  Rice
shortage is estimated as high as 2 million tons, 20% of normal crop.  Rice
rations are cut sharply.  Shortage has upset plans to double exports and reduce
large trade deficit.  Factors in shortage are prolonged drought, Govt
mismanagement of agr, resistance to collectivization.  North's food production
is estimated at about 5 millions tons a yr, south's as over 6 million.
Specialists view 5-yr plan goal of 8%-10% annual increase in rice output as
unrealistic.  South has trained manpower shortage apparently because approx
100,000 army officers and officials of former Saigon govt remain in so-called
re-education camps, and because Communists have chosen not to employ many
southern professionals such as doctors, businessmen and technicians.  Minorities
reptdly continue to resist Communist rule.  Govt is conducting campaign against
bureaucratic red tape in Saigon.  Army repts disciplinary problems among
draftees in south (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 27

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Page 39, Column 3

LENGTH: 48 words

60 Vietnamese refugees are playing Vietnamese soldiers and Vietcong guerillas in
film called Go Tell the Spartans being filmed in Valencia, Calif.  More than
20,000 Southeast Asian refugees are estimated unemployed in Calif.  Dir Ted Post
and producer Allen F Bodoh comment.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 277-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY SAUL ROSEN

SECTION: Page 36, Column 4

LENGTH: 80 words

Amer Veterans Com natl chmn Saul Rosen lr contends that Pres Carter clemency
program to service personnel who have received less-than-honorable discharges
issued during Vietnam War era has not realized its limited objective because of
program that was defective from beginning.  Holds that allotted time of 6 months
was clearly insufficient to process eligible 420,000, especially in view of
light publicity, massive 'media indifference' and provisions for case-by-case
review.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 27

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 5, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 129 words

Defense Dept ends 6-month campaign to review less-than-honorable Vietnam-era
discharges, with Army, Navy, Marine and Air Force discharge review bds still
facing 8,600 pending cases.  Effective Oct 5 '77, all discharge reviews will be
processed under normal dept procedures using written application procedures.
Pentagon repts that by end of week of Sept 26 16,227 discharges had been
upgraded: 11,364 undesirable discharges to genl, 1,682 undesirable to honorable
and 3,181 general to honorable.  In addition, 1,065 Vietnam-era deserters had
inquired about discharges, out of estimated total of 4,560, and 784 had
'returned to mil control' and received discharges, mostly undesirable.  Pres
Carter's son Jack confirms that he did not seek review of his genl discharge
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 27

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 6, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 23 words

31 Vietnamese refugees picked up from boat by Hong Kong marine police are
admitted to hosp for observation for suspected cholera (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 279-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 7, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

Article on ways in which US and Vietnam are edging toward smoother ties, while
going through motions of disagreeing publicly.  On Oct 5, Pres Carter included
Vietnam's UN delegate, Dinh Ba Thi, among Asians invited to luncheon.  On Oct 6,
by way of contrast, UN Gen Assembly's econ com approved postwar aid to Vietnam,
with only US saying it could not participate in decision because Cong has barred
direct help to Hanoi.  Thi, aware of dilemma, limited his response to mild
statement (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 280-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 156 words

Pres Carter signs bill to deny veterans' benefits to Vietnam mil deserters and
other servicemen who received upgraded discharges under his special discharge
review program.  Legislation also requires Pentagon to set new standards for
upgrading bad discharges dating back to World War I and then review them on
case-by-case basis.  ACLU and United Church of Christ are among orgns which
challenge new law.  Denial of benefits to dischargees who were absent without
leave for 180 consecutive days is particularly controversial portion of bill
because such vets do not legally fit definition of deserters and were often
persuaded through plea bargaining to take 'undesirable' discharges.  Carter
notes that Justice Dept warned him that law is 'probably unconstitutional'
because of provision that denies benefits only to those 180-day absentees who
received upgraded discharges under President's special discharge review program
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 282-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY NICHOLAS M HORROCK

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 152 words

FBI secret rept, prepared in Aug '76, asserts that Cubans in UN and at Cuban
embassy in Canada aided militant American antiwar group, Weather Underground, in
late '60's and early '70's.  Rept was prepared after Justice Dept opened
investigation into charges that bureau agents used illegal methods in attempts
to apprehend Weathermen fugitives.  Claims North Vietnam also gave group some
technical assistance, but repts no evidence that any Communist power ever made
direct attempts to stir up US dissidents.  Discloses that Cuban officials helped
several Weather Underground members reach Czechoslovakia and then return to US
secretly.  States that objective of Cuban intelligence agency, DGI, was to
recruit Americans who had pol contacts or who might be in position to provide
Cuban Govt with access to pol, econ and mil intelligence.  Notes that informant
Larry Grathwohl reptd DGI code system to FBI (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 282-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 10, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY TANNER

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 58 words

Saigon, Vietnam, Abp Nguyen Van Binh says Vietnamese Catholics are determined to
coexist with country's Communist regime and that priests must find way to
communicate with Communist-oriented congregations, speech, Synod of Cath
Bishops, Rome.  Attitude reptdly has blessing of Pope but is opposed by more
conservative members of ch hierarchy (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 283-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 12, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6

LENGTH: 87 words

US Army repts inventory check has revealed it has $118.5 Million less in
clothing and other equipment than was thought to be on hand.  Notes approx 5% of
missing items are believed stolen, but weapons were not found to be among those
goods missing.  Attributes losses to sloppy inventory practices developed by
officers during Vietnam War, when they were not required to acct for lost
equipment.  Repts that, in addition to uncovering shortages, it also found $89
million in equipment it did not know it had on hand (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 285-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 12, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 24 words

Hong Kong authorities allow 43 Vietnamese refugees to land after sea rescue by W
Ger vessel.  Refugees are granted 3-mo temporary visas (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 285-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 13, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HORST FAAS

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Horst Faas article on vast tunnels and caverns stretching 150 mi from Cu Chi to
Saigon, Vietnam, and to surrounding provincial capitals.  Tunnels were used by
Vietnamese soldiers to infiltrate Amer strongholds during war.  Tunnels took 30
yrs to dig and were used extensively at height of war.  Capt Nguyen Thanh Linh,
who lead soldiers in '66, comments.  Nguyen illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 286-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 13, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY IAN MATHER

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 54 words

Ian Mather article on current Saigon, Vietnam scene.  Notes many hotels are in
process of being refurbished.  Former Saigon Govt bldgs and presidential palace
are being used by new Govt.  Many Western-style establishments are closed.
Mather notes most forceful impression of city is how much has survived war.
Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 286-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 14, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 71 words

Ian Mather article on problems northern Vietnamese Govt faces in attempting to
bring south under control.  Notes there are estimated 150,000 former S
Vietnamese soldiers in re-educ camps.  Notes Prime Min Pham Van Dong remains
committed to gentle approach rather than hard-line revolutionary one argued for
during Communist Party Cong.  Econ problems plague new Govt, with unemployment
at 500,000 workers in Saigon alone (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 287-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 14, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

US officials say Amer yacht Brillig apparently was fired on, rammed and crew
apparently seized by either Vietnamese, Cambodian or rebel gunboats in contested
waters off Vietnam.  Crew members were Cornelia Anne Dellenbaugh, Charles Affel
and Leland Dickerman (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 287-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 14, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

39-ft US sailboat Brillig fired on and rammed by 2 gunboats off Vietnam.
3-member crew seized.  Identified as Cornelia Anne Dellenbaugh, Charles Affel
and Leland Dickerman (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 287-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 15, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 160 words

Hijackers who diverted Lufthansa Boeing 737 to Dubai, United Arab Emirates,
threaten to kill 91 hostages aboard plane and Hanns Martin Schleyer, W Ger
industrialist kidnapped Sept 5, unless 13 terrorists are freed from W Ger and
Turkish jails.  UAE Defense Min repts hijackers had demanded 11 tons of jet
fuel, enough for 4 hours of flight.  W Ger Min of State Hans-Jurgen Wischnewski
arrives in Dubai for negotiations.  W Ger indicates it will consider releasing
11 W Ger terrorists, including members of Baader-Meinhof gang, but Turkey
refuses to release 2 Palestinians.  Hijackers, members of hitherto unknown group
called Orgn of Struggle Against World Imperialism, sends to Paris newspaper
France-Soir photo of Schleyer and instructions for 13 terrorists' safe passage
to Vietnam, Somalia or Southern Yemen.  Hijackers refuse to release hostages or
to allow doctor on plane to examine passenger apparently suffering from
diabetes.  Photo of plane (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 288-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 16, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HORST FAAS

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Article by Horst Faas, AP newsman who covered war in Vietnam for 12 yrs, on his
impressions after recent visit there.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 289-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 16, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY TANNER

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 193 words

W Ger Govt gives no indication it will meet hijackers' demands and release from
Ger prisons 11 members of Baader-Meinhof terrorist orgn to gain freedom of 87
hostages held in Lufthansa jet in Dubai and Hanns Martin Schleyer, W Ger
industrialist kidnapped in Sept.  Govt sources note Somalia, Vietnam and
Southern Yemen have all refused to accept terrorists, thus destroying 1 of
hijackers' basic demands.  Arabic-speaking hijackers refuse to release women,
children and sick from jet but continue negotiations with officials, who propose
release of those hostages in exchange for refueling plane.  Schleyer family
cancels arrangements to surrender $15 million to kidnappers' reprs after word of
transaction leaked out.Schleyer's son Hanns Eberhardt sues Govt to meet
terrorists' demands and insure his father's release, claiming every citizen has
right to life and physical inviolability.  Kidnappers fail to communicate with
Denis Payot, Ger Govt's liaison with kidnappers, after ransom delivery was
canceled.  Observers rept no unusual activity at prisons where terrorists are
held.  Photo of Dubai airport and hijacker of bus in Nagasaki, Japan (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 289-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 18, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

State Dept says Vietnam is holding 3 Amers aboard yacht Brillig which was fired
on and seized recently.  Message transmitted by Vietnam says crew is well (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 291-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 18, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 13 words

US State Dept repts Vietnam is holding 3 Amers aboard yacht Brillig (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 291-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 18, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY IAN MATHER

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Ian Mather article on scene in Vietnam.  Notes much of clutter of war has yet to
be removed, including unexploded mines and war equipment.  Govt estimates that
in 1st yr after victory, 322,000 working days were spent defusing 885,870 bombs
and mines at cost of hundreds of lives.  Illus.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 291-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 19, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 103 words

HR votes 229 to 195 to rescind previous measure barring US contributions to
internatl banks from being lent to countries which violate human rights,
including Uganda, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, Cuba, Angola and Mozambique.  Bill
was opposed by Sen and Pres Carter, who promised to instruct US delegates to
oppose loans to these countries.  Proponents of measure were not satisfied with
Carter's promise, however, noting banks could override US opposition.
Appropriations Committee chmn George H Mahon holds compromise measure is 'best
bill we're going to get'.  Details of controversy and other House votes cited
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 292-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 20, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Cong completes action on $6.7 Billion foreign-aid bill banning direct econ aid
to Uganda, Laos, Vietnam, Mozambique, Angola and Cuba, and barring certain mil
aid to Argentina, Ethiopia, Uruguay, Brazil, El Salvador and Guatemala.  HR
agrees to drop provision barring US funds in internatl development banks from
going to 7 countries barred from receiving direct econ aid after Pres Carter
promised US would oppose loans to them from internatl banks (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 293-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 21, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 65 words

Bruce L Beyer, who fled US in '70 after being charged with striking FBI agent as
result of his involvement in Vietnam War protest, returns from Canada and is
promptly arrested by US marshalls.  Fed Dist Ct Judge John T Curtin, who had
originally sentenced Beyer to 3 yrs in jail for striking agent, releases Beyer
on $2,000 bail and suggests he might reconsider sentence.  Beyer photo (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 294-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 22, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE H FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Page 27, Column 2

LENGTH: 168 words

Clyde Farnsworth comments on economic paradox between Pres Carter's goals and
actions.  Notes that Carter actions have contributed to low level of business
confidence though his goals are tied to healthy economy.  Some in Cong and
business fault Pres for going ahead too quickly with too much legislation.
Economist Arthur Okun of Brookings Institution estimates that Govt initiatives
will force up cost of living by as much as 1.5% in '78.  Du Pont exec Irving
Shapiro notes that long-term investment is not being undertaken because of
uncertainty over wide array of pending legislation.  Repr Al Ullman and Gen
Electric exec Reginald Jones are among those urging Carter to go slow on tax
reform and hard on tax reductions.  Philadelphia Natl Bank exec A Gilbert
Heebner faults Carter on his economic policies.  Present economy is seen as
result of Vietnam War spending and huge increase in oil prices.  Trade official
Robert Strauss predicts relations between Carter and business community will
improve.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 29

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 23, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS BUTSON and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 64 words

HR reluctantly agrees to eliminate amendment to foreign aid bill which would
have barred US aid, through internatl lenders, to Uganda, Cambodia, Laos,
Vietnam, Cuba, Angola and Mozambique.  World Bank pres Robert S McNamara held
conditions of amendment regarding US contributions were 'unacceptable' to bank,
while Sen also rejected amendment in its version of $6.8 Billion bill (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 296-2

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 24, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES PETERS

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Charles Peters article scores US indifference to Vietnam veterans and plight of
refugees.  Holds left and right should admit wrongdoing and find common ground
in order to face obligations.  Contends there is evidence that guerrilla warfare
is continuing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 29

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 25, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 6

LENGTH: 49 words

10 Vietnam veterans burn discharge papers in eternal flame at Daley Center Plaza
(Chicago) in protest over Govt's treatment of vets.  Vets for Peace and Vietnam
Vets Against the War denounce Veterans Day as 'phony honor' because of high
unemployment among vets and lack of Govt benefits (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 298-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 25, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

Pres Carter holds US owes 'special debt of gratitude' to Vietnam veterans,
during Veterans Day speech at Arlington Natl Cemetery.  Notes that those who
served in Vietnam, including his son Jack, were 'sometimes scorned' by their
peer group.  Holiday is used by several vet orgns to criticize Carter's
policies, with Mil Discharge Review Project announcing it plans to file suit
challenging denial of unemployment benefits to vets with less than honorable
discharges.  Several other criticisms of Carter's policy regarding upgrading of
some discharges noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 298-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 26, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JOSEPH B TREASTER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 129 words

Joseph Treaster svy notes that effectiveness of trade embargoes may depend on
geographic location, in article examining effects of various embargoes by US and
allies.  Notes that attempts to enforce embargoes have been lax.  Repts Rhodesia
has been able to circumvent embargo by receiving imports and channeling exports
through S Africa.  Notes that US embargo against Cuba had severe effect on its
economy because of Cuba's physical isolation.  Repts that African countries of
Gabon, Zambia and Zaire have disregarded embargo on Rhodesia.  Notes that
neither N Korea nor China suffered markedly from US embargo during Korean War
because they got what they wanted from other countries.  Notes US trade
sanctions remain in effect against N Korea, Vietnam and Cambodia (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 29

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 27, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY IAN MATHER

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 98 words

Article by Ian Mather, who covered Vietnam war for London Daily Mail, on Hanoi's
indoctrination, or 're-educ' plans, which frequently require people to foresake
cities for rural areas where agr production was halted by war.  He describes
visit to 'new econ zone' of Le Binh Xuan and int with zone chmn Ho Van Thiet.
Says Ho says zone is 1 of 9 state-controlled territories in Saigon area.  Ho
says main aim of settlements is to reclaim marginal land for state agr by
digging canals and constructing irrigation systems.  Mather also describes visit
to re-educ center for prostitutes (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 300-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 27, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 101 words

Dr Arthur W Galston, Yale prof who periodically travels to Vietnam, repts Hanoi
has embarked on full-scale development of its scientific research facilities,
and is likely to name Gen Vo Nguyen Giap to head scientific program, article in
Science.  Urges Carter Adm to aid program.  He has lectured to Vietnamese
scientists and was recd by Prime Min Pham Van Dong and other sr Govt officials.
Says Vietnamese science, rudimentary by Western standards, is making
contributions in several fields.  Says science center has been built in Hanoi at
which some 400 scientists and technicians work.  Giap por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 300-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 30, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RAYMOND A SOKOLOV

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16

LENGTH: 25 words

George Condominas book We Have Eaten The Forest.  The Story of a Montagnard
Village in the Central Highlands of Vietnam revd by Raymond A Sokolov.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 30

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 30, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

4 armed hijackers commandeer Vietnamese DC-3 airliner on domestic flight, kill
radio operator and flight mechanic, knife and shoot steward seriously.  Plane is
forced to land at Selatar mil airport in Singapore after making refueling stop
in Thailand.  Plane is carrying 36-40 persons.  Singapore officials state Govt
is considering whether to grant hijackers' request for pol asylum (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 303-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 30, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY NICHOLAS GAGE

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 176 words

Narcotics officials attending Internatl Drug Enforcement Assn conf hold W Eur
has fastest-growing heroin addiction in world.  Dutch official repts that number
of identified heroin addicts in W Eur soared almost 10 times in 5 years, from
9,000 to 88,000, while heroin seizures in '76 totaled 1,500 pounds, up from 25
pounds in '72.  Growth of Eur heroin use follows end of Vietnam War, when Asian
dealers, lacking market among US soldiers, began to dump large supplies in W
Eur.  Amsterdam is principal Eur delivery point because of historical ties to
Southeast Asia.  Growth of heroin addiction is accompanied by corresponding rise
in drug-related crimes.  33 Eur and Middle Eastern countries attend conf,
indicating change from earlier attitude that hard drugs were US
problem.Countries now welcome US agents and some send own agents to source
countries.  Those with agents in Thailand are US, France, Netherlands, Canada,
Sweden, Hong Kong and Austrialia, with W Ger expected to follow suit.  Govt
officials comment on law enforcement problems (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 30

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 31, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 53 words

4 hijackers of Air Vietnam DC-3 who forced landing in Singapore surrender to
police after 4 hours of negotiation.  Had killed 2 crew members.  Released 32
passengers and remaining 4 crew members.  Aircraft has been flown back to
Vietnam.  Singapore Govt has not reached decision on how to deal with hijackers
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 304-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 31, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 130 words

Henry Kamm interview with Cambodian refugee family in Thai refugee camp focuses
on life in Communist-ruled Cambodian village.  Family describes society rigidly
organized by sex and age that is weakening traditional family ties.  Also
describes long work days, lack of contact with family members and outside world,
lack of adequate food and medical care, and many deaths from hunger, illness and
violent punishment for minor transgressions.  Also notes children were not given
pol indoctrination and that indoctrination of adults stressed natl self-reliance
rather than criticism of US or old regime.  Also notes Cambodian Communist Party
was never mentioned.  US refugee program has only 15,000 places for 100,000
refugees from Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia now in Asian camps (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 304-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 1, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Description of tourist sector in Vietnam.  Vietnamese divide tourists into 2
categories, politically motivated and feverish globetrotter.  Warn tourists
against buying black mkt articles from street youths or taking advantage of
prostitutes that frequent some cities.  Some of Vietnam's major tourist
attractions and planned improvements by Natl Tourist Bureau are noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 305-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 2, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 35 words

Brig Gen J C Pennington sends telegram to Mrs Ina E Dodge saying son Sgt Maj
Edward Ray Dodge has officially been listed as presumed dead after being listed
as missing in action in Vietnam war since '64 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 306-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 2, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 59 words

Pres Carter signs $6.7 Billion foreign aid appropriations bill that cuts off aid
partially or totally to some countries deemed guilty of abusing human rights.
Bill excludes all aid for Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and Uganda.  Mil aid is banned
for Ethiopia and Uruguay, and mil credit sales are barred for Argentina, Brazil,
El Salvador and Guatemala (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 306-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 4, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD G HARSHFIELD

SECTION: Page 33, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

Article by Edward G Harshfield, Citibank NA, Hong Kong, vp, on econ conditions
in Vietnam.  He is 1st US businessman to visit N Vietnam in over 20 yrs.  Notes
country is implementing 2d 5-yr plan and contemplates investment of about
$7.5-billion.  Notes major problems include shortages in rice production that
have led to large-scale unplanned imports and major deviation from planned
import levels and assimlation of South and socialization of traditional private
sector.  Comments on country's foreign affairs with neighboring SE Asian
countries.  Drawing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 308-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 4, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 80 words

Pres Carter orders change in Military Code to allow Americans taken prisoner by
an enemy to give captors more than name, rank, service number and birth date if
tortured.  Says change was made to reduce guilt feelings in POW's.  Acted on
recommendation of special civilian-mil com based on experiences of Americans
held prisoner in Vietnam who later acknowledged they divulged more than basic
information after torture.Those who refused had bad feeling for others who
talked (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 308-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 49, Column 5

LENGTH: 44 words

Richard Hughes, conscientious objector who spent 8 yrs in Saigon helping war
orphans and street urchins through hostels and Sunshine Boy Foundation, says
foundation has not been dissolved and bd is to meet shortly to help him decide
on its new direction (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 310-3

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 8, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ARNOLD H LUBASCH

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 180 words

US Ct of Appeals in Manhattan, with Chief Judge Irving Kaufman writing decision,
reverses lower ct ruling ordering broad inquiry into libel suit filed by former
Lieut Col Anthony B Herbert against Columbia Broadcasting System.  Holds
journalists cannot be required to disclose thoughts and opinions they had during
preparation of news story, noting such inquisition would result in their
reluctance to express doubt, and may cause them to avoid controversy and
contention.  Landmark decision, marking 1st time that First Amendment is invoked
to protect thought process of journalist, involves Herbert's contention that he
was defamed by '73 60 Minutes TV program, because it cast doubt on his charges
that Army officers covered up atrocities by US troops during Vietnam War.
Herbert's attys questioned producer of program Barry Lando, who was named in
suit along with reporter Mike Wallace, and it was Lando's refusal to comment on
his thoughts and opinions which provoked ruling.  Details of case and comments
by attys for both sides noted.  Por of Kaufman and of Herbert (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 312-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 9, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY CYRUS L SULZBERGER

SECTION: Page 25, Column 5

LENGTH: 234 words

C L Sulzberger says great complaint about previous Repub Adm was that US foreign
policy was virtually paralyzed by Vietnam War in every area outside Southeast
Asia.  Says Sec Vance denies that US diplomacy has become so bogged down by
arguments over Sen ratification of Panama Canal treaties that it is ineffective
regarding high-priority diplomatic issues like SALT negotiations, Middle East or
southern Africa.  Says Greco-Turkish crisis does not seem to be affected by
canal argument.  Says only immediate reason to stall on this matter is Nov 20
Greek elections when Prime Min Caramanlis hopes to confirm his parliamentary
majority.  Says Panama seems to have no slowing effect on efforts to apply
pressures on Prime Min John Vorster to equalize racial opportunities in S
Africa.  Says US-USSR bilateral exchs on nuclear issues are moving quietly
ahead.  Says US diplomacy has made considerable advances on issue of reactor
contracts with W Ger and France.  Says neither W Ger and France has agreed to
call off existing sales contracts with Brazil and Pakistan respectively, but
both have given US assurances that in future they will transfer abroad neither
sensitive technologies nor sensitive equipment.  Says US is forging ahead slowly
on preliminary talks with USSR about another SALT accord.  Says Vance admits
that Panama Canal pact ratification prospects seem temporarily blocked in Sen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 31

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 10, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

Vietnamese Buddhist movement has smuggled Thich Man Giac, 1 of top leaders, out
of country to begin worldwide campaign against alleged religious persecution.
Thich, in Paris, says he will appeal to Amnesty Internatl and tour W Eur and US.
Is member of Central Exec Council of United Buddhist Ch, which opposed pro-Amer
S Vietnamese Govt during war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 314-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 11, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 111 words

Article finds US veterans' orgns lagging in enrolling veterans of Vietnam war
period and attributes lag to basic difference in values between Vietnam vets and
older veterans.  Cites enrollment statistics of Amer Legion and Veterans of
Foreign Wars, which have only been able to maintain same enrollment of 2.7
Million and 1.8 Million, respectively, despite 8.3 Million pool from Vietnam
era.  Values split is seen on subjects ranging from use of drugs to
Amer-right-or-wrong patriotic fervor that has characterized credo of veterans'
orgns.  Officials of those orgns insist that Vietnam veterans will eventually
join to enjoy rediscovery of mil camaraderie (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 31

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 12, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY MORRIS KAPLAN

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

Veterans Day in NYC brings traditional parades by veterans orgns and picketing
of parades and of local offices of Veterans Adm by Vietnam veterans.  Several
hundred marchers parade along 5th Avenue and are watched by scattering of
spectators.  Meet pickets condemning Amer Legion and Veterans of Foreign Wars.
Pickets later join other pickets in front of Veterans Adm bldg.  Other Vietnam
vets protest showing of movie Heroes as demeaning.  Photo of 5th Ave march (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 316-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 12, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 6

LENGTH: 21 words

Vietnam demands return of 4 men who hijacked DC-3 commercial airliner to
Singapore and resulted in killing of 2 crewmen (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 316-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 13, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY LYNDA OBST

SECTION: Section 6; Page 40

LENGTH: 116 words

Lynda Rosen Obst ints with 7 1st-hand witnesses to major events of '68,
excerpted from her book The Sixties.  Vietnam vet Ron Kovic recalls eve of Tet
offensive, former White House Fellow Doris Kearns Goodwin recounts a visit with
then-Pres L B Johnson at his Tex ranch as he decided not to run for re-election,
James S Kunen recalls student strike at Columbia Univ, journalist Jules Witcover
recalls last day of Robert F Kennedy's Pres campaign, former Sen Eugene McCarthy
recalls his Pres campaign, journalist Abe Peck on demonstrations during Dem Natl
Conv in Chicago, and Julie Nixon Eisenhower recalls painful experience of
campaigning for her father before hostile coll crowd.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 317-1

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 13, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HORST FAAS

SECTION: Page 53, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Horst Faas, photographer/writer who covered Vietnamese war for 12 yrs, revisits
country.  Notes thousands of Communist party workers are 'watchdogs' of soc.
Notes goal of total population control reptdly is falling short because ther are
not enough trusted party workers.  Comments on strict controls set by Govt over
citizens.  Says 150,000 former S Vietnamese soldiers and other workers remain in
re-educ camps (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 317-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 13, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 20, Column 3

LENGTH: 45 words

CIA Dir Stansfield Turner orders personnel reduction in agency's clandestine
services, starting with dismissal of 198 agents in Mar '78 and eventually
totaling dismissals for 800 agents.  Many of agents to be dismissed worked in
Southeast Asia during Vietnam war (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 317-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 13, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Vietnamese Govt orders large-scale transfer of farming supervisors from northern
to southern provs as part of agr reorgn undertaken to fight poverty and
backwardness.  Order establishes agr, forestry and processing indus zones (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 317-1

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 15, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Thai Govt drops threat to force 591 Vietnamese refugees out to sea after UN
officials promise to urge US and other nations to accept them (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 319-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 16, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID K SHIPLER

SECTION: Section 3; Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Joseph Buttinger book The Unforgettable Tragedy about Vietnam revd by David K
Shipler.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 32

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 18, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY SEYMOUR M HERSH

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 213 words

Former CIA analyst Frank Snepp criticizes CIA's '75 Saigon evacuation in new
book 'Decent Interval' to be published by Random House during week of Nov 21
'77.  Principal analyst of N Vietnamese political affairs Snepp further alleges
that US Govt prevented investigation into poorly planned evacuation.  Blames
lack of planning on US officials including Sec of State Henry Kissinger, US
Ambassador Graham Martin and then-CIA station chief Thomas Polgar.  Says
intelligence reports warning of N Vietnamese attack on Saigon were ignored.
Snepp says that CIA published materials designed to mislead '75 Congressional
fact-finding delegation to Saigon, that Kissinger and then-Sec of Defense James
Schlesinger fought over Kissinger's advice to delay evacuation, that Polgar was
duped by Hungarian officials that coalition govt was still possible, and that S
Vietnam Govt abandoned $220 million in gold bullion destined for NY Federal
Reserve Bank.  Evacuation of 55,000 Vietnamese and 6,700 Americans overlooked
400 S Viet special police, 400 S Viet central intelligence employees, many S
Viet intelligence code clerks, 70 translators, and hundreds of communist
defectors.  Snepp's observations are detailed as well as further evidence of
poor US management.  Photo of Snepp (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 322-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 19, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY CAREY WINFREY

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

Decent Interval, book by former CIA sr analyst Frank Snepp, was published by
Random House amid great secrecy because of concern about possible Govt
intervention.  Only dozen of co's employees knew about book and Snepp never
entered co's hq.  Snepp contends CIA tried to whitewash its role in Amer
withdrawal from Vietnam and action invalidates agreement he made to submit book
to agency for approval before publication.  Random House chmn and pres Robert L
Bernstein and ed Robert Loomis comment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 323-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 19, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY SEYMOUR M HERSH

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 147 words

CIA accuses former CIA analyst Frank Snepp of violating agency security oath
through publication of his book about '75 Saigon evacuation, Decent Interval, by
Random House.  Snepp promised CIA Dir Stansfield M Turner that he would abide by
CIA secrecy oath and submit book to Turner prior to publication in May 17 '77
meeting.  Attorney General Griffin B Bell discusses book with Turner and refers
matter to Justice Dept Civil Division after Nov 18 meeting.  Lawyers familiar
with CIA oath say Snepp is innocent of any crime even though he failed to secure
CIA clearance as promised in May meeting.  Random House pres Robert L Bernstein
supports Snepp decision to publish book although unnamed Random House officials
acknowledge that Snepp's deceptive actions were deliberate.  Govt is powerless
to take any sanctions against 15,000 copies being shipped to nation's bookstores
(L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 323-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY C D B BRYAN

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1

LENGTH: 13 words

Michael Herr book Dispatches, about Vietnam war, revd by C D B Bryan.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 32

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY TOM WICKER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 5

LENGTH: 43 words

T Wicker comment on charges being made in book by former CIA sr analyst Frank
Snepp that agency miscalculated collapse of S Vietnam in '75, abandoned
thousands of employees and informants and tried to cover up failures by
preventing Cong investigation (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 32

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 6

LENGTH: 18 words

Vietnamese Govt says Singapore's decision to try 4 Vietnamese airline hijackers
is straining relations (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 324-1

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 21, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY SEYMOUR M HERSH

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 253 words

Former CIA analyst in Saigon, Frank Snepp says that CIA and US Embassy in Saigon
deliberately provided Amer newsmen with false information about possible 'blood
bath' in closing days of Vietnam war despite fact that there was no intelligence
to indicate so.  Says them-Amb Graham AMartin planted stories because he was
trying to generate sympathy for S Vietnamese cause abroad.  At least 1 former
agency employee, Victor Marchetti, who was co-author of book in '74 is under
ct-approved ban to prevent publication.  Snepp, in TV int, names 4 Amer
reporters, Keyes Beech (Chicago Daily News), Robert Shaplen (New Yorker
Magazine), George McArthur (Los Angeles Times and Wendell Merick (US News &
World Rept) as 'favored' by agency and Saigon embassy.  Merick and Beech
respond.  Snepp says NY Times reporter Malcolm W Browne was among reporters
provided with misleading CIA information about chances for last-ditch negotiated
settlement.  Says agency was using Browne to pass message to Communist
delegation at Tan Son Nhut.  Browne acknowledges that he was passing information
at time but contends he did not compromise journalistic principles.  Times
formally requested in '76 and '77, under Freedom of Information Act, that agency
disclose any information regarding past or present relationship between it and
Times or Times employees.  Agency has refused to provide such information but
said in '76 that it no longer enters into such arrangements with part- or
full-time correspondents for Amer publications (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 325-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 21, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 6

LENGTH: 32 words

Vietnamese Communist Party lead Le Duan arrives, Peking, China, and obliquely
warns against Soviet intentions in developing countries.  Is welcomed by Chmn
Hua Kuo-feng and other leaders (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 325-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 29 words

Vietnamese Communist Party chief Le Duan meets with Chinese leader Hua Kuo-feng,
Peking.  Brevity of Le Duan's visit reptdly reflects cool relations on part of
China (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 326-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 23, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD B FISKE

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 96 words

Ints with students and officials at various NYC met area colls indicate that
campus mood has shifted from pol and soc activism of '60's to one of pragmatism,
increased academic seriousness and emphasis on local issues.  New attitude
attributed in part to concern over job situation, absence of strong campus
leaders and lack of single overriding issue like Vietnam War.  Students'
apparent search for security is accompanied by increased consumption of alcohol.
Situation on various campuses noted.  Illus of student demonstrators at Columbia
Univ in '60s and in '77 (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 327-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 23, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY SEYMOUR M HERSH

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 178 words

John R Stockwell, 2d former CIA official who served in S Vietnam, accuses agency
of leaving behind Vietnamese allies and collaborators and covering up evacuation
failures, int.  Confirms many of major allegations in Decent Interval, book
written by former CIA analyst Frank Snepp.  Sen Intelligence com staff dir
William G Miller says com has begun investigation into Snepp allegations.
Stockwell, who was in charge of agency's outpost in Tay Ninh City for 2 yrs,
says there was widespread disillusionment among younger CIA officers over
agency's failure to evacuate allies and decision not to investigate failure.
Former CIA Dir William E Colby denies all allegations.  Denies providing any
classified documents to journalists after Saigon evacuation.  Agency officials
concede that chances have dwindled for major Justice Dept intervention to
prevent distribution of book, which has been shipped to booksellers by Random
House.  Says agency may seek monetary damages from Snepp and Random House as bar
to publication of similar works by other CIA employees (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 327-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 24, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

Vietnamese Communist Party leader Le Duan leaves Peking for southern China.  Is
seen off at airport by Chmn Hua Kuo-feng (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 328-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 24, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 2

LENGTH: 28 words

Vietnamese press agency says 4-million more people will be moved from cities to
rural areas in next 3 yrs.  1.3-million reptdly have been resettled since war
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 328-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 24, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

US and Vietnam to reconvene Paris talks, Dec 7-10.  Delegations to be headed by
US Asst State Sec for Far Eastern Affairs Richard C Holbrooke and Deputy Foreign
Min Phan Hien.  Holbrooke met with Vietnamese officials in NYC during UN Gen
Assembly session.  State Dept spokesman says US has not changed stand on war
reparations.  Vietnam has demanded $3.25-billion, which it says was promised by
Pres Nixon in '73 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 328-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 24, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

Vietnamese Govt reshuffles some members for 2d time in yr.Do Muoi is replaced as
Construction Min by his deputy, Dong Sy Nghiem.  Will retain post as Deputy
Prime Min.  Engineering and Metals Min Nguyen Con is replaced by Nguyen Van Kha,
former State Econ Comm chmn.  Home Trade Min Hoang Quoc Thinh is replaced by his
deputy Tran Van Hien.  Maritime Products Min Nguyen Quang Lam is replaced by Do
Chinh, former Haiphong People's Com chmn (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 328-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 25, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Vietnamese officials say they expect major progress when talks with US reconvene
on Dec 7 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 329-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 188 words

Thailand has reptdly taken increasingly hostile attitude toward refugees, mainly
from Vietnam, who flee their countries in small boats and attempt to gain
temporary asylum in Thailand.  Thai Prime Min Gen Kriangsak Chamanand claims
Thailand is bearing 'disproportionate burden' of refugees, while rest of world
is making inadequate efforts to ease Thailand's burden, thereby necessitating
new policy of sending 'boat people' back to sea.  Holds that if US promises to
grant permanent asylum to refugees, Thailand will continue to accept them.  US
is already principal country of permanent asylum to Indochinese, and has
admitted almost full quota of 7,000 from Thailand and Malaysia.  US and office
of UN High Comr for Refugees have been unsuccessful in requesting that Thailand
soften its policy, but were able to effect some delays, thereby saving refugees
from being sent back to sea while US, French and Australian immigration
officials processed their immigration applications.  Details of past and current
Thai policy detailed.  US immigration system outlined.  Photo of Vietnamese
refugees arriving in Australia (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 330-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 27, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY EDWIN DIAMOND

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30

LENGTH: 26 words

Peter Braestrup book Big Story.  How the American Press and Television Reported
and Interpreted the Crisis of Tet 1968 in Vietnam and Washington.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 33

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 28, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 80 words

'massive' improvement in Canadian attitudes toward US is attributed to 3
factors: severe pol and econ strains besetting Canada, Prime Min Pierre Elliott
Trudeau's warm personal regard for Pres Carter, and fading of Canadian memories
of Watergate and US involvement in Vietnam.  Amer investments in Canada,
formerly decried, are being welcomed.  Trade with US is being sought.  Many
English-speaking Canadians regard US as ally in battle against separatism
espoused by Quebec (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 332-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 29, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 85 words

Decortated Vietnam veteran and prominent real estate salesman Tom Sheff faces
jail sentence for '73 conviction on charges of possessing marijuana and other
drugs because ct plea he filed reactivated dormant plea against him.  Plea filed
for reduction of sentence failed to reach Leon County (Fla) Circuit Ct Judge
James Joanos until Nov '76 when statute of limitations for filing appeal had
expired.  Sheff still faces jail sentence because no statute of limitations
exists for start of jail sentences (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 333-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 29, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 81 words

Cambodian Govt entertains Burmese Pres Gen Ne Win after 2 yrs of withdrawal from
normal state relations.  Reactions of outside diplomats noted.  Diplomats assume
Ne Win visit is result of recent visit to Peking of Cambodian Prime Min Pol Pot.
Govt radical measures to convert country to Communist state noted.  Ne Win and
Cambodian Pres Khieu Samphan stressed nonalignment in declarations at official
functions.  Both countrys' concerns over possible Vietnamese expansion noted
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 333-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 30, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES BARRETT RESTON

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

J Reston article says confs on Middle East proposed by Egyptian Pres Sadat and
UN Sec Gen Waldheim could delay serious definition and reconciliation of issues
separating Israel and Egypt or result in hasty settlement that would only
increase tensions.  Says Carter Adm's doubts about confs are chiefly over what
role US, after agony of Vietnam, will be asked to play in guaranteeing peace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 33

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 30, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY ANDREW H MALCOLM

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

US turns over Tachikawa Air Base to Japan.  Facility, held by US since
occupation of Japan, described.  Its operations during Korean and Vietnam Wars
discussed (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 334-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 30, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 72 words

Vietnamese Govt asks Australia to returned hijacked coastal freighter that
arrived in Darwin with 181 refugees.  Australian police who boarded vessel
confiscated pistol and 3 rifles.  Vietnamese officials say 3 soldiers were
overpowered and locked in cabin by hijackers, who seized vessel Nov 7 enroute
from Saigon to Phu Quoc Island.  Australian Deputy Prime Min J Anthony says
those wanting to return to Vietnam may do so (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 334-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 30, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 298 words

HR Subcom on Internatl Orgns discloses $750,000 plan by South Korean Central
Intelligence Agency in '76 to manipulate Ford Adm, Cong, US news orgns, clergy
and academicians to Seoul's advantage.  It is unclear how much of plan was
carried out and how document, most specific and comprehensive yet seen in Cong
investigation, was obtained.  KCIA defector Sohn Ho Young attests to document's
authenticity, claiming he was shown copy of document by Maj Gen Kim Yung Hwan,
KCIA chief in Washington.  Document includes plans to implant 'intelligence
network' in White House in final year of Ford Adm and to win over Dem Party's
policy research com in Cong.  Repts KCIA 'firmed up' cooperation with similar
Repub Com in '75.Reference to specific coms is unclear because document is
translated from Korean.  Also details attempt to create favorable US public
opinion of Korea using variety of lures, including trips to Korea for
journalists and academic critics.  Also notes plans to establish NYC newspaper
secretly financed by KCIA and to distribute to academicians material not
identified as coming from KCIA.  Plan, which called for spending $750,000 on 140
different operations, is latest in series of yearly plans dating back to early
'70's and was drawn up just after fall of Vietnam.  Document also details South
Korea's plan to thwart North Korea's attempt to open contact with US, to
guarantee efficacy of US security commitment to South Korea and to prevent
anti-Seoul activities among Korean residents of US.  Among specific agencies
targeted for contacts were State Dept, Pentagon, CIA and Natl Security Council.
News orgns cited are NYT, Washington Post, Christian Science Monitor and ABC.
Media spokesmen deny knowing of attempts to influence journalists.  Rept
detailed (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 334-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 1, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JOHN J O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 3; Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

J J O'Connor revs ABC-TV documentary on Chatham (NJ) HS class of '64, which was
used as microcosm of Vietnam war era.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 33

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 1, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 65 words

New Yorker magazine correspondent Robert Shaplen denies published allegation
that he and other newsmen covering Vietnam war had their reporting 'shaped' or
in other ways manipulated by CIA and Amer Embassy in Saigon.  Allegation was
made on TV news program by former CIA analyst Frank Snepp, who asserted that
some journalists were 'favored' by agency, which would leak information (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 335-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 1, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 80 words

New Yorker magazine correspondent in Asia Robert Shaplen has denied published
allegation that he and other newsmen in S Vietnam had their reptg 'shaped' or in
other ways manipulated by CIA and Amer Embassy in Saigon.  Allegation was made
on TV news program Nov 20 by Frank Snepp.  Shaplen says Snepp is on 'ego trip'
and says he finds his performance shocking.  Says that earlier Snepp asked him
to write introduction for his book, Decent Interval, and he turned Snepp down
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 335-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 1, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 14 words

Illus of Thai marine police boat turning away 'boat people' refugees from
Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 335-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 1, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 29 words

Photo of Vietnamese refugees being sent back to sea by Thailand marine police in
Gulf of Siam.  Refugees were refused entry in keeping with new Thai policy on
refugees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 335-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 2, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY T C RHEE

SECTION: Page 26, Column 3

LENGTH: 70 words

Prof T C Rhee lr on Frank Snepps explosive account of CIA bungling in Vietnam
says such misjudgment can be seen in S Korea.  Says that continued rationale of
supporting Pres Park with mil and econ aid bases itself soley on dangerous and
myopic assumption that his regime's need is purely mil and that pol stability
can be attained without meeting urgent conditions for major structural changes
and for new pol climate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 33

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 147 words

Thai Foreign Min Uppadhit Pajariyangkul says Thailand and Vietnam plan to
establish full diplomatic relations and exchange ambs.  Says progress with Laos
and Cambodia is slow.  Announcement reptdly marks 1st foreign-policy success of
current Govt of Prime Min Kriangsak Chamanad.  Joint communique says development
of friendly relations will contribute to 'cause of genuine peace, independence
and neutrality in SE Asia'.  Improvement of Thai relations with Laos and
Cambodia is complicated by assistance both countries have given to Thai
Communist insurgents.  Uppadhit says question of Vietnamese support of Thai
rebels will be raised in further negotiations.  Says country will continue to
provide assistance to Vietnamese refugees.  Thai relations with Laos are
complicated by continuing flow of Laotians, numbering 100 to 150 daily.
Increase in border incidents noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 337-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 95 words

Anthony Lewis article on allegations by former CIA analyst Frank Snepp that
agency bungled Amer evacuation of Vietnam in '75 and left behind thousands of
collaborators.  Notes officials are concerned that other former employees may
write books on similar subjects.  Notes more than 800 persons carrying out
covert activities are to be fired over next 2 yrs.  Cites case under which
former employee Victor Marchetti and writer John Marks were barred from
publishing book CIA and the Cult of Intelligence based on secrecy agreement
signed by all who join agency (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 338-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 76, Column 3

LENGTH: 69 words

Group of Vietnamese refugees living in Augusta, Maine, reptdly has been attacked
and harassed by young men.  Maine Community Services Div spokesman Mickey
O'Malley fears attackers, not realizing that Vietnamese have been fighting most
of their lives, will be hurt.  Incidents described.  4 Amers have been indicted
by Kennebec County grand jury.  Refugees rept some merchants have taken
advantage of them (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 338-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 6

LENGTH: 20 words

US State Dept repts Vietnamese Govt has asked for postponement in talks with US
scheduled to begin Dec 7, Paris (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 338-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 159 words

State Dept seeks emergency admission of 10,000 Vietnamese refugees stranded in
Asia, many living on boats.  Repts number of refugees fleeing Vietnam has risen
from 500 to 1,500 monthly, mainly because of economic concerns, fear of
discrimination and Communist plans to confiscate private property.  Is seeking
support for bill by Repr Joshua Eilberg to admit refugees on emergency basis
without consultations with Congress normally required.  Would admit 5,000
promptly and hold 5,000 places for later arrivals.  Eilberg has also proposed an
internatl conference on refugees to encourage other countries to admit more
Indochinese.  In related matter, Atty Gen Bell is expected to announce use of
his parole authority for emergency admission of 5,000 Soviet and East European
refugees, mostly Jews, who are now in Italy awaiting US visas.  Sen Edward
Kennedy has asked that new parole authority for Soviet and East European
refugees be open-ended (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 33

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 5, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Article on increasingly difficult plight of Vietnamese refugees fleeing by boat
to other SE Asian countries.  Notes Vietnamese officials reptdly have been
instructed to fire on escaping boats, fishing fleet is being increasingly put
under state control and surveillance by Communist Party officials is rising.
Stricter regulations of Thailand and Malaysia in dealing with incoming boat
people noted.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 339-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 6, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 93 words

National Cancer Institute reports that drug, Dapsone, that was taken by tens of
thousands of American troops in Vietnam as part of medical experiment has been
found to cause cancer in male rats.  Drug, which is used in treatment of lepers,
was administered to troops in South Vietnam to see whether it would work as
preventive medicine against severe form of malaria.  Adds that findings do not
prove drug can cause cancer in humans.  Army spokesman explains that Dapsone had
been approved as new investigational drug by FDA before it was administered (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 340-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 7, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 9 words

US to accept 56 Vietnamese refugees in Singapore (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 341-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 9, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

US Army advises Vietnam veterans who were given antimalaria drug dapsone not to
be concerned by test reports that showed it might cause cancer in male rats.
Explains that dose given to rats in tests was almost 320 times as great as that
received daily by soldiers in Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 343-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 11, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS BUTSON and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

Article finds it remarkable, in light of number of airplane hijackings and
confusion and terror accompanying event, that only 3 such seizures have resulted
in tragic crashes.  Cites recent crash of Malaysian Airline System's Boeing 737,
'48 crash of Pacific Airways flying boat after it was commandeered on flight
from Macao to Hong Kong, and '74 crash of South Vietnamese airliner after a
Vietnamese demanded that airliner be rerouted to Hanoi (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 34

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 14, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

Recent arrival in Australia of rash of fishing boats carrying Vietnamese
refugees has provoked unusual xenophobia.  Arrival of 535 boat people coincides
with Australia's natl election campaign and they have become campaign issue.
Dock workers in Darwin have called short strikes to protest arrival of boats.
Much of comment against refugees has centered on their personal character.
Refugees face hostility from 2 minority groups: Labor Party left wing, which
backs Communist victory in Vietnam and which views refugees as reactionaries.
Other group is made up of workers worried about job competition and high
unemployment.  Australia has accepted 5,200 refugees (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 348-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 15, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 73 words

US to press Vietnam for release of 3 Amers held since their sailboat was seized
in Oct off S Vietnam.  Those detained are Cornelia Dellenbaugh, Leland Dickerman
and Charles Affel.  Issue will be raised at next round of talks between 2
countries on normalizing ties.  Vietnam is detaining 3 because boat entered
Vietnamese waters and because suspicious drugs and diving equipment were found
aboard craft.  Relatives of 3 comment (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 349-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 15, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 85 words

RC Ch in US, through US Cath Conf, appeals to Carter Adm to offer unltd asylum
to refugees who have fled by boat from Vietnam, and it promises to find them
homes and jobs without financial help from Govt.  US Cath Conf refugee services
dir John E McCarthy says guarantee of asylum would solve desperate plight of
fugitives, who are being turned away in their boats by countries in S China Sea
and being ignored by passing ships.  Between 500 and 1,500 refugees are thought
to escape from Vietnam each mo (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 349-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 110

LENGTH: 12 words

Christopher L Pendleton lr on Ron Kovic's article on Vietnamese war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 35

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOHN KENNETH GALBRAITH, EUGENE J MCCARTHY and L PENDLETON

SECTION: Section 6; Page 110

LENGTH: 56 words

Lrs from John Kenneth Galbraith, Eugene J McCarthy and Christopher L Pendleton
on Lynda Rosen Obst's Nov 13 article on 60's.  Galbraith denies defecting from
McCarthy's '68 Pres campaign.  McCarthy says Galbraith did stay with him
throughout.  Pendleton says not all Marines were like 1 whose Vietnam memoir was
included in article.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 35

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 68, Column 3

LENGTH: 59 words

CIA documents released through Freedom of Information Act reveal that CIA agents
were sent to potential coll trouble spots during Vietnam era to warn agency
recruiters of demonstrations or possible violence.  Documents contain memo from
then-CIA Dir Richard Helms saying that agency 'should not be reptg at all on
domestic matters of this sort' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 352-1

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 19, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 104 words

A Lewis article on criticism of Pres Carter's conduct of foreign policy.  Says
critics forget reality of foreign policy before Carter, citing such episodes as
secret Christmas bombing of N Vietnam in '72.  Also mentions bombing of Cambodia
in '73, overthrow of govt in Chile after covert US campaign, US failure in '74
to warn Greek mil leaders against coup in Cyprus, which led to Turkish invasion,
and covert US intervention in Angola in '75.  Says there are imperfections in
Carter record but he has started to restore old Amer calues to foreign policy by
willingness to consult, openness and concern for human rights.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 35

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 19, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

62 private US orgns urge Pres Carter to provide emergency food aid to Laos and
Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 353-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 20, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY JOHN LEONARD

SECTION: Page 33

LENGTH: 28 words

Frank Snepp book Decent Interval.  An Insider's Account of Saigon's Indecent End
Told by the CIA's Chief Strategy Analyst in Vietnam revd by John Leonard.  Snepp
por.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 35

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 20, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 65 words

US State Dept officials say Vietnam Govt has indicated Cornelia Anne
Dellenbaugh, Charles Affel and Leland Dickerman, seized in boat off Vietnamese
coast in Oct, will be released before Christmas as 'good will' gesture in light
of current Paris talks.  Friendshipment bd member and antiwar leader Cora Weiss
says she received word from Vietnam and phoned parents of those captured (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 354-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 20, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 59 words

US and Vietnam resume talks, Paris.  US chief negotiator Richard C Holbrooke and
Vietnamese negotiator Deputy Foreign Min Phan Hien are silent on subjects
discussed.  Repts by refugees who have fled country recently on harsh conditions
in country noted.  Main issues at conf center on remaining 2,500 Amers missing
in Indochina and post-war aid (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 354-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 21, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JONATHAN KANDELL

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

Vietnamese and US negotiators agree that Vietnamese scientific team will be sent
to Defense Dept Central Identification Lab and Joint Casualty Resolution Center,
Hawaii, in Jan to study advanced methods of identifying remains of Amers missing
in action during war, Paris talks.  Both sides agree to meet for 4th round of
talks at later date.  Vietnam formally announces release of 3 Amers taken into
custody in Oct aboard yacht.  Amer spokesman John Cannon comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 355-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 22, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY GREGORY JAYNES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

Gregory Jaynes article on plight of Anh Hoang Dinh family, refugees who recently
started new life in NYC after fleeing Vietnam by boat.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 356-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 22, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 98 words

Carter Adm reptdly will seek emergency admission of 7,000 Vietnamese refugees
instead of 10,000 originally desired by State Dept, in apparent budgetary
consideration.  Has authorized Atty Gen Griffin B Bell to use 'parole authority'
to admit refugees.  Has decided to cooperate with Repr Joshua Eilberg in
pressing for legislation to allow admission of Vietnamese refugees on regular
basis instead of current piecemeal approach.  State Dept reports that number of
'boat people' has grown dramatically.  Since '75 US has admitted or approved
admission of 165,000 Indochinese refugees (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 35

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 23, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY WALTER H WAGGONER

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Ed supports Carter Adm bid for emergency admission of 7,000 more Vietnamese
'boat people'.  Says measure is far short of what is needed to aid refugees.
Notes thousands of Indochinese refugees are living in Thai camps, most of them
from Laos.  Holds US has moral obligation to aid in resettlement of refugees in
US and in Asian countries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 35

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 23, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 43 words

Article on plight of Cambodian refugee women Huon Sour Lai and sister-in-law Ly
Linn, who escaped to Vietnam and then to refugee camp in Thailand.  They comment
on Cambodian life during forced mass exodus from Phnom Penh beginning on Apr 19,
'75.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 357-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 25, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

Vietnam and Cambodia intensify border conflict into full-scale battles involving
planes and artillery.  Heavy casualties reptd.  Fighting is centered in
'Parrot's Beak' border region.  US State Dept officials say fighting is result
of Cambodian attempts to recapture disputed territory.  Neither Vietnam nor
Cambodia openly acknowledge hostilities (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 359-0

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 25, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOHN M CREWDSON and JOSEPH B TREASTER

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 500 words

1st article in series, CIA: Secret Shaper of Public Opinion, repts that in last
30 years CIA has attempted to influence support of US policy abroad and news
reporting through ownership or sponsorship of over 50 newspapers, news services,
radio stations and other communications media, mostly overseas.  Claims at least
12 CIA officers have worked abroad as reporters or in other jobs for
American-owned news orgns abroad.  Alleges that some 18 American reporters
refused CIA offers to undertake secret intelligence assignments.  Notes that CIA
reptdly used its agents in AP and UPI foreign bureaus.Repts UPI allegation that
CIA planted story in early '50s that Chinese were infiltrating Vietnam.  Claims
agency circulated false rumors in press clubs.  Distinguishes US Information
Service's forthright propaganda from CIA methods, as in case of newsreels,
notably CIA-tampered film shown in Argentina.  Claims CIA added 34 paragraphs to
a speech by Khrushchev.  Alleges US publishing houses have published some of the
250 English-Language books financed or produced by CIA, often without knowing
about CIA involvement.  Notes that 1,000 books published for or by CIA have
contained fabrications, notably Penkovsky Papers, which allegedly was compiled
from CIA records by Frank Gibney and Peter Deriabin.  Alleges CIA assisted John
Barron with his book on Soviet KGB.  Claims CIA planted propaganda in Latin
America to discredit Cuba by suggesting it was under Moscow control.  Claims it
provided material to Daniel James, who included it in his translation of Che
Guevera's diaries, about Tamara Bunke, guerrilla known as Tania.  Repts CIA, in
operation KM FORGET, planted stories in one country which were clipped and
mailed to others.Cites multimillion-dollar CIA propaganda campaign against
former Chilean Pres Allende.  Cites 'embellishments' provided by CIA to Arnold
Beichman story about Soviet defector 20 years ago.  Cites rept of riot at Soviet
trade fair in Far East reptdly staged by CIA.  Cites CIA claim that it supplied
material for C L Sulzberger New York Times column Sept 13 '67 on Soviet KGB, an
allegation Sulzberger denies.  Cites instances when CIA pressures resulted in
censorship, notably David Kraslow article about CIA training of Cuban exile
forces in Florida.  Notes CIA efforts to suppress book The Invisible Government,
and then to slander it.  Recalls that in '66 CIA Dir John A McCone allegedly
removed parts of New York Times series on CIA before publication.  Claims that
in '54 CIA Dir Allen Dulles told New York Times that he and his brother, John
Foster Dulles, then State Sec, did not believe correspondent Sydney Gruson was
capable of reporting Guatemalan revolution with objectivity.  Suggests CIA
feared Gruson knew that it had role in fostering revolution.  Gruson says Arthur
Hays Sulzberger complied with CIA's wishes by keeping him in Mexico and away
from Guatemala.  Pors of William E Colby, Lyman B Kirkpatrick and Allen Dulles.
Photo of CIA seal (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 35

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 26, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY JOHN M CREWDSON and JOSEPH B TREASTER

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 314 words

2nd article in series, CIA: Secret Shaper of Public Opinion, details use of news
and other communications media by CIA in its propaganda network.  Emphasizes
that agency used few American journalists abroad in its worldwide propaganda
effort.  Notes that recent disclosures about agency have led to phasing out of
ties to organizations and individuals abroad that at peak numbered 800.  Quotes
CIA sources who say agency bought control in established news organizations and
occasionally set up new ones.  Indicates propaganda effort was response to
Soviet financing of left-wing European papers.  Notes that CIA in its early
years subsidized Paris Match.  Notes its broadcasting media and affiliated
propaganda orgns.  Notes CIA involvement in periodicals.  Notes CIA affiliation
with Research Council, Princeton, NJ, which conducted public opinion surveys.
Notes US publishers who were CIA subsidized or who brought out books to which
CIA made editorial contributions, and authors who worked as CIA agents.  Notes
CIA investments in Rome Daily American, Brussels Times and other newspapers in
world's capitals.  Repts CIA allegedly had agents within a number of foreign
news services.  Notes CIA news agencies in US, Continental Press Service,
Editors Press Service and Forum World Features.  Notes that while CIA has said
it never attempted to place propaganda directly in American Press, Forum World
Features had 30 domestic newspapers as clients.  Repts that weekly magazine
Vision, distributed in Europe and Latin America, was reptdly CIA-subsidized.
Notes news-related organizations linked to CIA.  Notes CIA affiliations with
newsmen's orgns and American newspaper Guild.  Pors of Cord Meyer Jr in '48, who
later became CIA propaganda dir, Tom Braden, who preceded him, and late Robert
Blum, who reptdly resigned from CIA to head Asia Foundation.  Photo of CIA seal
(L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 36

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 100 words

East Germany is emerging as increasingly prominent promoter of Soviet diplomacy
in many parts of world.  Recent trips by deputy head of state Horst Sindermann
to sub-Saharan Africa, Werner Lamberz to Middle East and Communist Party Chief
Erich Honecker to Philippines, Vietnam and North Korea are viewed as attempts by
USSR to have Moscow's views carried to sensitive areas where Soviets would
rather not show themselves at present.  Surge in East German travel is also
motivated by search for future supplies of raw materials and is also interpreted
as East Germany's diplomatic coming of age (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 361-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Vietnam's official newspaper Nhan Dan accuses Pres Carter of planning to 'throw
his weight around' during coming 6-nation tour and says trip would not bolster
US's prestige in world.  Says US 'is still bent on recruiting allies for
intervention in other countries' despite serious reverses in Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 361-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 28, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 36 words

Cambodian Govt acknowledges border problems with Vietnam in Parrot's Beak
region.  Recent travelers from Vietnam rept casualties higher than 2,500.
Vietnamese refugees say border region has been evacuated (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 362-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 29, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 105 words

Prime Min Kriangsak Chamanand minimizes importance of continuing Cambodian
border skirmishes, int.  Accentuates positive aspects in Thai relations with
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.  Mil sources, taking dimmer view, place all blame
for fighting on Cambodia.  Kriangsak says unclear border demarcation by French
during Cambodian colonization in 19th century is reason for skirmishing.  Says
diplomatic contacts are taking place through embassies in Laos.  Says Thailand
no longer will repulse any boats carrying Vietnamese refugees and that Govt is
prepared to grant permanent asylum to 94,000 refugees interned in Thai camps
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 363-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 30, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 116 words

Group of 32 Vietnamese who reached refugee camp in Thailand on Dec 23 after
fleeing from Vietnam claim that Vietnamese Govt has launched open campaign of
intimidation against increasing number of attempts by Vietnamese to flee
country.  Explain that in last 6 wks wall posters announcing stern penalties for
attempts to escape have appeared and sound trucks and loudspeakers have
broadcast same warnings in public places.  State that penalties are 3 to 5 yrs
in prison for persons caught trying to flee and prison terms of 5 to 15 yrs or
death for boat owners who aid people in escaping.  Provide details of
unsuccessful mass escape attempt by 400 men, women and children in early '76.
Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 364-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 228 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 31, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 56 words

Cambodia announces break of diplomatic relations with Vietnam and accuses its
fellow Communist country of 'ferocious and barbarous aggression,' statement read
over Phnom Penh radio.  Demands that Vietnamese diplomats in Phnom Penh leave
country by Jan 7 '78.  Statement also announces suspension of air link between 2
countries (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 365-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
