
                               1 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

James L Buckley urges Pres Nixon to announce that no draftee will have to fight
in Vietnam after April 1; cites Vietnamization program as evidence US has
achieved 'significant degree of success' in Vietnam; O'Dwyer, accepting chmnship
of Com to Save Our Const, says he is pleased with Buckley statement on draftees;
com seeks NYC referendum in Nov 3 election on City Charter change that would
compel Corp Counsel to defend any city resident opposed to combat service in
undeclared war; Reprs Carey and Collins are co-chmn of com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 203 words

Pres Nixon announces 'successful' completion of Amer incursion, written rept;
rules out use of Amer troops in Cambodia in future, suggests Cambodia's defense
will be left largely to Cambodians and their Asian allies; says he will not
provide air or logistical support for S Vietnamese units operating in Cambodia
but forecasts continued bombing of enemy personnel concentrations and supply
targets 'with approval of Cambodian Govt'; repts 'there will be no US ground
personnel in Cambodia' except regular staff at US Embassy; makes clear that
Cambodia will now become clear test of Nixon doctrine of transferring combat
responsibility from Amer to Asian forces; urges Cambodian Asian allies to assist
nation, pledges to help subsidize efforts of '3d countries who wish to supply
Cambodia with troops or material'; details accomplishments of 2-mo operation;
notes 11,349 enemy troops have been killed and that 1 yr's supply of ammunition
has been captured; accuses N Vietnam of having provoked US intervention; denies
US had any role in overthrow of Norodom Sihanouk regime; insists US responded
only to overt attempts by enemy to move out of sanctuaries and seize entire area
along 600-mi S Vietnamese-Camb odian border

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

M Frankel comment on Pres Nixon's final rept says main stress is on Nixon's own
credibility; says that Sen, however, in passing Cooper-Church amendment, said in
effect that it no longer trusts any Pres in conduct of Indochina war; revs
Nixon's statements on war that have created skepticism, points out ambiguities
of statements in amendment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Last US advisers and support troops withdraw from Cambodia; about 34,000 S
Vietnamese troops remain; official Amer sources say they have received clear
restrictions on what Amer forces can do in Cambodia; do not give details but say
Amers are prohibited from entering Camboda and are barred from flying
helicopters over Cambodia; say program of strategic bombing will continue

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 7

LENGTH: 27 words

Selective Service dir Tarr denies Mayor Fitzpatrick request for moratorium on
draft of Bayonne youths because of high fatality rate of city's draftees in
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 71 words

US gives Cambodia gift of 40 Amer trucks; trucks transport 1,000 Vietnamese
soldiers of Cambodian descent as well as supplies; S Vietnamese turns over
ceremonially to Cambodians an airstrip built between Pnompenh and S Vietnamese
border by S Vietnamese soldiers; enemy action light; disappointment with results
of Amer action grows in Cambodia; many officials believe it has actually
worsened situation for Cambodians; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 1, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

State Dept indicates more flexibility in US approach to formation of coalition
govt in Saigon; dept spokesman says US could agree to formation of coalition
regime that would include Vietnamese Communists and would not insist on natl
elections; officials say US would be willing to hold 'preliminary discussions'
with N Vietnam without participation of present S Vietnamese Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 2, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 18 words

Sen McGovern scores Pres Nixon's Vietnam policy, asks for equal time on TV to
answer Nixon's defense of it

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 2, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 98 words

N Vietnam charges US, despite withdrawal of its ground troops from Cambodia, is
prolonging war in SE Asia by aiding anti-Communist forces; cites Pres Nixon's
promises of aid to Lon Nol Govt and those nations coming to its aid; derides his
claim of mil victory; Vietcong spokesman at Paris peace talks says pressure of
pub opinion forced Nixon to withdraw Amer troops; Soviet press agency Tass
claims US mil operation had been failure, commentary signed I Orlov; describes
results of operation listed by Nixon as 'sinister'; claims 'patriotic forces'
still control large areas of Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 2, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 47 words

Fed judge in Bklyn rejects Sp/5 S Orlando contention that combat activities in
Indochina are unconst because Cong has not declared war; rules that Cong, in
effect, supports war; denies temporary injunction against Defense Dept order
sending Orlando to Indochina; details on decision

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 2, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 43 words

Over 5,000 S Vietnamese troops sweep across areas north of Pnompenh but have no
contact with enemy forces; mil experts believe enemy is pulling back into base
areas in northern Cambodia to regroup and refit; tons of arms and ammunition for
Cambodians arrive

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 2, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

N Vietnamese Communist party affirms its ideological independence from Communist
China by warm display of friendship for Japanese Communist party on occasion of
its 11th cong, which opens in Tokyo; N Vietnamese delegation attends cong; Nhan
Dan ed lauds Japanese assistance to Communist struggle in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 2, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

Increased looting and pillage of Cambodian towns by S Vietnamese troops stirs
Cambodians hatred of Vietnamese, poses serious problem; Premier Lon Nol and S
Vietnamese leaders say publicly that problem is under control; events prove
differently; pillage of village of Prey Koth, 12 mi SW of Pnompenh, and at least
3 other villages and towns described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 2, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 171 words

Pres Nixon announces apptmt of D K E Bruce to head US delegation at Paris talks,
televised 'conversation' with 3 TV network commentators; promises Bruce 'great
flexibility' in talks and expresses hope that N Vietnam will respond to US move;
refuses to say that he will not reintroduce US troops to Cambodia, but
emphasizes US does not plan on it; says he recognizes discontent caused in US by
his policies, but asserts dissent will not prevent him from acting decisively
again to protect Amer lives and withdrawal program; defends right of Pres to act
quickly without prior consultation with Cong; says US will not abandon right of
S Vietnam to determine its own future and will not agree to impose coalition
govt, although it would accept such a govt; indicates willingness to maintain
substantial force in Indochina until enemy is willing to accept 'just peace'
that will neither 'humiliate' US nor encourage Communists to embark on
expansionist policies; embraces 'domino theory' more explicitly than ever; other
details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

Rev Billy Graham denies allegations Washington demonstration is aimed at aiding
Pres Nixon's Vietnam war policy, news conf; says he hopes ceremonies will bring
unity, not div; Black United Front leader Rev D Moore recently branded event a
'racist carrousel'; celebration plans detailed; CBS reverses its stand, agrees
to televise segment of evening program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 23 words

S Vietnamese reaction to Bruce apptmt as US Amb to Peace Talks is relatively
restrained; Tran Van Lam says apptmt does not mean concession

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 49 words

Communist China describes withdrawal of US troops as 'trick' and calls on
Communist forces in Indochina to 'persevere in protracted people's war', Jenmin
Jih Pao ed; N Korean Premier Kim Il Sung pledges moral and material support for
Norodom Sihanouk in his efforts to overthrow Pnompenh Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 68 words

About 1,300 Cambodians, vanguard of about 10,000 men who are to be trained in S
Vietnam, begin training at training center near Nhatrang; program reptdly was
agreed upon during Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky's June visit to Pnompenh; S Vietnam
plans to reorganize its own mil effort in Cambodia; Tran Van Phuoc, former
Supreme Ct official, named min plenipotentiary in charge of S Vietnamese mission
in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 53 words

French Pres Pompidou scores Pres Nixon and says peace cannot come to Indochina
until Amers make up their minds to get out, news conf; enemy delegations to
Paris talks minimize significance of Bruce apptmt as US Amb to Vietnam Peace
Talks; Pompidou says he is happy with apptmt; reiterates stand on conf on
Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 3, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 27 words

15 scout dogs on patrol with Amer soldiers leave Cambodia when troops are
withdrawn to Vietnam; dogs' role in detecting enemy and their training
discussed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 5

LENGTH: 8 words

Reply to June 27 lr scores US Vietnam policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 73 words

Assemblyman Stein presents to City Clerk Katz petitions signed by 36,796 New
Yorkers opposed to 'undeclared war in Indochina' in effort to place war issue on
Nov ballot; petitioners hope for referendum on law empowering city's Corp
Counsel to defend any city resident who refuses to serve in hostile area in
undeclared war; Katz says he will examine petition; Stein comments; Katz
rejected petitions of 2 antiwar groups 3 yrs ago; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 24 words

Vietnam Min Nguyen Duy Trinh says apptmt of Bruce as US Amb to Vietnam Peace
Talks is 'correction' of US's previous attitude toward negotiations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

Jury at 20th annual W Berlin Film Festival drops from competition W Ger movie
about incident in which Vietnamese girl is raped and murdered by group of Amer
soldiers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

Sec of State Rogers arrives in Saigon to attend annual conf of war allies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 32 words

5 S Vietnamese civilians killed, 23 persons wounded when Vietcong guerrilla
throws grenade into cafe in Mekong Delta city; 2 Amers killed, 18 wounded in
enemy attack on base 80 mi NW of Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 65 words

S Vietnam repts its troop strength in Cambodia has dropped to about 25,000
following withdrawal of marine brigade that participated in sweep around
Pnompenh; says threat to Pnompenh has lessened; Thai command assesses mil
situation in Cambodia, BAngkok; warns on threat to Thailand; map; 46 S
Vietnamese civilians killed when passenger river boat strikes floating mine S of
buffer zone; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

Article on activism among S Vietnamese students, which is directed against
Nguyen Van Thieu Govt and US; comments of several students noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 44 words

Highly placed Cambodians are in mood of gloom following US pullout; voice
concern that Vietnamese factions are fighting civil war in another country; are
disappointed with US thrust because it drove Communists farther away from
Vietnam and deeper into Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 4, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 126 words

Sec of State Rogers rebuts Thant Khoman attack on US Sens, criticizes reluctance
of Thailand to provide troops to Cambodia without US guarantee to finance them,
SEATO conf and private talks; S Vietnam Min Tran Van Lam, observer at SEATO
conf, and Thanat Khoman express disappointment at SEATO failure to help counter
Communist pressures in Indochina; SEATO final communique notes varying forms of
aggression but refrains from offering any direct aid to Cambodia on ground that
she is not treaty member; ministerial meeting emphasizes that big powers no
longer consider orgn as meaningful instrument of defense against Communist
infiltration or incursion; issues final communique; Pakistan refuses to
participate in its drafting; meeting boycotted by France

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 147 words

Dr H A Rusk comment on drunken driver as main culprit in high accident toll;
cites Natl Safety Council rept that during '69 drunken drivers killed 25,000
people and caused 800,000 accidents; stresses majority of drunken drivers
involved in accidents are not 'social' or 'ordinary' drinkers, but hard-core
alcoholics, of which there are 5- to 6-million in US; notes 1 estimate that 44%
of drivers killed are innocent victims of drunken drivers; notes almost 40,000
Amer men died in Vietnam 9 yrs of war, but there have been 437,000 US deaths
from auto accidents during same period; says injuries in Vietnam numbered
263,000 while hwy injuries totaled 138-million; also notes that auto since 1900
has taken 1.75-million lives, far more than from all wars in US history; notes
Natl Safety Council estimates there will be 560 to 660 deaths and 27,000 to
31,000 injuries over July 4 wkend

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 46 words

US command announces Amer guns in newly estab firebases along border are now
firing at enemy supply and troop movements in Cambodian border areas recently
vacated by US troops; says guns fire only at specific and 'positively
identified' targets to protect US forces in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 103 words

Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky criticizes commercial import program under which US buys
and ships commodities to S Vietnam which are then sold to importers to absorb
excess piasters put in circulation by war spending; says US spent $240-million
on program in fiscal '70 but that it brought in commodities that are not really
necessary, such as some materials that could be produced locally; Nguyen Van
THieu issues strong statement prohibiting st demonstrations; statement says Govt
will take conciliatory measures to dissuade protesters from taking to sts; order
is not challenged by 2 student anti-Govt meetings at Saigon U

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 18 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu sends goodwill message to Pres Nixon and Amer
people to mark Independence day

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

S Vietnam agrees to apptmt of Thoutch Vuttmi as Cambodian Amb to Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 129 words

Sec of State Rogers confs with Pres Nguyen Van Thieu and other S Vietnamese
officials on mil situation, Saigon; Rogers delivers to Nguyen Van Thieu personal
lr from Pres Nixon; Asst Sec Green leaves for Pnompenh to study situation and
appraise Cambodia's immediate econ and mil needs; Rogers and Nguyen Van Thieu
reptdly agree that Thai cooperation is essential since S Vietnam cannot spare
large mil forces in Cambodia; Thanat Khoman reptdly insisted, in Manila talks
with Rogers, on US financial guarantees before sending any troops to Cambodia;
denies repts that he and Rogers had bitter 'clash' at Manila meeting; Thai sup
command repts that Thailand is aiding Cambodian authorities and refugees in
border prov of Preah Vihear; denies repts of Thai air strikes; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 2

LENGTH: 55 words

Ints with persons who went to Washington for Honor America fete detailed; many
rebuke all the loud voices; many seen confused and helpless; many say they back
US effort in Vietnam not because US belongs there but because it is there; back
Nixon because he is Pres; common threat seen 1 of nostalgia and distaste for
contention

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 24 words

Comment on recent Pres Nixon's statements on Bruce apptmt as Amb to Vietnam
Peace Talks; comment on Nixon assessment of US operation in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 29 words

Pres Nixon's announced decision to continue bombing Communist supply routes in
Cambodia and likely results of such move discussed; illus of Amer troops
withdrawing to Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 19 words

Comment on offensive actions by allies in S Vietnam that are expected in
aftermath of Cambodian operation; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 7

LENGTH: 12 words

Comment on judge's action in Sgt E Torres case, Vietnam atrocity charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 160 words

C L Sulzberger article on simultaneous diplomatic efforts US is making in many
of world's troubled areas including Middle East discusses 'linkage,' notion that
if 1 party yields in 1 area, the other might yield elsewhere; notes Soviets may
have decided to move towards conciliatory new US attitude on Middle East by
demanding concessions from UAR to meet similar concessions US is asking of
Israel; notes both nations are applying pressure by withholding weapons
shipments; notes Bruce apptmt as US Amb to Vietnam Peace Talks, says Pres Nixon
has started obvious new peace initiative; notes USSR has taken pains to do
nothing harmful to US position following Cambodian invasion; retained relations
with Lon Nol Govt and refused recognition to Norodom Sihanouk's
Chinese-sponsored regime; comments on signs East-West diplomatic log jam may be
breaking, notes NATO and Pact acceptance in principle of a Eur security conf;
sees it hinging on a W Ger-USSR accord

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 32 words

A Lewis comments on apptmt of Bruce as US Amb to Vietnam Peace Talks; says US
must make clear it will withdraw its forces and must be willing to see govt in S
Vietnam other than present regime

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 2

LENGTH: 63 words

Lr on US proposals and Soviet strategy holds only viable long-range solution
must include new partition of pre-'67 Israel, W Bank and present Jordan agreed
to by Israel and Palestinians themselves; says Nixon Adm peace plan for Middle
East is 'transparent effort' to get USSR to cooperate in extrication of Amer
forces from Indochina in return for concessions in Middle East

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 3

LENGTH: 32 words

Reply to Prof Pease June 21 lr deploring 73 US Sens who urged support of Israel
holds demand for US disengagement in Indochina is consistent with demand for
Soviet disengagement in Middle East

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8, Column 0

LENGTH: 62 words

Muskie article scores Cambodian incursion, says Vietnamization plan is 1 for
reducing US troops, not withdrawaing them; discusses possibility that Pres Nixon
may escalate war; notes Cooper-Church and McGovern-Hatfield amendments;
discusses his resolution committing Sen to policy aimed at cease-fire, complete
withdrawal by specified deadline and pol settlement; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 6, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

Berlin Film Festival broken off following dispute over film on Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 6, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7

LENGTH: 23 words

Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky says anti-Communists in S Vietnam would accept coalition
govt with Communists if it is result of free elections

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 6, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 13 words

Vietcong joins with N Vietnam in hailing Bruce apptmt as US Amb to Peace Talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 6, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 104 words

Sen Proxmire charges Defense Dept has spent over $2-billion for still-secret
'electronic battlefield' system that cannot distinguish between enemy soldiers
and civilians, planned s, Sen; says system is outgrowth of ex-Sec McNamara's
plan to build electronic wall across Vietnam; says system could eventually cost
over $20-billion; calls it classic example of Defense Dept's 'foot in door'
technique in which small sums for research and development are escalated into
billions for systems which never get Cong approval; notes system's vulnerability
to malfunction; asks Sec Laird for details of system purpose and application

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 6, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 119 words

Sec of State Rogers and S Vietnam Premier Tran Thien Khiem appeal to Thailand, S
Korea, Australia and NZ, their allies in Vietnam war, to provide urgent aid to
Cambodia, Allied Nations Mins Conf, Saigon; they and Adm McCain describe gravity
of deteriorating situation; pleas bring no immediate response; Rogers repts that
US plans to keep up its air strikes against Communist forces and will provide
mil and econ aid; allied govts reptdly voice concern over stability of Lon Nol
regime, continuing movement of Communist troops throughout Cambodia and their
redevelopment in eastern provs; US officials say S Vietnamese and US agree on
desirability of exploring any new initiatives to accelerate negotiating process

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 6, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 69 words

Enemy forces seize most of dist capital of Saang, 20 mi S of Pnompenh, but
withdraw as bn of Cambodian troops arrives; fighting at Saang and attacks on
Kompong Thom indicate end to week-long lull in major fighting; S Vietnamese
troops rept 38 enemy killed in 3 clashes in northermost sec; 2 Amers killed
after enemy shoots down helicopter near Saigon; 2 other helicopters downed
elsewhere; other action reptd; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 5

LENGTH: 24 words

Lr from US Special Forces soldier in Vietnam deplores rept of support by some
Special Forces soldiers of pro-war actions by construction workers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 19 words

Berlin Film Festival officials rule that films still sceduled will be shown
despite dispute over film on Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 78, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 112 words

Dems announce format of their free-time broadcast over CBS to reply to ss of
Pres Nixon and Vice Pres Agnew; chmn O'Brien says main campaign issue is Adm's
leadership capability; CBS rules out appearance by Dem Cong members because some
are running for re-election and equal-time rule would be involved; Repub Natl
Com Chmn Morton protests CBS grant of free time; demands equal time for Repubs;
Repr Reuss and Sen Muskie, discussing inflation problem, hold state of econ No.
1 campaign issue, TV int with Dem Natl Chmn O'Brien; Muskie holds econ problem
related to Vietnam war; suggest temporary wage-price freeze to buy time for
finding longer-range ways to halt inflation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 16 words

Army announces it will go ahead with Sgt E Torres pretrial proceeding in Vietnam
atrocities case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 156 words

Cambodian troops recapture Saang; rept 32 soldiers killed, 47 wounded, heaviest
losses reptd in single day's action; claim 250 Communist Vietnamese killed; S
Vietnamese gunships cover Cambodian troops attack on enemy soldiers reptdly
massing for push against Kompong Thom; Communist troops withdraw from Angkor Wat
after mo-long occupation; remain entrenched in other temples in jungle
surrounding Angkor and Siemreap; S Vietnam command repts withdrawal of 5,000-man
force from southern Cambodia; Thai Sup Command repts situation in Cambodia along
Thai border has deteriorated, that enemy forces have joined forces with
Cambodian partisans and increased attacks in Preah Vihear and Siemreap Provs;
Cambodian troops rout Communists in temples at Angkor Wat and quickly withdraw
themselves to avoid being attacked while inside; Communist forces reptdly
withdraw but remain entrenched in neighboring temples; lull continues in
Vietnam; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 72 words

Amer talks with Thai officials over possible dispatch of Thai troops to Cambodia
reptdly have bogged down over Thai demands that US underwrite large share of
costs; Thailand seen rejecting possibility of transferring units of its inf div
in S Vietnam to Cambodia; Koun Wick confs with Rogers on problem; most likely
solution believed to be to transfer some of Thai div back to Thailand to serve
along common border with Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 99 words

Many S Vietnamese disabled veterans, discouraged at slow pace of Govt programs
to benefit them, are bldg themselves homes on pub property; an estimated 10,000
illegal structures have been built in Saigon alone since veterans' protest
movement began in early March; Tran Thien Khiem and Pham Van Dong have appealed
to veterans to stop bldg; Natl Assembly recently passed law increasing veterans'
benefits; Pham Van Dong says 3,500 housing units are being built by Govt for
veterans in Saigon; some veterans build kiosks in Saigon and plan to compete
with established merchants; 2 veterans comment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 65 words

Min Koun Wick flies to Saigon to conf with Sec of State Rogers at latter's
request; reptdly discusses Cambodia's immediate need for arms and uniforms for
army, raises problem of Thai mil aid; Rogers reptdly pledges US aid; Green
returns from fact-finding mission; Rogers says level of war has been 'reduced'
and that this will be reflected in what he calls very low casualties for last wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 163 words

D Luce, gathering information for World Council of Chs aid div, repts, after
visiting S Vietnam's largest civilian prison (Polo Condor) on Con Son island, on
what he describes as inhuman conditions and intimidation existing there; says
500 of 9,900 prisoners on island are confined in small stone compartments, and
that many of prisoners are unable to stand; says prisoners suffer from
malnutrition, physical abuse and filthy conditions; accompanied Reprs Hawkins
and Anderson on visit to island; T R Harkin, congressional aide, photographed
worst of prisons; access to prison is denied to newsmen; small stone
compartments were not voluntarily shown to Amers; trip's purpose was to see if
they existed; Col Nguyen Van Ve, warden of prison, made attempts to prevent
inspection; Luce describes what was seen; special HR com, recently returned from
Vietnam trip that Hawkins and Anderson went on, says it observed some conditions
that require change; Hawkins and Anderson comment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 7, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 143 words

HR com submits rept on its trip to S Vietnam; recommends withdrawals of US
ground troops continue at least as fast as now scheduled; endorses Cambodian
incursion; is pessimistic about future of S Vietnamese econ; indicates aid
should be used to bolster present Saigon Govt; says troop morale got lift from
Cambodian incursion; Montgomery describes rept as 'consensus of views'; says he
does not believe rept can be classified as supporting or opposing Pres Nixon's
policy; some com members will file separate statements; Hawkins comments; com
repts that it observed conditions in prison on S Vietnamese island of Con Son
that need to be remedied; Hawkins and Anderson inspected prison; they comment,
com repts that it observed conditions in prison on S Vietnamese island on Con
Son that need to be remedied; Hawkins and Anderson inspected prison; they
comment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 8

LENGTH: 40 words

USSR delegation to World Youth Assembly demands exclusion of groups from
'puppet' regimes of S Korea, S Vietnam and Nationalist China; charge of
discrimination in not inviting non-member nations denied by planning com head F
Pouliot (Canada)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 49, Column 1

LENGTH: 117 words

NYS Dem gubernatorial candidate Goldberg proposes addition to NYS Dem party
platform urging US announce it will provide Israel with 125 jets; Goldberg
scores Repub Vietnam policies and Rockefeller support of them, s, Dem state com
meeting, NYC; demands immediate peace; is cheered by delegates; says pub bldg
projects under him as Gov would credit taxpayers, not Goldberg; com adopts
platform but rejects Goldberg proposals for direct election of county leaders
and submission of judicial screening to nonpartisan com; chmn Burns, vice chmn
Gurevich, other officers re-elected; platform adopted; platform omits Goldberg's
proposal for submission of judicial selections to non-partisan screening com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Calif Gov Reagan calls 'ridiculous' Sen Hatfield statement that Repub party
might turn to Reagan for its Pres nominee in '72 and deny renomination to Pres
Nixon unless econ conditions improve and Vietnam war ends; says he backs Nixon
in his policies and will support him for renomination

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 79 words

Pres Nixon, in lr delivered by Sec of State Rogers to Pres Nguyen Van Thieu,
promises S Vietnamese Govt $100-million to build badly needed housing for S
Vietnamese soldiers and their families; aid program will also include 47,300
tons of canned food for soldiers; promised housing aid is short of Nguyen Van
Theeu's request; disabled veterans will presumably benefit from new US housing
aid program as existing premises are vacated by S Vietnamese troops; details on
request

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 16 words

Enemy forces kill 4 Amers, wound 34 near Hue; S Vietnamese troops kill 40 enemy
in Vinhbinh Prov

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 48 words

Main area at Angkor Wat found undamaged after withdrawal of Communist troops; S
Vietnamese gunships attack enemy positions around Kompong Thom; fighting
generally tapers off; US mil sources rept fewer than 65 Amers killed in
Indochina war in past wk, lowest toll for any wk of yr; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 29 words

US spokesman in Saigon says US officials who advise S Vietnamese on prison
matters are aware of conditions in prison; US officials stress Amers have no
control over jails

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

S Vietnam Economics Min Pham Kim Ngoc says Govt will devalue piaster 'in deed,
if not in name', int; says that, contingent on approval of special econ powers
for Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, 2-part foreign exch system will be estab; 1st would
retain current official rate for import of essential goods and for govt
transactions; 2d would be based on 'free mkt' to be decreed for piasters used in
export, some import, currency exchs, etc; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 8, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 193 words

T R Harkin, staff member of HR com that toured war zone in Indochina, terms com
rept a 'whitewash' and says com suppressed signficant findings; says com was
'led around by the nose'; his criticism mainly concerns existence and use of
prison; charges com rejected rept prepared by Hawkins and Anderson; describes
prison; Hawkins and Anderson confirm Harkin's allegations; Harkin says he
resigns from com staff because of disillusionment with rept; Montgomery,
speaking through spokesman, says com has disbanded and Harkin's resignation is
unnecessary; spokesman rejects Harkin's charges; Harkin says most information
com obtained was from US and S Vietnamese Govt sources; charges B Anderson,
press aide hired by com, is USIA employe; charges Anderson met with Nixon
Communications Dir H Klein and with Natl Security Council member before visiting
S Vietnam with com; Klein confirms meeting took place, says it was natural and
lasted only about 5 mins; US spokesman in Saigon says US officials who advise S
Vietnamese on prison matters were aware of conditions in prison; US officials
stress Amers have no control over jails; photograph taken by Harkin illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

Pres Nixon signs bill suspending import duty on L Dopa for 2 yrs; signs bill
extending to Dec 31, '71, Natl Pk Service auth to issue Golden Eagle Passports
signed; US Agr Dept announces details of agreement; says S Vietnam will pay for
food in its own currency; HR Agr Com approves bill authorizing $4.2-million tax
fund to begin wheat mix research and promotion program; fund was collected from
levies on exporters, '68-69

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 22 words

US Dist judge says he lacks jurisdiction to stop ct-martial of Pfc S G Green,
accused of killing 16 Vietnamese civilians last Feb

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 203 words

Complaint filed with FCC by bipartisan group of 14 Sens charging 3 TV networks
with denying them equal opportunity to present their views against Nixon Adm
policy in Vietnam seen still another manifestation of problem of how to provide
opposition party or Cong, along with Pres, with opportunity to present opposing
views on paramount pub issues; FCC Chmn Burch, at earlier news conf, said Dem
Natl Com raised legitimate issue in plea to FCC to require networks to sell time
to pol groups to give views on controversial issues; Fulbright bill to provide
TV time to Cong as an inst and Sen Pastore, chmn of Sen Commerce Subcom on
Communications, pledge of hearings noted; Sen Dem Policy Com recent
establishment of subcom to discuss with networks how Cong and opposition party
might be granted greater access to TV noted; basic issue stressed in complaint
by bipartisan Sen group is that there should be balance maintained between Exec
branch and Cong opposition in presentation of pub issues; spokesman for group,
Sen Hughes, stresses checks and balances issue at news conf; brief holds ready
access to TV has given Pres new weapon in pol process and denial of right to
respond to his TV addresses amounts to censorship

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 130 words

Thanom Kittikachorn repts 2,000 Cambodians will come to Thailand for mil
training, that Govt will begin training Thais of Cambodian origin for Cambodia;
rules out transfer of Thai troops from S Vietnam; Peking-based Natl United Front
says Thai troops are already fighting in Cambodia; sees 'intervention' part of
Pres Nixon's plan to 'set Asians against Asians'; Govt repts capture of Prasert
Iawchai, top ranking Communist sought since '67; sees his arrest crippling
clandestine Communist movement; announcement of arrest made in midst of mil
alert; Govt gives arrest as reason for alert, which observers hold was designed
to ward off disturbances expected over rising prices caused by sharp increases
in import duties and sales taxes; pol crisis seen developing over increases

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 34 words

S Vietnamese forces start new operation in southeastern Cambodia; end 6-wk drive
in Parrot's Beak area; drive resulted in killing of 1,119 enemy; US troops kill
139 enemy near Khesanh; other details; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

State Dept repts Amb Porter has officially informed Premier Chung Il Kwon of US
intention of withdrawing some 60,000 Amer troops from S Korea; S Korean
spokesman confirms rept; says Sec Rogers had so informed Min Choi Kyu Hah at
meeting in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 79 words

State Dept spokesman says US is very concerned about reptd conditions in Con Son
prison; says Saigon Govt is investigating conditions; Repr Tunney urges Pres
Nixon to set up comm to investigate prison and all pol prisons in S Vietnam;
Goodell urges Nixon demand inspection; White House remains aloof from prison
disclosures; Montgomery says he told Bunker about conditions and was assured
investigation was being undertaken; says he is sure 'corrective actions' will be
taken

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

US to withdraw at least 2 Air Force squadrons from Vietnam combat zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 49 words

Comment on Bruce apptmt as US Amb to Peace Talks; apptmt may weaken Communists'
propaganda point that US deliberately downgrades negotiations and may reopen
possibility of secret talks between US and N Vietnam; talks said to be at lowest
point since they began as 4-sided negotiation in Jan, '69

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 9, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 105 words

NY Times reporter, discussing 3-hr conversation among allied pacification
officials, says picture of newly important phase of war emerges: competition
between Vietcong and S Vietnamese Govt to attract bright young people to their
cause; says Vietcong got best people in early days but close observers see shift
in that Vietcong are less and less attractive now because of terror tactics and
because they no longer look like sure winners after yrs of predicting imminent
victory; says Govt is now looked upon as concerned about S Vietnamese; enemy
tactics and some aspects of allied program noted; econ said to be in grave
disarray

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 15 words

Lr from Prof J W Gould derides domino theory as justification for continuing
Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 167 words

US is trying to persuade S Vietnamese Govt to do away with concrete pits,
so-called 'tiger cages', at prison on Con Son island; reliable sources rept S
Vietnamese are sensitive about being pressed on issue of conditions at prison,
but will stop using pits; rept US Embassy is looking into situation and has been
asked to rept its findings to Washington; S Vietnamese Govt concedes 400 persons
are held in pits, but says they are confined temporarily as disciplinary
measure; says those held have rebelled against rules of prison; US officials say
those held are 'reasonably well treated and in reasonably good health'; high Red
Cross source says US will be at least morally responsible for treatment of any
Amer-captured N Vietnamese or Vietcong if they were transferred to pits; sources
say Red Cross delegate has made at least 1 inspection trip to prison and his
rept has been made available to both S Vietnamese and US Govts; Communist
delegates to Paris talks raise issue of prison in scoring US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 5

LENGTH: 152 words

Ousted Cambodian leader Norodom Sihanouk says N Korean Premier Kim Il Sung urged
him recently to accept volunteer troops but most members of his 'govt in exile'
believe job can be done by Cambodian resistance fighters, int, Peking; warns his
attitude may change if Thai and other outside troops intervene; doubts Communist
China would wish to send in volunteers; expresses disappointment at USSR failure
to recognize his new regime; says N Vietnam Min Gen Vo Nguyen Giap is his chief
instructor in charge of training his guerrillas; repts Chinese and N Korean mil
aid has already begun to arrive in Cambodia; says each member of new Indochinese
alliance is pledged to aid cause of the other 'right to the end of the fight';
claims US bombing and 'atrocious conduct' of S Vietnamese troops is pushing
Cambodian peasant population to his active support; credits N Vietnamese and
Vietcong troops with good behavior

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 8 words

US soldiers on scarred hill near Danang illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7

LENGTH: 83 words

Sec of State Rogers says Communist China is key to future of Indochina and that
peace settlement could be worked out 'very quickly' if Peking showed some
interest, Japanese TV int; Rogers urges China abandon 'belligerent' attitude
toward world and play 'sensible role' in internatl community; notes US efforts
to resume diplomatic talks in Warsaw but says progress so far has been slow;
says there would be no difficulty in improving ties if China accepts normal
obligations of internatl community

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 21 words

Communists delegations to Vietnam peace talks, scoring US, raise issue of
mistreatment of pol prisoners in S Vietnamese prison

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 157 words

US Nixon Adm sources deny alleged existence of secret pact linking continued US
mil presence in S Korea with presence of S Korean troops in S Vietnam;
allegation made by visiting S Korean legislator P B Park; Defense Sec Laird says
he does not expect S Korea to withdraw some of its 50,000 troops from Vietnam as
reaction to US troop reductions in S Korea; S Korean Foreign Ministry also
denies existence of secret pact; Laird links budgetary pressures and Nixon
doctrine; declines to discuss timetable of withdrawals but says there will be
substantial Amer presence after withdrawals are made; Adm sources deny rept made
by visiting S Korean ex-Govt aide P B Park that there exists secret agreement
linking continued Amer mil presence in S Korea with presence of S Korean troops
in S Vietnam; S Korean Foreign Min denies existence of such agreement, Govt
source indicates there is an 'exch of lrs' concerning troops stationed in S
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 44 words

US command repts 61 Amers were killed in war last wk, lowest toll in more than 3
1/2 yrs; 463 were wounded; S Vietnamese and enemy casualty figures for wk noted;
10 Amers reptd killed during last days of US operatoons in Cambodia; 34 were
killed in previous wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 118 words

World Youth Assembly opens, UN hq, NYC; Sec Gen Thant urges idealistic youth
lead world away from tension; appeals to youth to exert their influence on
govts, says UN poor showing in preventing conflicts is fault of govts that hold
to selfish natl interests, calls for 'new patriotism, which is patriotism of
man,' to make UN work; Communist and other leftist delegations make pol attacks,
urging expulsion of S Vietnam, S Korea and Nationalist China groups; Theodorakis
gets standing ovation, tribute to his attacks on Greek mil Govt; 638 delegations
in attendance, from 110 nations; 5 US participants listed; assembly planner R M
Akwei (Ghana) calls for submerging of nationalism in world community; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Ed discusses Sec of State Roger's failure to obtain help for Lon Nol Govt during
his Asian tour; holds best hope for Asians and US lies in pol settlement for
Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 3

LENGTH: 24 words

Lr from Prof J Orear holds US has not discontinued spraying rice fields in
Vietcong-controlled areas of S Vietnam; scores program as 'atrocity'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 49 words

87 Sens send lr to Pham Van Dong demanding Hanoi end 'inhumane treatment' of
Amer POWs; Sen Bayh 1st suggested lr; his aide says 13 Sens who did not sign lr
do not oppose it; Fulbright and Kennedy did not sign; excerpts from lr; other
Sens not signing it, including Aiken, and McCarthy, listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4; (AFP)

LENGTH: 56 words

Man identified as J M Sweeney, introduced at Hanoi news conf, says he left his
unit in S Vietnam in Feb '69 and has been with Vietcong until this mo; says he
fled into jungle after he was 'threatened with death' by his co comdr; Defense
Dept says it lists a Pfc J M Sweeney as missing in action in Feb '69 and as
captured on May 20, '69

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 62 words

S Vietnam promises to abolish punishment cells if investigation confirms
criticism of Hawkins and Anderson and press repts of mistreatment of prisoners;
says team is investigating prison; 3 Saigon U students recently released from
prison accuse S Vietnamese Govt of 'not telling the truth' about conditions;
charge more than 1,200 prisoners are held in punishment cells

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 66 words

Sec of State Rogers in London for talks with new Conservative leaders on
Indochina; says he is encouraged at progress of Vietnamization and feels that US
mil operations in Cambodia enhanced prospect for success; Rogers says he will
inform Brit leaders of Pres Nixon's favorable reaction to Brit intentions of
maintaining mil presence; says NATO will be among topics he will discuss; int,
London

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 31 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, after conf of S Vietnamese mil and pol leaders, calls on
dissident veterans to halt their protests and give Govt more time to solve their
problems, radio and TV s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

Walsh's release leaves 4 non-Communist Amers and an unknown number of Communists
or Communist sympathizers of Amer origin still under arrest; latter group
includes S Rittenberg, I Eqstein, and S Shapiro; J T Downey and R Fecteau,
civilian employes of US Army, downed over Manchuria in '52 during Korean War,
are among Amer prisoners still held by China; says Capt P Smith and Lt R Flynn,
USAF pilots shot down after straying over China during missions over N Vietnam
are still held in Chinese prison

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 52 words

US command announces searchers have found wreckage of Gen Casey's helicopter;
withholds most details pending completion of recovery operations; repts 5 bodies
found about 120 mi NE of Saigon; continues to list Casey and 6 others with him
as missing rather than dead because of difficulty of identifying bodies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 125 words

UN youth assembly puts down leftist demands to exclude 3 delegations, sends new
invs to Communist China, N Korea and N Vietnam youth groups; clashes erupt over
election of Palestinian to head Peace Comm which will consider Arab-Israeli
dispute because of charges that pro-Arabs pack meeting; officials rept only 68%
of delegates are under suggested age limit of 25, that oldest is 47; Theodorakis
walks out to protest seating of Greek delegation; Pueto Rican walks out charging
meeting is leftist-controlled; pro-independence Puerto Rican group won 1 seat
earlier; clash over Israeli effort to get private talks with Arabs also noted;
Theodorakis walks out of youth assembly rather than attend with 5 reprs of Greek
regime; illus at news conf there

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 133 words

Sen Mansfield predicts Pres Nixon will be re-elected as things appear now
despite foreign and domestic problems, comment to reporters at breakfast; says
Dems have not come forward with candidate who can match him; says best man Dems
have is Muskie, that he has charisma, charm and a following, but not in enough
degree at this time; discounts Humphrey and Kennedy as contenders; Sen Mansfield
holds Nixon has US 'in up to our necks' in Cambodia even after withdrawal of Us
troops; cites presence of S Vietnamese troops, US advisers, US logistic and air
support and increased mil mission in Pnompenh; Mansfield says Nixon told him
privately he intended to 'get out' of Vietnam before his term expired at end of
'72, int; says he believes Nixon meant 'all out, air cover, support troops,
everything'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 49, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

Article on CUNY-sponsored pilot program at Ft Dix, NJ, that prepares servicemen
for entrance into coll; univ has proposed program for natl adoption aimed at
training Vietnam war veterans, Army prisoners and other soldiers; program,
started in '69, was initially supplied with $100,000 by univ, NYS Educ Dept and
Esso Educ Foundation; soldiers will pay for much of program's expenses
themselves through new GI Bill arrangements; officials are also trying to raise
$200,000 to establish consortium of univs to set up programs at other bases;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 27 words

Current situation appraised; US aid seen key to Cambodia's survival; black mkts
flourish as econ founders and inflation grows under war impact; black mkt illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 9 words

Comment on inflation in Vietnam and other econ problems

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 47 words

Repub counter-arguments to Dem anti-Adm campaign on Vietnam issue is that Pres
Nixon has at last reversed Kennedy-Johnson trend of more and more involvement,
bringing troops home instead of sending them out and that Cambodian campaign
weakened enemy and brings war nearer to end

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 47 words

Lr lauds invasion of Cambodia; says N Vietnamese are no longer capable of
sustaining major operations in S Vietnam; says S Vietnamese forces now have mil
balance in their favor; urges S Vietnam be made to remain dependent on US as
means of avoiding S Vietnamese invasion of N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 6 words

Cartoon on rept on Saigon prison

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 13 words

Lr from Truong Dinh Hung scores conditions in S Vietnam prison, urges change

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 112 words

Int with AP reprs aboard his official plane; Vice Pres Agnew says that he would
be interested, on leaving pub office, in becoming a commentator, or columnist,
or someone involved in media; refers to group he calls 'the Fulbright claque' in
discussing Sen's action on Cambodia, says N Vietnamese and Vietcong get comfort
from those Amers in high elective offices who question efficacy of Amer presence
in SE Asia; acknowledges that his pol role is to respond to attacks on Adm's
record, to point out errors and inconsistencies in position of opponents; says
this sometimes forces him to take 'hardline' stance; says he thinks Repubs have
a chance if candidates work hard

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 19 words

Gen Westmoreland illus being greeted by Gen Rosson on arrival in Saigon to check
on US troops and Vietnamization

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

Knowledgable mil sources in Washington believe Pres Nixon's Vietnam strategy may
require Adm to keep large Amer mil contingent in S Vietnam, roughly 150,000 to
200,000 men, as late as '72; 1 officer derides rept that US hopes to reduce
forces to 50,000 by end of '71; Mansfield says Nixon told him privately he
intends to 'get out' before '72 elections; details on US withdrawal program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Mil sources rept Green Berets will be phased out of S Vietnam by end of yr;
reasons discussed; Green Berets began turning over some camps to S Vietnamese in
'67

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

Lt J B Duffy, convicted last March of involuntary manslaughter, tells Army
ct-martial that he ordered Sp/4 J R La Nasa to execute Vietnamese prisoner
suspected of being Vietcong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 220 words

Saigon police use tear gas to break up march by S Vietnamese students and
visiting Amer delegation, in Saigon to assess peace movement; newsmen J
Steinbeck (CBS and Dispatch News Service), T Fox (Dispatch News Service) and G A
Liles (Omega Films) arrested and released after their film is confiscated by
police, who charge 3 took part in antiwar demonstration by allegedly accepting
black armbands from marching students; C Robinson (AP) detained briefly; CBS bur
chief D Miller repts network canceled Steinbeck's accreditation as result of
incident; G Watson (ABC) slightly injured by tear-gas cannister fired by police
breaking up march; students released after Amer peace group says it will
postpone scheduled departure until students are freed; Rev P Moore Jr, chmn of
group, scores police actions; group includes Rev D Hunter, Rabbi B Brickner, C
Palmer and S Brown; meets briefly with Deputy Amb Berger; request to meet with S
Vietnamese officials rejected; group joined several hundred Vietnamese students
in antiwar assembly at Saigon U; other delegation members listed; US Embassy
spokesman scores actions by newsmen; charges wearing of armbands by officially
accredited newsmen 'jeopardizes the whole press corps' and would endanger
embassy's ability to assist those arrested under such circumstances; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 51 words

S Vietnam sends 62 POWs back to N Vietnam; prisoners, before boarding motorized
junks to take them home, throw away clothing and other articles in defiance of S
Vietnamese Govt; are all sick and disabled; S Vietnam also frees 24 N Vietnam
fishermen who strayed into territorial waters several yrs ag; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 86 words

US, Laotian and Cambodian strategists plan to use guerrilla warfare to try to
frustrate N Vietnam's efforts to develop waterborne route along Mekong River as
alternate supply route for its forces in Cambodia and S Vietnam; plans include
formation of irregular forces to harass N Vietnamese in Laos and in NE Cambodia,
extension of S Vietnamese river patrol activities up Mekong to Kratie in
Cambodia and employment of special units to provide detailed radio repts for
Amer bombers when lucrative targets are spotted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 13, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

RC orgn Natl Assn of Laymen decides primary activity in forthcoming yr will be
to express opposition to state aid to religious schools, annual conv;
resolutions; W A Caldwell re-elected pres; unusual mass that features 'Z'
liturgy, named after motion picture, celebrated; services conducted on spot
where G Winne immolated self May 12 to protest Vietnam war; Gospel consists of
message from Rev D Berrigan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 13, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 3

LENGTH: 61 words

Fed Reserve Bd member Maisel, in discussing monetary policy, emphasizes Fed
Reserve role in preventing cumulative contraction of monetary and credit system,
citing several recent econ studies, holds further unemployment rise will not
help curb inflation, s, Fed Reserve Bank of Kan City dirs meeting; predicts high
unemployment will continue until Vietnam war ends

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 13, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 5

LENGTH: 75 words

C Huntley, retiring as NBC newscaster, says he is 'overwhelmed' by Pres Nixon's
shallowness and 'frightened' by fact that he is Pres, int, Life (pub); says Vice
Pres Agnew appeals to 'most base' elements; recalling that networks televised
Vice Pres Agnew's Nov '69 speech attacking commentators for critically analyzing
Pres Nixon's Vietnam speech, says 'We almost created him'; says Govt today is
'insufferable jungle of self-serving bureaucracies'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 13, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5; (AFP)

LENGTH: 65 words

Cameraman R Meyer, correspondent R Puissesseau and engineer A Clement, members
of French TV team, captured by Vietcong patrol near Angkor Wat, bringing to 23
number of newsmen missing in war; Meyer reptd shot, others unhurt;
correspondents X Baron (Agence France-Presse) and L Nicaise reptd shot and
captured near same site; French Embassy later repts neither were shot but are
prisoners

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 13, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 59 words

US helicopter-borne assault and following B-52 raid reptdly kills 384 N
Vietnamese soldiers, wounds many more near Khesanh; US officials say enemy
forces were composed of apparently new troops just entered from Laos; S
Vietnamese rept they killed 33 of enemy near Khesanh; 2 Amers killed, 19 wounded
when US helicopter is downed 30 mi NW of Saigon; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 13, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 146 words

Sec of State Rogers, in London after Asian tour, says Communists have no
immediate intent to negotiate a peace settlement; reptdly believes they will not
negotiate from position of weakness after Cambodia losses; US seen encouraging
new round of secret talks with N Vietnamese reprs; US sources say no fresh
proposals will be submitted to Hanoi when Bruce assumes his post in Aug; Rogers
expected to tell Nixon that US must brace itself for protracted war and
continued talks stalemate; revs talks situation in conf with Bruce and Habib,
London; US officials say Bruce will visit Saigon at own request; Bunker may be
in Washington soon and may accompany Bruce back to Saigon; Rogers, Prime Min
Heath and Sec Douglas-Home conf on Indochinese problems and possibility that GB
may make new effort to reconvene '54 Geneva conf; has luncheon conf with Prime
Min Heath; returns to US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 13, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 232 words

Newsweek (pub) repts Pres Nixon has ordered Pentagon to supply Israel with 8
Phantom jets this mo and 2 more per mo for indefinite period; repts complex
radar-jamming equipment of type used by US pilots in Vietnam has been sent to
Israel; US officials say Newsweek rept is 'substantially inaccurate;' privately
say radar equipment is part of earlier sales; say Nixon has made no decision on
Israeli request to purchase 125 more jets; encourage speculation that US has
increased rate of shipment of jets under agreement negotiated by Johnson Adm in
'68; are reluctant to discuss increased shipment of jets so as not to arouse
Arabs or Soviets by appearing to strengthen Israeli mil and to hold out jets as
incentive to Israelis to encourage agreement on cease-fire included in recent US
proposals; Asst Sec Sisco says he, White House and other State Dept officials
have agreed not to comment on speculative stories while US is pursuing
diplomatic initiatives, even at risk of seeing misinformation in print, TV int;
illus; says Soviets have sent UAR amphibious landing equipment, which, he says,
does not appear to be of defensive type; Israel repts equipment consists of over
100 armored amphibious troop carriers, each with capacity to carry squad of
soldiers; say Arabs have been conducting maneuvers with them; US observers hold
only use for equipment is to enable Arabs to cross canal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 2

LENGTH: 48 words

Ed saying it is essential that pressure be maintained on Saigon to eliminate
punishment cells reptd to exist in S Vietnamese prison by Reprs Hawkins and
Anderson during recent fact-finding trip by HR com; scores behavior of Adm
officials and Congressmen concerning conditions in prison

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 50, Column 7

LENGTH: 116 words

Econ consultant A Greenspan, adviser to Pres Nixon before he entered White
House, says spending must be cut, that present rate could produce $15- to
$20-billion deficit for fiscal '72, that built-in increases tend to outstrip
ability of normally growing econ to offset them; says problems are long-term and
need long-term solution, that arithmetic of budget has more pol and soc
implications for nation than any current crisis; comment on toll on econ from
budget drain from Vietnam war and on growing opinion of economists that US will
have to pull back to avoid serious econ debacle; A Greenspan says Nixon will
have to ask for new taxes in Jan '71 budget message that will produce $5-billion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 75, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 48 words

Citizens Com for the Amendment to End the War (Mc Govern-Hatfield amendment) set
up, Washington, to organize grass-roots support for US withdrawal from Indochina
by next June 30; headed by ex-Atty Gen R Clark and E Burling; NYC Mayor Lindsay,
P Newman, B Cerf and T Seaver are members

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

S Vietnam and Nationalist China delegates denied right to speak at UN peace comm
meeting, prompting walkout by 30 delegates of 19 nations; Amer D Warren earlier
replied to attacks on US, charging unidentified diplomats coach participants and
that pol meetings are packed, with Amers barred from speaking; scores such undem
practices; walkout described; other comms on specific topics meet peacefully

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 90 words

Pres Nixon, in move to step up diplomatic relations with new Govt, names E C
Swank as Amb, 1st since '65; Sec Rogers repts to Nixon on his visit to area;
rumors of possible new Soviet interest in an internatl conf on Indochina
circulate, Washington; US State Dept and Soviet Amb Dobrynin silent; por; State
dept announces J Moore, Deputy Asst Sec of State for E Asian and Pacific
Affairs, with special responsibilities for Cambodian affairs is resigning to
become HEW Dept counselor; J M Wilson, career Foreign Service officer, to
succeed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 43 words

Le Van Loi, S Vietnamese repr to internatl orgns in Geneva, says Red Cross rept
last Feb on conditions in Con Son prison contained no 'damaging' allegations
against S Vietnamese Govt; S Vietnamese Govt informants say Govt considers
abolishing 'tiger cages'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

US command repts number of Amer troops in S Vietnam has dropped to 411,500,
lowest level in more than 3 yrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

Article on innefective pacification effort in Binhson hamlet; mil officials
consider 80% of inhabitants to be Vietcong sympathizers; Thai soldiers work at
pacification, Amers advise and pay for effort, S Vietnamese provide police

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 145 words

HR com demands Fed investigations of conditions at Con Son prison S Vietnam;
Hawkins and Anderson offer resolution calling on Cong to condemn 'cruel and
inhumane' treatment of pol prisoners and urging Pres Nixon to demand Saigon Govt
take immediate action; prison situation comes up during testimony of AID aide R
H Nooter before HR subcom; Nooter, in response to questions posed by Reprs Moss
and Horton, says Saigon Govt investigates conditions; N Cornish, subcom staff
member, says AID officials knew of conditions and did nothing about them; Moss
insists that AID investigation of prison should not be conducted by F E Walton,
head of AID's pub safety program in S Vietnam; says Walton has shown bias;
directs all civil prisons in S Vietnam be included in investigation; Hawkins and
Anderson send long personal lrs to Nixon urging his support for corrective
action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 209 words

Top mil and diplomatic analysts in Saigon believe Hanoi still regards S Vietnam
as its principle objective in Indochina; many concede US made basic mistake in
committing Amer ground forces to Cambodian venture; most agree campaign changed
mil equation in Indochina; Indochina experts expect N Vietnamese to establish
new supply route and bases to conduct mil operations, continue small attacks
against towns surrounding Pnompenh with aim of toppling Govt and embarrassing
US; most experts concede US made basic mistake in committing Amer ground forces
to Cambodian venture but agree that campaign fundamentally changed mil equation
in Indochina; praise campaign as major setback to N Vietnam; cite among
'permanent changes' Saigon's reptd offer to Cambodia to annex all or part of
Parrot's Beak in exch for Phuquoc Island with its large naval base and end to N
Vietnam's ability to send large quantities of war supplies into S Vietnam by sea
via Cambodian coast convinced war's mementum now favors S Vietnam; Amer
intelligence officials have turned up new evidence of movement toward S Vietnam
by some N Vietnamese regiments well N of buffer zone; analysts believe enemy
will probably mount sizable offensive against northernmost provs in Oct; illus;
map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 14, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 93 words

R Blumenthal, 24-yr-old liberal, said to have refused Pres Nixon's offer of
appmt as VISTA dir, post which has been vacant since '68, because of sharp
disagreement with Nixon's Indochina and domestic policies; Blumenthal on 6-mo
duty tour with Marine Corps; had long conf with OED Dir Rumsfeld on apptmt;
Nixon said to seek to establish rapport with young by apptmt though it was
opposed by 91 Cong members in petition and by Atty Gen Mitchell; Blumenthal's
reptd opposition to Nixon Adm policies and to new directions of agency denied by
Rumsfeld in int; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Lr backs June 25 ed criticism of S Korean dependence upon US; scores
Vietnamization program; says Thais use mil blackmail in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 49, Column 6

LENGTH: 77 words

L S Silk analysis of Vietnam war effects on US econ as belying Marxist charge
that capitalist economies depend on war to provide prosperity and full
employment; notes drop in profits from '65-70, in contrast with rise from
'61-65; quotes Prof Eisner; war has cost US $219-billion in last 5 yrs
discussed; Vietnam war's adverse impact on econ notes spendable earnings for avg
worker with 3 dependents have declined 2% since '65, compared with 10% rise,
'60-65

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

R Blumenthal, apparently yielding to White House pressure, denies repts that his
disagreement with Nixon Adm policies on poor was reason for refusing post; does
not dispute repts of his disagreement with Pres Nixon's Indochina policies; Natl
Vista Alliance issues statement regretting failure to find permanent dir for
VISTA; 4 Sens from Sen Labor and Pub Welfare Com write Rumsfeld expressing
'alarm' at new agency policies designed to limit expression of young

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 215 words

HR panel rept on Songmy incident recommends that jurisdiction of Fed cts be
expanded to deal with mil offenders who have become civilians; calls for
regulations to insure that all investigations of allegations of possible war
crimes be conducted by competent investigators who shall be independent of
immediate command involved in alleged incident; recommendation reflects panel's
disenchantment with Army procedures for investigating and repting alleged war
crimes; major portion of rept is devoted to scrutiny and subsequent criticism of
Army's original investigation of Songmy incident; rept finds tragedy of major
proportions occurred at Songmy; finds incident was 'covered up' within Americal
Div and by dist and prov advisory teams; discloses several details about
original Army investigation; names 5 witnesses who reptd they saw varying
numbers of Vietnamese casualties; says evidence indicates relatively few US
troops actually committed acts; displays apparent reluctance to brand alleged
deaths as crimes or to judge individuals responsible for them; panel was named
by Repr Rivers; Repr Hebert heads it, Reprs Stratton, Gubser and Dickinson are
other members; rept discloses Koster countermanded order to make thorough check
of number of civilians killed; other details on rept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 11 words

Enemy troops kill 6 Amers near Hue, S Vietnam; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 141 words

Soviet Deputy Min Firyubin leaves New Delhi after conf with Indian officials on
prospects of new Indochina conf; he reptdly backed Indian view that US
declaration of intent to withdraw from S Vietnam by specific date will expedite
such conf; Indian Foreign Min discounts repts that it has recd peace proposal
involving USSR and N Vietnam accord for new Geneva conf-type parley; concedes
problem had been discussed by Firyubin; Firyubin reiterates USSR view that
initiative for peace must come from US with unconditional withdrawal of troops;
New Delhi officials are skeptical on prospects of early peace; US also takes
skeptical view; State Dept makes available somber assessment of prospects for
peace from Rogers, who, in int, says US has not moved closer to peace in last yr
and that peace is not closer because enemy does not want to end war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 7

LENGTH: 137 words

M Frankel comment on Richardson return to HEW Dept notes dept growth since he
last served, his concern over 'incredibly wasteful diversion of money and
manpower' on 260 Fed grant programs, on view that major obstacle to effective
delivery of health and educ services is profusion and confusion of Fed programs;
says Richardson intends to seek nationwide constituency to support reform;
search for new Under Sec continues; F D Murphy and J N Irwin 2d are candidates
most frequently mentioned at dept; Frankel notes Sec of State Roger's expression
of doubt that Hanou will will soon agree to serious negotiations contradicts
repts of White House calculations that he attributes to Kissinger; says Defense
Sec Laird is studying econ; says unofficial repts indicate S Vietnamese troops
last yr deserted at rate of 10,000 a mo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Negro City Coll student P B Simms invites delegates to tour Harlem, s as
'special' assembly participant; defends right of Nationalist China and S Vietnam
to be heard

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 61 words

180 candidates will vie for 30 of 60 seats in S Vietnamese Sen in election Aug
30; central election com announces names of candidates and tickets on which they
are running; pol observers view election as indicator for next yr's presidential
election; many opposition politicians discount this election; say Govt will
arrange voting in favor of pro-Govt candidates

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 32 words

Case of flagrant vote-rigging in recent S Vietnam election discourages officials
and reinforces cynicism of villagers in unnamed prov along coast; case
discussed; some details on elections

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 66 words

Cambodian troops battle enemy on hwy linking Pnompenh with port of Kompong Som;
19 busloads of Khmer Krom, former mercenaries of US Special Forces in S Vietnam
(Green Berets), moved to scene of fighting to help 2 bns pinned down by enemy
fire; battle viewed as 1st real test of Khmer Krom who are fighting without
support of S Vietnam Army; 6 bns have been incorporated into Cambodian Army; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 117 words

S Vietnamese Govt spokesman says more than 500 prisoners have been flown on Amer
planes from prison to Saigon and are awaiting release; families do not yet know
identities of prisoners; Govt sources take position that return of prisoners is
not related to controversy over conditions; Govt announces it has begun
investigation of conditions; Red Cross inspectors found in 2 visits to prison
last Feb that conditions were 'not too bad' and that most inmates were held as
common criminals; sources reveal fewer than 50 prisoners are classified as POWs;
details on Red Cross rept; State Dept says US has legal responsibility for kind
of treatment given civilian prisoners it turns over to S Vietnamese Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 21 words

Lr urges continued support for Nixon Adm policy of continued US aid to enable
Indochinese to withstand N Vietnamese aggression

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu vows to 'beat to death' those of his countrymen who call
for 'immediate peace, in surrender to Communists', s, ceremony honoring S
Vietnamese troops who participated in Cambodian operations; some recent protests
in S Vietnsm and Govt's actions against them noted; Thieu scores demonstrators

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 7

LENGTH: 38 words

Min Schumann (France) and Sec Douglas-Home (GB) discuss Brit entry to EEC, conf,
Paris; discuss Indochina; reptdly agree that UN and Jarring should make new
peace initiative; calls on Premier Chaban-Delmas; returns to London

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 11 words

US command identifies Maj Gen George Casey's body; S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

S Vietnamese force of nearly 5,000 men begins major sweep near Danang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

S Vietnam delegates withdraw from UN World Youth Assembly, charging harassment;
had been prevented from speaking by leftist hecklers; UN repr denies charge that
Vietnamese interpreter was manhandled

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 283 words

Sec of State Rogers, in apparent effort to move his position on war closer to
that of White House, says there are 'reasonable prospects' for peace
negotiations in long run but short-run prospects are not bright, doubts
Communist powers would be inclined to negotiate peace settlement on Vietnam
after setbacks they have suffered in Cambodia, State Dept briefing; White House
press sec Ziegler tries to counter idea that there are differences in Adm over
impact of Cambodian operation; indicates in comment that there is some White
House pique at Rogers, who is known to have opposed use of Amer troops in
Cambodia; Rogers, in briefing, backtracks somewhat from earlier statement that
Communist China has gained influence in N Vietnam as result of Cambodian
operation but goes out of his way to avoid giving any false hopes on operation
leading to peace negotiations; says he shares Defense Sec Laird view that USSR
is continuing to build up its ICBM force but says this does not adversely affect
prospects for accord on strategic arms limitation in Vienna talks; says US has
assured S Koreans that it will take steps to modernize their armed forces to
make up for reduction in US troops, says he expects cooperation from S Korea
despite its sharp criticism of planned cutback; says he expects any settlement
will require removal of foreign troops including Soviet combat personnel from
Arab countries, says, contrary to White House assessments, that he does not
think USSR is trying to establish permanent combat or mil base in UAR but is
trying to bolster position of Arab states; says Nguyen Van Thieu is still
noncommital about Pres Nixon proposal that pol settlement reflect balance of
forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 216 words

Nixon Adm urges Cong to drop Cooper-Church amendment on ground that, if enacted,
it would infringe on Pres's 'lawful responsibilities' as Comdr in Chief, State
and Defense Depts memo to Cong conf members trying to reconcile differences;
appears to rule out any compromise; conferees begin debate; HR conferees reptdly
have taken adamant stand for deletion; Sen conferees reptdly insist upon
amendment's retention, hint they are prepared to see mil sales bill, to which it
is attached, die rather than retreat; Armed Services Com repts to Sen that it is
revising sec of mil sales bill to make clear that US can help finance operations
of S Vietnamese and other 'free world forces' in Communist sanctuaries across
Cambodian border; Sen Stennis, com chmn, says enlargement of authority is not
designed to give Adm power to finance mil operations in support of Cambodian
Govt, news conf; holds com amendment will work 'in concert' with Cooper-Church
amendment; Sen debate set on $19.2-billion bill for weapons procurement and for
research and development; Sen Stennis, noting Armed Services Com cut
$1.3-billion from Adm request, calls authorization 'austere,' s, Sen; bipartisan
Cong group, Members of Cong for Peace Through Law, holds $3-billion more could
be cut without weakening natl security

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 16, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 169 words

Sens E M Kennedy and Scott, Drs Hayakawa and Fleming, Natl Student Assn pres C F
Palmer and Black Amer Law Students Assn chmn J O Cochrane testify at 1st hearing
of Pres Comm on Campus Unrest; cite Vietnam war as key issue in divisiveness on
campus; also cite hypocritical attitudes towards sex, drugs, racial
discrimination and divisive Nixon Adm rehtoric as causes and 'crude attacks on
dissenters'; Scranton meets with Vice Pres Agnew, says Agnew does not intend to
press for Rhodes dismissal from panel; says comm's rept will be addressed to
Pres Nixon rather than to pub, in terms of natl crisis; Sen Kennedy says war
must end; Mich U pres R W Fleming says end of war will help contain campus
unrest; makes other comments; cites US operation in Cambodia; Scott queries why
unrest did not erupt during Johnson Adm, when war was expanding; Dr S I Hayakawa
says a prime reason for restlessness of students is that they are trapped by
knowledge that to leave school is to give up their student deferments; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Ed noting statements by Pres Nixon and Sec of State Rogers, says, with new Amer
negotiator, D Bruce, headed for Paris, time now has come for comprehensive
mil-pol proposal without waiting for S Vietnam to approve every last detail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 24 words

Mass Sen passes unanimously bill drafting statewide referendum question for Nov
ballot on future US mil action in Vietnam; Sen Donahue is sponsor

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 71 words

Peace comm, 181-73, votes denunciation of US for Vietnam and Latin-Amer
policies, under strong anti-Amer pressure; other participants protest
propaganda, will challenge rept legality; chmn F Najia rejects considering
additions to text; 40 sign petition charging Soviet bloc and 'undem left'
manipulate conf and use it as pol tool; several Amer and USSR reprs meet
informally in amiable discussion; activity of other comms noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

M Frankel, noting strain between White House and State Dept, comment on Sec of
State Rogers's relations with White House views him less alarmed than Pres Nixon
and advisers over possibility of permanent Soviet combat presence in Middle
East; differing emphases viewed as not indicative of major policy split; comment
on Roger's statements on impact of Cambodian venture on prospects for peace in
Vietnam; holds Rogers says what White House itself had believed and expected

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 11 words

US command repts 72 Amers killed in Indochina in previous wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

Article on S Vietnamese widow who grieves for her only son, killed recently in
Cambodia, as example of S Vietnamese attitude toward casualties; illus; other
examples cited; 94,945 S Vietnamese have been killed in war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 17, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 142 words

Repr Anderson makes pub lr from Dr M Nelson, who served for 13 mos in Vietnam,
charging pol prisoners at Quangngai Prison were tortured with electrical shocks,
beatings and other abuses; says lr validates his conviction that abuse of
prisoners is widespread; says he has arranged for Nelson to testify before HR
subcom; excerpts from lr; US officials privately urge S Vietnamese to clean up
situation at Con Son prison; Walton has made visits to prison; has been ordered
not to grant ints to journalists or speak to them on telephone; recent comments
made by US official, who disagreed with repts about conditions, noted;
Communists at peace talks score prison conditions; Habib says US does not
condone mistreatment and that investigation is under way; S Vietnamese officials
in Saigon deride Communists' charges; N Vietnam denies it has new peace plan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

Ed on Pres Nixon opposition to Cooper-Church amendment holds amendment no more
than reaffirmation of const responsibility of Cong to declare war; says that to
argue that Pres has authority to initiate mil action in a foreign country on his
own is to claim powers for Comdr in Chief that were never intended by Const and
that are inimical to a free soc; criticizes Nixon's seeming attempt to narrow
interpretation of role of Cong; holds amendment in no way inhibits his
legitimate command over troops already committed in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 3

LENGTH: 48 words

Harvard Prof J K Fairbank article reviewing pre-World War II pol and strategic
techniques as anachronistic in their use in Vietnam situation; sees S Vietnamese
facing in Cambodia same quagmire as US in S Vietnam; viewing war in 'meaningful
historical context', scores US goals and strategy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

Tour of S Vietnamese positions along border reveals striking similarities
between S Vietnamese role in Cambodia and US role in S Vietnam immediately after
'65 buildup; S Vietnamese troops, put at about 18,000, concentrate on
search-and-destroy sweeps through countryside and on keeping major rds and
canals open; relations with Cambodians appear to be good; S Vietnamese Army
imposes its own controls on visits by foreign newsmen, institutes careful
bureaucratic procedures to keep tabs on them; S Vietnamese group illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 47 words

Justice Dept repts Defense Dept is cooperating with Atty Gen Mitchell in
surveillance discoveries and techniques; Justice Dept now using electronic
sensors developed to detect enemy movements in S Vietnam in its own war against
narcotics smuggling and illegal entries on Mex border

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

UN World Youth Assembly ends; approves message to UN member govts demanding US
halt aggression in Indochina, backing Arabs in dispute with Israel, calling for
immediate USSR mil withdrawal from Czechoslovakia and restore full democracy to
nation; issue had been hooted down by leftist-led members in prior debate;
raucous discussion described; Sec Gen Thant praises vigor and candor of
participants; says UN will probably never be same; prevailing harmony in 3 of
comms noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 37 words

About 1,500 Amers join North S Vietnam sweep; operation is aimed at destroying 2
major enemy base camps; US troops rebuild abandoned Khamduc Special Forces camp
as part of operation; B-52s raid near Laotian border; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 38 words

About 100 students in Saigon battle 30 policemen and recapture 3 student leaders
seized during protest meeting at Saigon school at which speakers called for end
to univ mil training program so more time can be spent on studies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 101 words

Premier Lon Nol, Deputy Premier Sisowath Sirik Matak and Chief of State Cheng
Heng, in rare tribute, fly to Neak Leung to welcome S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van
Thieu and Min Tran Van Lam to Cambodia; they conf in tent at mil base; Nguyen
Van Thieu repts aid and support for Cambodia were major topics of discussion;
says all agreed that other nations should immediately come to Cambodia's aid,
int with 2 Brit correspondents; declines comment on Thailand's hestitation to
commit troops; dismisses suggestion of Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky that Cambodia,
Thailand, S Vietnam and Laos form anti-Communist front

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 18, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 185 words

Dr Marjorie Nelson says she treated victims of beatings and torture inflicted in
S Vietnamese 'interrogation center' that had Amer adviser, testimony to HR
subcom; says some of victims included pregnant woman and teen-agers and that
some of women who emerged from center suffered chronic hysteria; says she was
told center had shifted from Amer to S Vietnamese control; says she is sure
Amers were aware of torture; says center was so closely identified with US in
minds of local people that they called it Amer interrogation center; AID says it
has nothing to do with such centers; Pentagon spokesman says there are no US
provincial centers; says Nelson probably refers to intelligence sec of S
Vietnamese Army's provincial hq; Reprs Reid and Moss call for rept by State Dept
on treatment of pol prisoners; official documents AID has reluctantly made
available show that despite Amer offer of assistance, Saigon Govt has delayed
construction of prison facilities; State Dept lawyers have provided US officials
with memo on US legal responsibility in regard to prisoners; details on Nelson
testimony; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 53, Column 1

LENGTH: 26 words

NYC police raid Bklyn apt and seize $5-million worth of heroin; arrest 4
persons, including 2 Army veterans who lost their legs while serving in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 11 words

Comment on student dissent in S Vietnam and Govt's reaction to it

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh arrives in India amid raging controversy over her visit; is
guest of Min S Singh; was invited by his predecessor, D Singh; is met at airport
by Communists and their rightist opponents, who oppose visit; leftists have been
playing up visit; visit has resulted in worsening of relations between S Vietnam
and India

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

Concerned New Yorkers for Rockefeller, Buckley and Levitt support that tri-party
slate, sharing NYC hq with 2d orgn, Silent Majority Mobilization Com, which runs
petition drive pledging support for Nixon Vietnam policies; both are run by coll
and hs students, are collecting money and soliciting volunteer workers
throughout city; Mobilization head R Carroll notes PBA supports same slate

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 110 words

Group of anti-Saigon students from S Vietnam band together to resist Canadian
efforts to return them to S Vietnam; is heartened by recent Immigration Appeals
Bd ruling reversing order that Luong Chou Phuoc, most prominent S Vietnamese
activist in Canada, be deported; some in group acknowledge they are draft
dodgers and mil deserters who consider Canada an ideal sanctuary; some resent
being accused of trying to avoid war service; 1 student says Canada is ideal
place to work for unity of N and S Vietnam; many of his compatriots are
militants who fear their antiregime stance in Canada will bring them severe
punishment; some activities of group noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 34 words

S Vietnamese village tailor, unable to walk or stand because of treatment he
received at Con Son prison, describes his ordeal; says he was kept in tiger cage
for over 1 yr; was accused of aiding Vietcong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 4; (AFP)

LENGTH: 25 words

Laotian Govt forces beat back attempt by Pathet Lao and Communist troops to
seize Ban Hatsaikhoune, village across from island of Khong in Mekong River

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 3; (AFP)

LENGTH: 58 words

Vietnamese Communists launch new attack on Longvek mil base after besieging it
for 8 days; Cambodian reinforcements approach area; Kompong Luong also under
attack, fighting in progress; US and Cambodian planes bomb enemy concentrations
over wide areas; Thai and S Vietnam mil missions arrive, Pnompenh, to discuss
coordination of air operations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 19, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 48 words

S Vietnamese Govt siezes day's editions of Vietnamese language papers Tia Sang
and Cong Luan and Chinese language papers Tan Thanh and Quang Hoa for their
articles on prison conditions; 5th paper Tin Mat also seized for printing
article 'with the intent to reduce the national prestige'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 20, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 3

LENGTH: 37 words

Lr from Amer soldier in Vietnam deplores violence of students and Guard officers
at Kent State Univ; says lrs from citizens hailing Guards' action is frightening
sign of acceptance of violence as way of solving problems

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 20, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 52, Column 1

LENGTH: 185 words

250 environmental activists attend Environmental Action conf to plan post-Earth
Day campaign to improve environment, UAW Family Educ Center, Black Lake, Mich;
discuss wide variety of urban and indus pollution problems and pol, legal and
educ methods of forcing reforms; many participants regard beginnings of alliance
between union leaders, students and other activists on environment issue as most
significant development at conf; workshops discuss researching pollution
problems, filing suits against polluters and efforts to force indus to cut
pollution through proxy fights in stockholders' meetings; many activists
complain politicians have given lip service to movement and then emasculated
antipollution bills in com in response to pressure from indus lobbies; feel
petition and referendum campaigns on specific environmental issues should be
stressed; hold serious antipollution campaign cannot be waged until Vietnam war
ends; internal combustion engine emerges as major target of environmentalists
attending conf; 'auto-free zones' seen emerging as goal of environmentalists;
5th Av test wins praise

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 20, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 86 words

Randalls Island festival, plagued for 2 nights by gate-crashing, admits all
comers free for final program; festival sponsors, Brave New World Productions,
say event is a financial failure; hope film of event will make up for loss;
trouble began 3 wks ago when group which claimed to represent NYC radical youth
groups threatened to spread word that festival was free event if they were not
permitted to share proceeds; police take down Vietcong and N Vietnam flags which
are later run up again by youths in audience

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 20, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 27 words

K Huppe, who opposes Vietnam war, gives up Miss Montana title rather than keep
her pol views 'middle-of-the-road,' as requested by Miss Amer pageant officials

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 20, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 74 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu terms US-S Vietnamese incursion into Cambodia a success
that may bring earlier end to Vietnam war, TV-radio int; US Troops will be
needed only in supporting roles; says supporting role will require more than
50,000 soldiers; calls Cambodian incursion a success; makes clear he expects
extensive US aid; reiterates his opposition to coalition govt including
Communsits but says he will abide by results of free election

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 20, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

US soldiers playing in mud in Vietnam during break in war duties illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 20, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 54 words

Enemy rockets strike Saigon for 4th time this yr; some damage but no casualties
reptd; Gen Chapman says enemy still poses threat in northern provs; B-52s raid
details on scattered mil action; Ssharp fighting near Svayrieng, Tuk Meas and
Kompong Trabek; losses put at 8 killed, 16 wounded; enemy losses put at 32
killed; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 4

LENGTH: 32 words

NYC Housing Repair and Maintenance Div Dir Underwood lr scores Pres Nixon for
authorizing $100-million to S Vietnamese Govt for bldg new housing when there is
great need for housing funds in US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 7; (UPI)

LENGTH: 14 words

2,900 Amers were withdrawn from Vietnam last wk, reducing US troop level to
408,600

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 13 words

2 rockets that crash into center of Saigon cause little stir among inhabitants

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 27 words

Sgt E Torres, charged with murder in alleged '68 Mylai massacre, arrested on
charges of discharging firearm within 100 yds of business place, Brownsville,
Tex

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 14 words

S Vietnamese capt serving in Cambodia voices pessimism on outlook for end of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 187 words

Sen McGovern, seeking to meet criticism he is dovish on Vietnam and hawkish on
Middle East, outlines proposals for settlement, s, Sen; urges Israel allocate
funds, in escrow acct, to compensate Arab refugees for loss of their land in
Palestine as result of '48 war; asks Arab Govts, prior to any talks, to accept
responsibility for acts of aggression committed from bases in their territory
thereby assuming responsibility for terrorism committed by Palestinian commando
groups; holds Israel and Arabs should be willing to accept presence of UN forces
on their territories as part of ultimate peace settlement and that forces should
be under control of UN agencies, not individual govts; urges US supply more jets
to help maintain Israel's deterrent power but that aircraft should not be made
available for use over Arab territory to perpetuate war; urges Adm to reveal its
proposals for solution; neither Johnson nor Nixon Adm have advocated
participation of Palestinian orgns in talks, move opposed by Israel and to which
some Arab govts are hesitant; militant Palestinian orgns are disdainful of
talks, seen as tactic

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 21, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 176 words

Pres Nixon backs S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu's opposition to imposed
coalition govt, emphasizing election open to all is best approach to pol
settlement, news conf; says Bruce will have 'new instructions' and 'great
latitude' in Paris talks; indicates he intends no change in fundamental pol
terms of US; says US will not send ground troops into Laos; does not rule out
coalition govt; considers such a settlement 'highly improbable'; his comments
said to be evidently intended to reassure Nguyen Van Thieu, who charged in TV
int that Rogers and some US Sens have created misunderstanding about
possibilities of negotiated coalition govt; Nixon says Us hopes to see Soviet
combat personnel in UAR removed through peaceful settlement, news conf; says
Kissinger did not mean to imply intended use of force to 'expel' Soviet
personnel; gives greater stress to US efforts to promote 90-day cease-fire than
during July 1 TV int; says Adm has not announced any sale or delivery of planes
to Israel because it wants to give new peace plan chance to succeed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 183 words

Vice Pres Agnew scores as fraud alleged confidential memo linking his office
with plans to cancel election and repeal Bill of Rights; says it is ridiculous
for eds of Scanlan's Monthly, which will pub document, to believe it is genuine;
according to memo, Rand Corp agreed to 'judicious leak' of study on cancellation
of election but does not feel that any information should be made pub on plan to
repeal Bill of Rights; memo, on stationery with heading The Vice President, is
dated Mar 11; rumors were heard in Apr and quickly spread across US that Rand
Corp was preparing secret study of implications of cancellation of election;
White House and Rand officials have repeatedly denied that any such study was
ever undertaken or planned; Agnew says form of memo and stationery heading are
different from those used by his office; Scanlan's eds Zion and Hinckle insist
document is genuine; Agnew denounces as fraud alleged 'confidential' memo
linking Agnew office with plans to use CIA funds to inspire demonstrations by
construction workers in 5 US cities in support of Nixon's Indochina policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 2

LENGTH: 130 words

Goldberg proposes 10 areas in which NYS should reform priorities for '70's, s,
Syracuse U Maxwell Grad School summer lecture series; holds Gov and Legis should
oppose Vietnam war, state should change relations with local govts, state
ombudsman should be set up, state should retrieve undue power from private corp
hands; also urges legis and election reform, more attention to rights of
prisoners, delinquent children, women and minorities; says that state should
accelerate treatment of drug addicts by establishing storefront clinics; cites
need for innovation in educ mass transit, and housing as among 10 priorities
facing state; urges spending law reforms to help candidates of modest means;
Ottinger and Goodell to s, Syracuse U Maxwell Grad School summer lecture series

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 53, Column 6

LENGTH: 61 words

Silk repts dissent to his July 15 article holding effects of Vietnam war bely
Marxist and New Left charges that capitalist economies depend on war to provide
prosperity; holds peace and prosperity in capitalist socs by no means impossible
to attain; holds it task of pol leaders to overcome inertia against changing
existing indus mix with its heavy mil reliance

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 15 words

India rejects demand by S Vietnamese aide in New Delhi that Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh
be arrested

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 15 words

Amb Bruce is present at Natl Security Council meeting on Indochina war held by
Pres Nixon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 17 words

In South Vietnam, 2 Australian soldiers killed, 2 wounded in arty accident
involving New Zealanders

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 46 words

Communist forces move into Angkor region reptdly in attempt to capture Siemreap
and Angkor ruins and install Prince Sihanouk's govt in exile there; N Vietnamese
and Vietcong forces reptdly occupy most of temples at Angkor and are operating
field hosp in inner ring of complex

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 16 words

Repr Moss urges Red Cross be given full access to all prisons and detention
centers in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 77 words

Communist troops continue attack on Romeas mil training camp, 48 mi NW of
Pnompenh; Cambodian troops recapture mil post at Srang, keep firm control of
Kirirom; S Vietnam mil command repts 79 guerrillas killed in 2 clashes in
actions near Tuk Meas; large enemy forces move into Siemreap-Angkor region, make
nightly attacks; N Vietnamese and Vietcong forces reptdly occupy most of temples
at Angkor and are operating field hosp in inner ring of complex; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 22, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 76 words

Tran Thien Khiem's office issues communique saying Govt has suspended use of
'tiger cells' pending improvements; communique classifies prisoners as
'undisciplined elements'; Govt spokesmen provide no details on improvements; 1
spokesman says prisoners in cages have been removed to regular cells; other
details on communique; Moss urges Red Cross be given full access to all prisons
and detention centers, s, HR; urges S Vietnamese Govt to act; cells illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 23, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 149 words

Natl Urban League Delegate's Assembly adopts resolution condemning Chase
Manhattan Bank for its financial links to S Africa, NYC conf; league exec dir
Young succeeds in getting statement amended to include other insts dealing with
S Africa; holds more blacks employed at high levels in Chase than in many other
major US banks; adopts resolution expressing concern for problems facing black
auto dealers; resolution calling for end to racial discrimination in
construction indus; resolution supporting equal opportunity for Spanish-speaking
Amers; resolution supporting NY Times reporter E Caldwell, who faces prison term
for refusing to testify before grand jury on his coverage of Black Panthers;
hold Govt disregards Bill of Rights by asking him to testify; adopts statement
demanding war be ended; Atlanta, Ga, Vice Mayor M Jackson backs coalition idea;
criticizes concept of black capitalism

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 23, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

Ed says Pres Nixon's qualification of his remarks on Amb Bruce's latitude in
talks is 'long way' from role Nixon suggested July 1 when he said Bruce would be
given 'great flexibility'; says Nixon limits Bruce by placing strong emphasis on
Nguyen Van Thieu's view that elections are only route to pol settlement; notes
other routes to settlement; says no road open to Bruce is likely to lead very
far so long as his every step must be cleared with Saigon Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 23, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 4

LENGTH: 10 words

Lr scores Pres Nguyen Van Thieu statements on protesters

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 23, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 67 words

US Army, under amnesty program adopted by 4th Infantry Div in Central Highlands,
Vietnam, is trying to get soldiers in Vietnam who use marijuana and other drugs
to turn themselves in and get help; promises that those who do will not be
punished; program discussed; Army physician Maj J Treanon's study made in Feb
shows that nearly 1 out of 5 front-line soldiers smokes marijuana at least once
a day

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 23, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 30 words

Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh says some members of Saigon Govt would be acceptable in
coalition govt; makes clear neither Pres Nguyen Van Thieu nor Vice Pres Nguyen
Cao Ky would be acceptable

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 23, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Pvt G M Hardin held, Saigon, after trying to hijack Air Vietnam passenger plane
and force it to take him to Hong Kong; US Army spokesman says he held knife
against throat of pilot as plane was landing at Tansonnhut Airport after flight
from Pleiku; pilot apparently hurt, taken to hosp

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Ed says Pres Nixon statement that he intends no significant reductions from
present level of defense spending implies that further reductions in Vietnam mil
operations will yield insignificant savings or that Nixon Adm means to shift any
future Vietnam savings to other mil uses

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Pres Nixon special adviser on campus unrest Dr A Heard, in statement on his
recent probe, notes concept of 'hon settlement' in Vietnam, important to Nixon,
strikes student generation as 'insane' because, in its view, Amer participation
in war is itself dishonorable; excerpts; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 63, Column 3

LENGTH: 69 words

Defense Sec Laird says draft calls for rest of '70 will return to pre-Vietnam
levels of under 10,000 a mo, s, Washington, to group of students working as
summer Govt internes; says fewer than 50,000 will be called up during rest of
yr; says reductions have been made possible by Nixon Adm commitment to reduce
forces in Vietnam to 284,000 troops by spring; suggests possibility of
all-volunteer Army by June 30 '72

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 66 words

US agrees to strengthen S Korea's armed forces and defense industries before
making any sizable withdrawal of Amer troops, Packard-Jung Nae Huik conf; US
Embassy spokesman says there is no change in US position; Park says S Korea
opposes any troop cut because next few yrs are critical ones for S Korea; US-S
Korean communique reaffirms assistance to S Vietnam in its 'resistance to
aggression'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Peace talks 76th session; Habib renews plea for better treatment of Amer POWs
but receives no positive response; spokesman for Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh makes clear
her statements on coalition govt do not indicate new position

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 35 words

Pres Nixon and Finnish Pres Kekkonen conf, White House, on proposals for Eur
security conf; Sec of State Rogers appeals to Finland to use its good offices
with Red Cross on behalf of Amer prisoners in N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

US troops abandon arty base N of Ashau Valley after heavy bombing strikes and
arty barrages fail to stop N Vietnamese army buildup around post; 12 Amers
killed, 51 wounded in recent battle; more than 30 Amers killed, more than 160
wounded in area since July 1; details on mil action; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 44 words

Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky says removal of Amer troops will ease his Govt's
problems by freeing it from pol pressures brought about by 'stupid' Amer
pacifists, statement; says he has informed S Vietnamese Army comdrs that US
troops will be out of Vietnam by mid-'71

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 25, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 2

LENGTH: 24 words

Australian 'dove', MP G Bryant, reverses stand against arms aid to Cambodia
after visit; says N Vietnam is committing aggression in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 25, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 92 words

Army sets gen ct-martial for M/Sgt Higdon on charges of theft and bribery while
in charge of servicemen's clubs in S Vietnam; move is 1st toward prosecution of
group of career sgts implicated in '69 in Sen hearings on misuse of funds in
clubs; Justice Dept studying possibility of civilian criminal proceedings
against Higdon and some others; has charges also against Maredem Corp; Higdon
now at Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, Ala; his lawyer E L Hopper says trial will
not begin for 3 mos because many witnesses will have to be brought from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 25, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 22 words

Amb Bruce arriving in Saigon to discuss terms for peace and new initiatives with
S Vietnamese leaders illus; is met by Amb Bunker

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 25, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 67 words

US planes attack enemy positions around abandoned base N of valley; S Vietnamese
troops, on sweep near base, rept finding enemy base smashed by recent B-52 raid;
find 53 enemy dead; Vietcong radio broadcast claims great victory in area; map;
Preyveng hit by mortor fire; no casualities reptd; reinforcements put ashore on
Mekong River island of Khong to meet threat of 4 N Vietnamese bns dug in nearby

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 25, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 151 words

Allied planners are concerned over implications of very large airfield reptd to
be under construction about 150 mi N of buffer zone; airfield may include 1st
underground hangars in N Vietnam; planes could range over several northern provs
in S Vietnam; US strategists fear N Vietnam, in future, may try to bolster
ground assault with large-scale air support; see serious mil trouble for S
Vietnam after bomber power available to S Vietnamese Air Force is reduced
because of Amer pullout; reduction in number of helicopters that will be used by
S Vietnam cited as another problem; reduction will mean shift in tactics, with
greater use being made of roads for supply; allied analysts also foresee S
Vietnam having only token capacity to bomb Ho Chi Minh Trail; are convinced N
Vietnam plans to continue ground action in S Vietnam for long time; other
projected aspects of future mil situation noted; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 25, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 84 words

Red Cross reprs, who visited Con Son in Feb, have protested treatment of POWs by
S Vietnamese Govt; inspection rept shows they told S Vietnam its treatment of 24
N Vietnamese prisoners at prison violates Geneva Conv on POWs; observations
about treatment of prisoners listed; prisoners were originally in POW camps, but
were sent to Con Son after having been found guilty of murder; remain POWs under
'49 Geneva Conv despite civil sentences; copy of rept has been filed with US
Govt; other details on rept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 187 words

Sec Sir Douglas-Home says Israel and UAR are beginning to view negotiation as
their best course, int; says Middle East is most important crisis he faces but
not too much optimism should be expressed; holds prejudices on both sides are
difficult to overcome; holds NATO must take acct of new Soviet influence south
of Eur, including possible protection of trade routes around southern Africa;
says that possible threat to Britain by Communist interference with Cape of Good
Hope sea route used by tankers bringing Persian Gulf oil to Eur is matter of
concern to all of W Eur; sees Vietnamization as beginning toward reduction of
hostilities in Indochina, says Pres Nixon has recognized he has chosen '2d-best
alternative' by beginning phased withdrawals of Amer troops alongside
Vietnamization process; says best solution would have been negotiated
settlement; expects Communist China to play major role in Asian development;
says his party, Conservative, and Labor party have made it abundantly clear
importance they attach to ties with US as major free world power; says that
over-all he sees no fundamental differences

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 9 words

Amb Bruce confs with officials at US Embassy in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 115 words

Nearly 150 members of Com of Planning Professions to End the War in Vietnam,
composed of NYC area architects, builders and engineers, seek out Sens in
Washington in lobbying effort to urge support for McGovern-Hatfield amendment;
erect displays in Sen com hearing room showing designs of proposed building
projects they say have been jeopardized because Fed funds for project have been
diverted to war effort; Goodell talks to group; lobby is in contrast to recent
demonstrations by construction workers supporting Pres Nixon's policies in
Indochina; some members of com sponsoring lobbying effort listed; com includes J
V Tishman and Amer Inst of Architects NY chapter pres G Cavaglieri

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

2 young Frenchmen hold aloft Vietcong flag from statue in downtown Saigon until
it is torn down and they are driven from their perch by crowd that throws stones
and beats them; 1 throws down leaflets calling for withdrawal of 'Amer
assassins'; other details on incident; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 81 words

Allied forces kill 119 enemy in 2 days of stepped-up fighting; 2 Amers and 2 S
Vietnamese killed; casualties suffered in 6 widely scattered clashes; 14 Amers
wounded in accident during mission 96 mi NE of Saigon; 2 Amer helicopters
downed; B-52s raid in Mekong Delta and near valley; mil action reptd at
Simreap-Angkor and Thmar Keo regions and near Takeo and Svayrieng; Cambodian
command repts Route 4, linking Pnompenh with Kompong Thom, reopened to heavy
traffic; details on action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

Comment on Vietnam coalition govt issue and recent statements by various
officials on it; cartoon of Amb Bruce

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

Lr says N Vietnam, not US, is entrapped in Cambodia because it has about 60,000
troops pinned down there; holding Cambodian operation was success, says recent
developments and Pres Nixon moves have resulted in deteriorated position for N
Vietnam; lauds Nixon for 'outfoxing' N Vietnam while reducing US effort

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

Lr denies Pres Nixon claim that US venture into Cambodia was a success; calls it
'greatest disaster' of Indochina war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 26, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 2

LENGTH: 53 words

Lr on Cambodian youth's rept on conditions under Vietcong (July 20,1:2) cites
Vietcong practice of shooting villagers as Govt agents; says standard Vietcong
operation procedure to deal with local population in S Vietnam includes forced
'contributions', incessant propaganda lectures and forced recruitment of young
men

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 27, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

S Vietnamese sources say desertions from S Vietnamese Army increased drastically
in last few mos, averaging nearly 50% higher than last yr's rate; desertion rate
has Saigon and Washington officials worried; is attributed mostly to S Vietnam's
spiraling inflation rate; figures; other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 27, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

US Embassy warns its staff of violence against Amers by students and other
anti-Govt demonstrators; urges employes to travel in pairs; Army spokesman says
there is rise in anti-Amer feeling in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 27, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 114 words

2,500 S Vietnamese troops enter Cambodia in new search and destroy drive
centered in Kompong Trabels area; reptdly kill 35 of enemy; reptdly flown by US
helicopters to Donphuc, S Vietnam, staging area before entering Cambodia; S
Vietnamese rept killing 10,346 N Vietnamese, Capturing 1,582 POWs, seizing
19,609 weapons since Mar 20; rept 929 S Vietnamese killed, 4,113 wounded;
Cambodia repts enemies damaged 2 bridges along route connecting Pnompenh and hq
charged with Pnompenh defense; 2 USAF planes crash; cause unknown; US plane
losses total 54 since Mar 10; action tapers off to lowest level since mid-July;
US troops uncover enemy supply cache near Cambodian border; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

Pipe bomb explodes at 41 Broad St branch of Bank of America, shattering glass
doors and fracturing marble walls; illus; Daily News receives telephone call 20
minutes after explosion from alleged Weatherman indicating that Vietcong flag
had been left in honor of Cuban revolution and brother who died at Isla Vista
protest site; police comment on bombing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 18 words

Red Cross says it will conduct new inspection of prison as soon as it receives
permission from Saigon Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 71 words

Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh ends visit to India; Indian officials seem relieved; visit
proved embarrassment to Indian Govt due to series of incidents centering mostly
on frenetic protocol maneuverings that arose because of invitation and because
India does not recognize provisional Vietcong govt; Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh arrives
in Colombo for 3-day visit to Ceylon; small band of students stage protest in
Saigon against visit to India

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 47 words

Antiwar and anti-Govt members of S Vietnam Natl Assembly say harassment over
their views is continual, but their most serious fear is for their pol survival;
many members predict Govt will help their opponents in next election; activities
and positions of Ngo Cong Duc noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 40 words

B-52s raid; strikes ordered following repts N Vietnamese troops move back into
bases near border; return of troops said to be apparent reason for new S
Vietnamese operation; enemy surrounds 4 Cambodian bns, Kirirom; heavy fighting
reptd; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 28, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 42 words

Laird says he feels he has authority to permit 'short incursions' into Laos,
testimony made to HR subcom May 4 and now made pub; bases such authority on
'protective reaction' policy; says he personally authorized 1 incursion during
visit to Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 45 words

Lr from E Russell scores US plane bombings, cites Norodom Sihanouk cable to B
Russell Peace Foundation describing suffering caused by bombings; noting Sec of
State Rogers statement that Cambodian invasion has stiffened resistance to US in
Indochina, deplores invasion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 62, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Business Execs Move for Peace in Vietnam chmn A R Appleby, at Bulova Watch Co
annual meeting, accuses co of attempting to conceal mil contracts from
stockholders; co chmn Gen O N Bradley denies charge, holding co takes great
pride in defense role

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 201 words

Ex-Under Sec Katzenbach, in testimony before HR subcom considering bills seeking
to define div of warmaking powers between Presidency and Cong, defends
Cooper-Church amendment as no infringement on Pres powers as Comdr in Chief;
says it is within Cong powers to tell Pres he cannot spend money in a particular
country; says Pres has power to take steps to protect Amer troops if attacked
but that this authority for defensive actions does not apply to indefinite mil
engagements such as those in Vietnam; Symington and Fulbright, in Sen ss, charge
that exec branch has entered into secret agreements, never passed upon by Sen,
that have led to mil commitments to foreign govts, reply to Sen Stennis
contention size of defense budget is dictated by need to meet extensive
commitments US has assumed 'so freely'; Katzenbach urges Cong to repeal Tonkin
Resolution, which he once described as 'functional equivalent' of declaration of
war in Vietnam, testimony to HR subcom; endorses Cooper-Church amendment; terms
it 'clearly const assertion' of power by Cong; challenges Nixon Adm
interpretation of powers of Pres; says Pres power to take steps if Amer troops
are attacked is limited to defensive actions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 23 words

Naval vessel carrying refugees to S Vietnam reptdly attacked 10 mi N of Neak
Luong ferry crossing; 20 refugees, 4 sailors reptdly wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 65 words

Cambodians, out of ammunition, yield state cement works at Kampot to enemy;
1,500 S Vietnamese troops, reptdly called in by Lon Nol, advance on Kampot to
seek to recapture factory; S Vietnamese reptdly clash with enemy around Kompong
Trabe; Gen Ngo Dzu repts S Vietnamese troops involved in latest drive have
killed more than 100 enemy in several sharp clashes; other mil action reptd; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 23 words

N Vietnamese delegation to peace talks charges US B-52s and other aircraft
carried out 3 days of raids last wk in northern part of zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 29, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 232 words

US Govt repts budget showed relatively small deficit of $2.9-billion for fiscal
'70; outlays totaled $196.7-billion, revenues $193.8-billion; Under Sec Volcker
says 'modest deficit' in sluggish econ that cuts into revenues is not
disturbing; some officials, adding up all things that could go wrong, have
reached deficit figure close to $15-billion for fiscal '71, without predicting
it; Volcker terms figure 'sheer speculation'; Shultz says Adm is not projecting
deficit nearly so high as $15-billion; main factors used in calculating
$15-billion figure outlined; final spending figure of $196.7-billion is below
Jan estimate but nearly $4-billion higher than figure fixed by Nixon Adm in Apr
'69 after rev of Johnson budget; lower than expected tax revenues reflected in
Treas announcement of $2.5-billion budget deficit for fiscal '70; fiscal '71
outlook for deficit estimated by some at up to $15-billion also takes into
account lower revenues, particularly from corp profits tax; '70 budget figures
show $4.2-billion shortfall in corp profits tax collections as against Jan
estimate, $1.8-billion shortfall in individual income tax collections, latter
reflecting decline in stock mkt and capital gains tax; Treas Dept rept on Fed
budget for fiscal '70 reveals mil outlays were $77.1-billion, compared with
$77.9-billion for '69, 1st drop since heavy engagement in Vietnam began in '65

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 30, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 12 words

Sgt Torres found not guilty in firearm case; Vietnam atrocity charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 30, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

USN turns over to S Vietnamese Navy 5 landing craft and small drydock, ceremony,
Danang; USN announces 2,000 of its men left Vietnam during July

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 30, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

Red Cross says its reprs who visited Con Son prison in Sept, '69 and Feb, '70
failed to learn of existence of 'tiger cages'; spokesman says conditions
surrounding visits precluded investigators' learning about cells; investigators
were permitted to see only 20 or so POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 30, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 42 words

Crowd of angry S Vietnamese surrounds truck carrying 6 US marines and holds it
for almost 10 hrs until Amer officials pay nearly $2,5000 as compensation for
boy killed by vehicle; US spokesman confirms incident took place but does not
confirm amt paid

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 31, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 23 words

Lr proposes details of election of new govt in S Vietnam be worked out while
'caretaker govt', staffed by foreign neutrals, is in office

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 31, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 85 words

US command repts 77 Amers killed last wk, 11 more than wk before; repts 510
wounded, 109 fewer then wk before; S Vietnamese and enemy casualties for last wk
reptd; US hq repts 43,134 Amers and 660,337 enemy have been killed in war; S
Vietnam repts 111,244 of its troops have been killed; ground action continues at
low level; US command repts 44 enemy killed in recent flareup of fighting in
central highlands; 2 US helicopters downed; B-52s raid in Mekong Delta and W of
Saigon along Cambodian border; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 31, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 123 words

Vietnam's Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, in int, says Communists may make next big mil
moves in Cambodia to try to put Pres Nixon in difficult position of either
substantially increasing US aid or letting Cambodian Govt fall, both of which
would have repercussions on US pub opinion; Thieu says 'residual force' of about
50,000 Amer troops will be required in S Vietnam after '73 to 'guarantee the
peace', informal dinner conversation with 11 Western correspondents; says some
US troops will be required by end of '71 to protect Amer logistical and support
troops; says S Vietnamese forces will fulfill combat burden by that time; says S
Vietnam, in the meantime, must have increased aid; does not go into detail on
his recent talks with Bruce

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 31, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7; (UPI)

LENGTH: 47 words

Group of Sens seeks to stir natl indignation over treatment of US prisoners,
termed 'forgotten men' of war; calls for Sen investigation; proposes resolution
calling on Nixon to ask for UN inquiry; urges renewed pressure for talks between
N and S Vietnam on mutual prisoner releases

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 31, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

71 US Sens back Pres Nixon policy and urge clarification of US intent to protect
and defend Middle East to defer USSR from bringing about confrontation of
superpowers, lr to Nixon; laud remarks made during July 1 TV int; several of
signers have been critics of Vietnam war who have been scored for taking more
hawkish positions on Middle East; partial list of Sens

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 31, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 111 words

Pres Nixon says he is hopeful Israel will accept plan, news conf; attempts to
assure Israel that she can accept plan without fear of jeopardizing her position
by saying plan provides for mil standstill during cease-fire; silent on how he
can provide assurances but hints UAR and USSR have either explicitly or
implicitly accepted US explanation that cease-fire proposal depends on mil
standstill; Nixon asserts for 1st time he is opposed to Saigon's negotiating
coalition govt with NLF, news conf; leaves open 1 avenue to coalition govt;
Communist success in election open to all; says attitudes of US and Vietnam Pres
Nguyen Van Thieu on coalition govt are the same

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
