
                               1 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 1, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Profile and interview with Frank N Mastrogiovanni, disabled Vietnam war veteran,
details his long-standing battle with Veterans Administration.  Inspection of
his file discloses difficulties by agency officials in dealing with
Mastrogiovanni, but records also show day-to-day frustrations of man with
special needs struggling against large bureaucracy to obtain GI Bill of Rights
benefits.  Photo of Mastrogiovanni (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 1-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 1, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 39 words

Radio Hanoi (Vietnam) reports Vietnamese soldiers killed or captured more than
300 Cambodians in 2 days of fighting in Vietnam's Tay Ninh Province.  Claims
Cambodians were preparing for attack on provincial capital Tay Ninh City (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 1-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 1, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY JOHN HERBERS

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

Veterans Administration has become center of controversy, in wake of passage of
new pension law.  Council of Vietnam Veterans, a new lobby, has opposed pension
law on grounds that it increases benefits for those with no service-connected
disability, thus cutting into money available for disabled veterans.  Council is
pitted against powerful veterans' lobby and old-line veterans organizations
which support legislation.  In separate controversy, old-line veterans
organizations have accused VA head Max Cleland of being pawn of Pres Carter
because of his unsuccessful efforts to reduce lifelong veterans preference in
Federal jobs and to cut costs in veterans hospitals (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 1-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 41 words

Unidentified Vietnamese refugee aboard freighter Huey Fong anchored off Hong
Kong dies of internal bleeding and 2 other passengers are airlifted to Hong Kong
hospitals.  Hong Kong has allowed 17 passengers ashore to obtain medical
treatment (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 2-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 81 words

Cambodian guerrillas calling themselves Kampuchean National United Front for
National Salvation claim they captured important northeastern town of Kratie
after killing and capturing hundreds of Government troops.  There is no
independent confirmation of report, and little is known of strength of
newly-created rebel movement, but Western sources express doubt group could
launch large-scale attacks against Cambodian troops without strong support from
Vietnam.  Map of Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 2-79-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 5

LENGTH: 28 words

Cambodian Deputy Prime Min for Foreign Affairs Ieng Sary calls on UN Security
Council to end conflict in Indochina and to condemn aggression by Vietnam and
USSR (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 3-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 3

LENGTH: 69 words

Cambodian Pres Khieu Samphan announces that Vietnamese forces penetrated deep
into eastern Cambodia, with attacks in Ratanakiri and Kratie Provinces.  Appeals
to UN and other countries for help, and accuses USSR of backing Vietnamese
action.  Meanwhile, political analysts receive information confirming
announcement by Cambodian guerrillas that they captured Mekong River town of
Kratie.  Map of Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 3-79-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 3, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY LESTER L WOLFF

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Visiting US Congressman Lester L Wolff urges Asian Development Bank in Manila
(Philippines) to consider establishment of projects in region for Vietnamese
refugees, thus encouraging Asian countries to absorb them (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 3-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 4, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

Philippine Government reports US, Australia and West Germany have agreed to
accept total of 650 Vietnamese refugees from overcrowded camp outside Manila so
that facility can absorb more boat people.  Notes, however, that only country
willing to give sanctuary to 2,400 Vietnamese aboard Tung An freighter anchored
in Manila harbor is Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 4-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 4, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 15 words

Chinese Amb to Vietnam Yang Kung-su has reportedly left Hanoi to return to
Peking (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 4-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 4, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 35 words

Cambodian Government reports it has blunted major Vietnamese thrust into eastern
Cambodia.  Military analysts in Bangkok hold, however, that Vietnamese troops
are still advancing westward in Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 4-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 4, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 31 words

US announces support for Cambodia's request for UN Security Council meeting on
Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia, and criticizes Vietnam's intervention in
Cambodia's internal affairs (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 4-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 4, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 124 words

US, in statement by State Dept spokesman Hodding Carter 3d, declares that it
will support request by Cambodia for meeting of UN Security Council to take up
Vietnam's invasion of Cambodian territory.  Carter, while taking 'great
exception to the human-rights record' of Cambodian Government, asserts that
unilateral intervention against that regime by 3d power is unjustified.
Declines to assess degree of popular support within Cambodia for guerrilla
movement Kampuchean National Salvation Front.  Expresses concern that conflict
not result in 'direct great-power involvement,' but states that US has no
information of any direct Soviet involvement in incursion to date.  Photo of
Carter and map of Cambodia and neighboring countries (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 4-79-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY MICHAEL MYERSON

SECTION: Page 22, Column 5

LENGTH: 50 words

Lr from Michael Myerson, exec sec of US Peace Council, comments on Dec 29
article on Henry Kissinger's future prospects.  Is amused that Kissinger feels
he had to conduct foreign policy 'under near-civil-war conditions'.  Claims it
was Kissinger's Vietnam policy that caused this condition (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 5-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 2

LENGTH: 31 words

Cambodian Prime Min Pol Pot asserts that Vietnam, backed by USSR, is involved in
large-scale effort to conquer Cambodia, but vows to fight to end to maintain
national prestige (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 5-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 55 words

State Dept announces that, although US supports Cambodia's request for UN
Security Council meeting on Vietnamese invasion, US is not committed to any
position regarding conflict.State Dept has twice criticized Vietnam's action,
but has also emphasized Carter Administration's concern over Cambodia's human
rights violations (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 5-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 64 words

Vietnam claims Cambodia's charges of Vietnamese aggression in its request for UN
Security Council meeting are 'flagrant calumnies'.  Asserts Cambodia is serving
expansionist policy of China and attempting to cover up serious defeats by
domestic opposition forces.  Meanwhile, Security Council pres Donald Mills will
begin consultation with other members on Cambodia's request (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 5-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

Vietnam's continued invasion of Cambodia has intensified fears in non-Communist
Southeast Asian nations that Vietnam harbors ambition of regional dominance.
Apprehension is fueled by Vietnam's establishment of friendship and cooperation
treaty, including military clause, with USSR.  Vietnam, formerly held in respect
by many Southeast Asian nations, has suffered decline in prestige, especially
after invading Vietnamese forces were held back by Cambodian army in winter of
'77.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 5-79-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 50 words

Phnom Penh (Cambodia) radio announces that hospital and marketplace in Mekong
River town Neak Luong was heavily bombed by USSR-made Vietnamese planes, causing
many civilian casualties.  Western analysts also report bombing of Tonle Bet,
town near Cambodian military headquarters at Kompong Cham (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 5-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 39 words

Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-Ping indicates that China will probably not
intervene in Cambodia to stop Vietnam's invasion but Peking will support
Cambodia's call for a meeting of United Nations Security Council on the
incursion (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 5-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 5, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY CRAIG R WHITNEY

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 87 words

USSR expresses approval for Vietnamese-backed military offensive into Cambodia,
reports string of Vietnamese victories and declares that campaign is continuing.
Attributes fighting to Cambodian 'revolutionary armed forces' advancing against
'reactionary Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique'.  Implies backing for ultimate overthrow
of present Cambodian leadership does not acknowledge participation of Vietnamese
troops in fighting.  Photo of Cambodian Deputy Prime Min Son Sen studing map
with Cambodian troop commanders (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 5-79-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 6

LENGTH: 50 words

Cambodian Prime Min Pol Pot, in Quotation of Day on border war with Vietnam,
says 'The army and the people, side by side, are conducting a people's war
against the hated Vietnamese invader.  The fighting will go on for eternity if
necessary, until the aggressors have been completely defeated'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 6-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY MAX SPECTOR

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 63 words

Max Spector letter, commenting on Stanley Hoffmann's Dec 31 Op-Ed article on US
foreign policy, deplores US's 'dichotomous foreign policy'.  Sees fundamental
contradiction in professing to embrace human rights while, as in Iran, openly
defending 'discredited despot'.  Questions why US national interests often align
US with enemies of the people, as in Iran and Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 6-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Editorial supports Carter Administration policy of non-interference in
Cambodian-Vietnam conflict.  Underscores Administration's contention that US has
no major strategic interest in conflict.  Holds that US does not automatically
belong on Cambodia's side because of its new relationship with China (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 6-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 96 words

Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping, in interview, indicates that, while
China will support Cambodia's call for UN Security Council meeting on Vietnamese
invasion and has been giving Cambodia material assistance, it will not send
soldiers or advisers to Cambodia.  Hopes UN will intervene, and holds aggression
cannot be restrained simply by resolution or other document.  In comments on
other issues, Teng notes China has taken notice of US wish for peaceful solution
to Taiwan question and denies USSR charges that China, US and Japan have formed
triple alliance (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 6-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 26 words

UN Security Council members confer privately on Cambodia's request that it
condemn Vietnamese aggression against Cambodia and call for cease-fire (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 6-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD BURT

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 86 words

State Dept and Pentagon officials report that China has moved large numbers of
soldiers and fighter planes to its frontier with Vietnam in apparent effort to
show its growing concern over Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia.  No estimate
given on numbers of troops.  Planes are MIG-19 fighters and Il-28 bombers.  Site
of buildup is identified as provinces of Yunnan and autonomous region of Kwangsi
Chuang.  Officials say that China continues daily shipment of arms and
ammunition to Cambodian port of Kampong Som (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 6-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 156 words

British Prime Min James Callaghan announces at 4-power summit meeting in
Guadeloupe that Britain will sell Harrier planes to China as part of $2 billion
trade package.  Callaghan also reports activity in both directions on further
trade with China.  Discussion topics at first round of summit talks reportedly
include the following: West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt warns about going
too far with China and upsetting USSR and about expecting too much from China
trade.  Pres Carter discusses impact of Iranian situation on neighboring
countries, including Turkey.  Also discusses Cambodia-Vietnam border and
solicits allies' ideas on next stage of strategic-arms talks with USSR which
will deal with 'gray areas' related to European security.  Conferees also agree
that disputed and suspended neutron bomb project needs some kind of
modernization.  Photo of Callaghan, Carter, Schmidt and French Pres Valery
Giscard d'Estaing (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 6-79-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 7, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 55 words

Editorial criticizes continued US loyalty to Shah of Iran.Holds that support of
Shah, like US effort on behalf of South Vietnam, is example of 'suicidal
devotion' to allies in conflict that US cannot control.  Contends US should
acknowledge that it was Shah's failings which caused his entire nation to turn
against him (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 7-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 7, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Week in Review discusses progress of Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia, including
Cambodia's plea for UN intervention (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 7-3-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 7, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

Largest number of Indochina watchers are found in Bangkok (Thailand) and are
primarily diplomats and Thai military personnel.  Common sources of information
are radio broadcasts of Vietnamese, Cambodians and pro-Vietnam Cambodian
insurgents.  US also obtains information through satellites, spy planes and
ships (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 7-3-2

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 7, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

Military and diplomatic analysts in Thailand believe that Vietnam's offensive in
Cambodia is intended to destroy Government of Prime Min Pol Pot, who has aligned
Cambodia with China, power that Vietnam fears most.  Think Vietnamese hope to
replace Pol Pot with one of pro-Vietnamese Cambodians that Hanoi has been
grooming, and cite former officials So Phim and Heng Samrin as most likely
candidates.  Fear that if Vietnam's aggression succeeds, Vietnam will further
its expansionist policy (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 7-3-5

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 7, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs Robert B Oakley,
speaking at news conference in Bangkok (Thailand), calls on Vietnam to withdraw
troops from Cambodia.  Says, however, that Carter Administration does not like
government of Prime Min Pol Pot (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 7-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 7, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 47 words

Vietnamese refugees spend 11th day aboard freighter Tung An, anchored in Manila
harbor, as Philippines and 12 other nations debate their resettlement.  UN
representative reports assistance program is going smoothly, and refugees have
adequate food, water and medical care (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 7-4-6

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 7, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 71 words

Former Cambodian ruler Norodom Sihanouk arrives in Peking (China), enroute,
according to Chinese press agency Hsinhua, to NY City to present Cambodia's case
against Vietnam to UN Security Council.  Is welcomed at airport by Deputy Prime
Min Teng Hsiao-ping and is later met, as sign of respect, by Teng Ying-chao,
widow of Chou En-lai and Politburo member.  Sihanouk makes no statement on
arrival.  Photo of Sihanouk (M)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 7-79-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY CRAIG R WHITNEY

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

Soviet news agency Tass hails 'liberation' of Phnom Penh by Vietnamese and
insurgent Cambodian forces.  Western diplomats believe Vietnamese got Soviet
approval for invasion of Cambodia last November when Vietnam signed treaty of
friendship and cooperation with USSR (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY JOSEPH B TREASTER

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 78 words

China, in statement to UN Security Council, condemns Vietnamese invasion of
Cambodia.  Charges Vietnam with 'towering crimes' and accuses it of acting as
surrogate of USSR in its 'expansionist strategic plan' for hegemony in Far East.
Diplomats express surprise at failure of Cambodia and China to press for Council
session on invasion earlier in week, choosing instead to await arrival of a
Cambodian delegation led by former Cambodian ruler Norodom Sihanouk (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT D MCFADDEN

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Review of Cambodian history during past decade traces country's struggles
beginning with involvement in Vietnam War in late '60s, through five-year civil
war between US-backed government of Pres Lon Nol, to current day regime of Prime
Min Pol Pot, reputed for human rights violations (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

US, in statement read by State Dept spokesman John F Cannon, calls for speedy
withdrawal of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia and avoidance of direct Soviet and
Chinese involvement in conflict 'at all costs'.  However, US officials stress
that US is not taking sides and continues to condemn human rights violations by
government of Prime Min Pol Pot (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 14 words

Israeli cabinet decides to fly 100 Indochinese refugees to new homes in Israel
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 180 words

Vietnam announces that Phnom Penh, capital of Cambodia, has been captured by
'revolutionary armed forces'.  Claims that Government of Prime Min Pol Pot and
Deputy Prime Min Ieng Sary has collapsed.  Also reports conquest of Kompong Som,
Cambodia's only major seaport and major entry point for Chinese arms.  2
airports that can be used by large transport planes, at Siem Reap and Kompong
Chhnang, are said to still be in Government hands.  Insurgents are said to
belong to Cambodian National United Front for National Salvation.  Political,
diplomatic, military and intelligence analysts estimate that as many as 13
regular Vietnamese divisions and supporting troops, numbering about 100,000 men,
have fought war.  Analysts also see strong possibility that fall of Pol Pot
regime is premature and that Cambodia may face long period of guerrilla war.
Map of Southeast Asia and map of Cambodia showing main cities.  Photo of Pol
Pot, aerial view of part of Phnom Penh and photo transmitted by Vietnam
purporting to show Cambodian soldiers captured in Vietnamese territory (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-79-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 139 words

Passengers arriving in Peking (China) with former Prince and Cambodian ruler
Norodom Sihanouk report that Cambodian regime is in flight and has moved to
Battambang in northwest near Thai border.  Embattled regime is said to be
evacuating large numbers of Cambodians from eastern part of country in face of
Vietnamese invasion with aim to leave Vietnamese facing empty space.  Sihanouk
says at Chinese state banquet in his honor that Cambodian people will never
submit to 'criminal aggression' of Vietnam.  Dinner host, Deputy Prime Min Teng
Hsiao-ping, calls Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia Soviet-inspired.  Embassy
staffs of the few countries with embassies in Phnom Penh report that they had
been evacuated on Jan 3 from capital, but had been allowed to return there for
Jan 6 flight to Peking.  Photo of Sihanouk and Teng (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-79-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 112 words

Drew Middleton's military analysis of reported capture of Phnom Penh (Cambodia)
by Vietnamese-backed insurgents argues that prolonged guerrilla operations by
Pol Pot Government are likely, and that Government would be advised and possibly
supplied by China.  Sees major transportation problem for China in getting
supplies to Cambodians.  Calls outlook for Pol Pot regime gloomy, because of
lack of popular support stemming from regime's draconian measures toward
populace.  Contends that Vietnamese are taking calculated risk that China will
not move against it at northern border because of its own fears that USSR may
stage its own border action against China (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 8-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY PETER KOVLER

SECTION: Section 3; Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

Writer and former Congressional legislative aide Peter Kovler blames chilling of
relations between US and Vietnam on US failure to normalize relations.  Notes
that in mid-'78 all signs pointed to normalization and high level officials had
even discussed location of a US Embassy in Hanoi.  Questions official excuse,
that Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia caused deterioration of relations, and
argues that, with normal relations, US could have used aid and trade to
influence Vietnam, which had to turn for help to 'the only ones offering it, the
Russians' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 9-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Vietnam asks UN Security Council not to meet on Cambodia crisis.  Protest
appears to set stage for severe clash between China, which has called for
meeting, and USSR, which supports Vietnam and Cambodian rebels.  Vietnam, in
separate note to council Pres Donald O Mills of Jamaica, denounces what it
asserts is large concentration of Chinese armed forces along Vietnam border (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 9-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

First 16 of 2,363 Vietnamese refugees stranded aboard ship Tung An off coast of
Manila (Philippines) are brought ashore to begin international resettlement
effort.  10 of 16 will go to France and other 6 to New Zealand.  Israel
announces that it will send plane to pick up 100 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 9-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Editorial contends Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia cannot be justified by
criticism of Pol Pot dictatorship.  Commends Carter Administration for its
refusal to answer China's plea for aid to Cambodia.  However, urges US to make
clear to Vietnam that Cambodian invasion is jeapordizing Vietnam's relationship
with US and other nations (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 9-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 53 words

Soviet newspaper Izvestia reports that defeated leaders of Cambodia are believed
hiding in Cardamom Mountains southwest of Phnom Penh and pro-Vietnamese
insurgents are closing in with 'lightning speed'.  Izvestia's Hanoi dispatch
identifies insurgents as members of National United Front of National Salvation
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 9-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 53 words

US accuses Vietnam of committing aggression against Cambodia and calls for
speedy withdrawal of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia.  State Dept spokesman
Hodding Carter 3d, at briefing, sees no likelihood of Chinese intervention in
border dispute despite massing of Chinese troops near Vietnam border in last
week (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 9-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 33 words

Profile of deposed Cambodian ruler Norodom Sihanouk on eve of Sihanouk's visit
to UN to plea for international support for Cambodia in face of Vietnamese
invasion.  Biographical data.  Photo (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 9-79-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Vietnam radio broadcast identifies leaders of new Cambodian regime.  Cambodian
National Salvation front is headed by Heng Samrin and his deputy Chea Sim.  12
remaining members of Central Committee are named.  US officials in Washington
disclose that US is depending almost exclusively on media reports on situation
because of general lack of intelligence on Indochina (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 9-79-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 9, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 149 words

Vietnam-backed Cambodian insurgents proclaim new government 1 day after capture
of Phnom Penh.  Will be headed by Heng Samrin, president of central committee of
Cambodian National United Front for National Salvation.  Heng is identified as
former army division commander and political commissar under Pol Pot regime.
Vice president and 6 members of ruling ministerial council are also named.
Meanwhile, more than 700 foreign officials and advisers escape into Thailand.
650 arrivals in Thai border town of Aranyaprathet are reported to be Chinese.
Whereabouts of Prime Min Pol Pot and other members of his Government are still
unknown, but they are believed to be hiding in Southwestern mountains.  Photo of
foreign officials arriving at Aranyaprathet, Vietnamese photo of insurgent
leader Chea Sim visiting peasants and map of Cambodia and adjoining Thai and
Vietnamese border areas (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 9-79-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 10, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD WEST

SECTION: Page 23, Column 4

LENGTH: 61 words

Richard West criticizes current comparisons of Rhodesian civil war and war US
helped fight in Vietnam.  Notes that white Rhodesians are not alien army, as US
forces in Vietnam were, but settlers who believe they are defending their land,
families and way of life.  Also contends that Rhodesian guerrillas are only
Communist in sense that they are paid by USSR (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 10

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 10, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

US officials disclose that US plans to refrain from taking active role in UN
Security Council debate on Cambodia, despite its criticism of Vietnam's invasion
of Cambodia.  US is not heeding Chinese request to speak out.  Officials stress
that US is not holding USSR responsible for Vietnam's action even though
invasion was carried out with Soviet military aid.  State Dept spokesman Hodding
Carter 3d is noncommittal about whether State Sec Vance would receive Cambodian
Prince Norodom Sihanouk (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 10-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 10, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 2

LENGTH: 30 words

UN Security Council Pres Donald O Mills of Jamaica announces that Council will
meet on Jan 10 to determine if it will debate charges of Vietnamese aggression
against Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 10-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 10, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

Prince Norodom Sihanouk arrives in NY City to ask UN Security Council to aid
fallen regime of Cambodian Prime Min Pol Pot.  Ridicules Vietnam's assertion
that Cambodian patriots had overthrown regime and asserts that Vietnam, with
extensive Soviet armament, is guilty of aggression.  Calls insurgent regime of
Heng Samrin 'totally a creation' and 'puppet' of Vietnam.  Sihanouk is received
warmly by Chinese Amb to UN Chen Chu (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 10-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 10, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 148 words

Senators Sam Nunn, John Glenn, Gary Hart and William Cohen report, after meeting
with Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping in China, that China is willing to allow
Taiwan to retain its government and armed forces if it gives up its sovereignty
in reunification with mainland.  Disarmament would not be required of Taiwanese.
Other points made by Teng: China would welcome expanded US naval presence in
western Pacific and would like more defensive coordination by Southeast Asian
countries against USSR and Vietnam.  China has not asked for US weapons, knows
of US opposition to such sales but would be willing to buy arms if offered.
China may call off future military maneuvers in Taiwan Strait as part of new
conciliatory stance.  China does not want to discuss human rights with US, but
intends to allow people to put up posters and demonstrate in favor of democracy
indefinitely (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 10-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 10, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 29 words

Photo of Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia, in NY City to plead Cambodia's
cause before UN Security Council, being greeted by Chinese Amb to UN Chen Chu on
arrival (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 10-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 10, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 98 words

Western analysts in Thailand conclude that Vietnam has apparently won war
against Cambodia, despite continuing fighting throughout Cambodia.  In other
developments relating to Cambodia, Vietnamese conduct air raids up to
Thai-Cambodian border.  Whereabouts of Cambodian Prime Min Pol Pot remain
unknown, but he is reportedly in China.  Long-standing rivalry between Cambodia
and Vietnam and other neighboring countries is reviewed.  Photo of Prince
Norodom Sihanouk and Chinese Amb to UN Chen Chu, photo of Cambodia's new leader
Heng Samrin and deputy Chea Sim.  Map of Cambodia (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 10-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 11, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

Anthony Lewis examines role of Prince Norodom Sihanouk in Cambodia's history.
Sees Sihanouk as powerful figure who successfully protected Cambodia for length
of his rule.  Argues that former Pres Nixon and advisor Henry Kissinger might
have enabled Cambodia to avert civil war and eventual rule by Communists had
they helped restore Sihanouk to power after '70 coup.  Contends Sihanouk may
still have power to keep Cambodia free of Vietnamese domination (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 11

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 11, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM L SAFIRE

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

William Safire examines current Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in light of
Cambodia's involvement in Vietnamese War.  Contends that US invasion of Cambodia
in '70 was not example of imperialism, as anti-war critics charged, but was
response to real threat of Vietnamese forces that had expanded war into
Cambodia.  Argues that, as South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia fell to Communists
after US withdrew from Vietnam, so Thailand and Malaysia suffer threat from
Communists now that Vietnam and USSR perceive weakness in US policy in Indochina
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 11

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 11, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 38 words

Nonaligned nations appear undecided about Vietnamese intervention in Cambodia,
according to foreign diplomats and US officials.  Yugoslavian officials condemn
invasion, but majority of countries adopt 'wait and see' stance (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 11-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 11, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 141 words

Western analysts in Thailand report Vietnamese troops are continuing their
westward drive through Cambodia, fighting in town of Siem Reap near famed temple
at Angkor.  Note Cambodian troops loyal to ousted Prime Min Pol Pot are
abandoning town, and fighting is continuing in many of areas that Vietnamese
swept through in seizing capital Phnom Penh and seaport Kompong Som.  Vietnamese
have also captured strategic river port Kompong Chhnang, site of large airport,
and are nearing provinical capital Pursat, which is on main road leading to Thai
border town Aranyaprathet.  2 jets believed to be Vietnamese bomb plantation
north of Aranyaprathet, in what is seen by some as warning to Thailand not to
take military action in Cambodia, but no injuries or damage is reported.  Photo
of Cambodian insurgents in Phnom Penh.  Map of Cambodia (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 11-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 10, Column 2

LENGTH: 101 words

Thailand officials and international relief workers prepare holding camps for
defeated Cambodian troops who may be forced into Thailand by advancing
Vietnamese units.  Cambodians are reportedly continuing resistance, but it is
not clear whether commanders loyal to ousted Prime Min Pol Pot are capable of
conducting coordinated operations against Vietnamese and Cambodian insurgents.
Meanwhile, arrangements have reportedly been made to evacuate Deputy Prime Min
Ieng Sary.  Map of Cambodia.  Photo sent to Tokyo from Cambodia purportedly
shows inhabitants returning to newly liberated villages (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 12-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 185 words

China-bound Cambodian Deputy Prime Min Ieng Sary declares, in interview aboard
commercial airplane from Bangkok to Hong Kong, that Cambodian forces will
continue to fight against Vietnamese.  Asserts that Cambodian army is far from
defeated and many units remain intact.  Holds that Vietnam has taken only towns,
which have been nearly empty since Pol Pot Government moved population into
countryside and jungle after '75 victory.  Says he is going to Peking on 'very
delicate' mission and will return to Cambodia at mission's end at undisclosed
time.  Refuses to reveal whereabouts of Pol Pot, but says he had seen him
earlier in day.  Sources disclose that Ieng Sary and other Cambodian officials
had been at town of Sisophon, not far from Thai border.  Ieng thanks Pres Carter
for his condemnation of Vietnamese invasion.  Denies knowledge of announced new
Pres Heng Samrin and expresses doubt that he exists.  Asserts that Prince
Norodom Sihanouk will continue to be Cambodia's principal spokesman to world,
denies prince had been kept prisoner for 3 years but appears resigned to his
outspokenness (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 12

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 12, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 155 words

Former Cambodian ruler Prince Norodom Sihanouk appeals to UN Security Council
for help against Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia after USSR and Czechoslovakia
fail to procedurally halt emergency Council session.  Charges that Vietnam has
committed 'flagrant aggression' against Cambodia in form of 'Rommel-style
blitzkrieg,' asks that Security Council not recognize new Cambodian regime and
calls for withdrawal of Vietnamese forces and end to Vietnamese interference in
Cambodia.Asserts that forces of ousted Cambodian Government still hold several
towns near Thai border, and that leaders are still in country and 'will fight to
the death'.  Sihanouk reports that he plans to take his case to as many UN
member nations as possible, urging economic sanctions against Vietnam, which he
says is chronically short of food and 'very hungry right now'.  Photo of
Sihanouk, Cambodian Amb to China Thiounn Prasith and Keat Chhon (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 12-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

UN Security Council emergency meeting on whether to take action against Vietnam
for its purported invasion of Cambodia and overthrow of Prime Min Pol Pot
expands as growing numbers of nations join debate.  Diplomats note that broader
conflict between USSR, which supports Vietnam, and China, which backs Cambodia,
underlies debate.  Assert speeches are being offered mainly for their propaganda
effect, since USSR is certain to veto any action.  Photo of Cambodia's Prince
Sihanouk (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 13-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

Baby boy born to Vietnamese mother aboard refugee freighter Huey Fong is first
Vietnamese given permission to stay in Hong Kong.  Officials note baby could be
considered British subject and citizen of United Kingdom, but his parents and
brothers and sisters remain barred.  2,700 refugees aboard ship have been denied
landing rights since Dec 23 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 13-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

International Committee of Red Cross and League of Red Cross Societies assert
world's rejection of boatloads of Vietnamese refugees symbolizes world's failure
to respond adequately to basic humanitarian needs.  Appeals for universal
understanding of refugees' plight and calls on governments to respond (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 13-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 39 words

Cambodian forces loyal to ousted Prime Min Pol Pot are reportedly resisting
attacks by Vietnamese and insurgents in Kompong Speu, Kompong Cham and Svay
Rieng.  Are also continuing resistance in Ratanakiri Province in northeast (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 13-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 70 words

Henry Kamm, discussing Cambodian conflict, asserts nearly all information on war
is either contradictory or unknown.  Notes there are no objective witnesses, and
all information comes from Vietnam or new and old regime of Cambodia.  Points
out that it is not only details of military operation that are unclear, but also
question of which side has support of Cambodian people, and identity of new
Cambodian leaders (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 13

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 17 words

Vietnam News Agency reports Vietnam and Norway have signed economic and
technical aid agreement (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 13-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 147 words

Western analysts report Vietnamese troops are nearing Cambodia's second-largest
city Battambang.  Note city, center of country's rice granary, has been bombed
heavily for 2 days.Also report second Vietnamese unit is advancing toward key
road junction town of Sisophon, which is only 25 miles from Thailand border town
Aranyaprathet.  Assert capture of Sisophon would make it difficult for
Cambodians to escape, except on foot.  Cambodian Deputy Prime Min Ieng Sary
reportedly managed to escape by car Jan 11, was picked up at Thai border by
military helicopter, taken to Bangkok and then flown to Hong Kong, where he
crossed into China.  Cambodian forces are making their strongest stand at Siem
Reap, but there are conflicting reports on whether town has fallen.  Details of
fighting in other areas cited.  Photo of Cambodian refugees entering Thailand.
Map of Cambodia (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 13-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 14, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 2

LENGTH: 55 words

Editorial, commenting on USSR leader Brezhnev's telegram congratulating new
Cambodian leaders on their victory, notes Brezhnev claims victory will bring
peace in conformity with national aspirations of peoples of area.  Points out
that national aspirations of Cambodians have traditionally included independence
from Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 14

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 14, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 97 words

Henry Kamm analyzes Vietnam's victory in Cambodia, which was virtually
determined with fall of Phnom Penh.  Asserts conflict is deeply rooted in
history of Indochinese Communism, Indochina's liberation from French colonialism
and struggle against US and its client governments.  Thinks Vietnam is justified
in believing Cambodia and Laos would still be French colonies if Vietnam had not
played dominant role in independence struggle, but holds view conflicts with
Cambodian nationalism and China's evident unwillingness to let Vietnam become
Communist bloc leader.  Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 14

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 14, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Summary of Vietnamese-Cambodian conflict questions whether action involved
invasion of small country by ancient enemy neighbor or whether invaders were
actually liberators of country that had been accused of genocide.  Notes
Cambodian Prince Sihanouk's role as both spokesman and critic of Cambodian
regime further confused situation (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 14-4-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 14, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 58 words

Thai border villages prepare for flood of Cambodia refugees as Vietnamese
increase their advance into Cambodia.  Thai Government has thus far forbidden
entrance to Cambodian refugees but expects to lift restrictions as fighting
nears Thai border.  Thais are preparing camps and detention facilities for
refugees.  Photo of Cambodian refugee (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 14-5-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 14, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 80 words

Vietnamese troops have reportedly seized important Cambodian town of Sisophon,
about 25 miles from Thai border, and completed conquest of Siem Reap near Angkor
temple complex.  Are also threatening Battambang, Cambodia's second-largest
city.  Western analysts report that bitter fighting is continuing in many
regions where Vietnamese bypassed Cambodian units.  Fall of Siem Reap is assumed
to be major setback because of symbolic value of temple ruins.  Map of Cambodia
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 14-4-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 14, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

African and Asian nations join China and Western nations in accusing Vietnam of
aggression in Cambodia, at UN Security Council meeting.  Action is considered
exceptional show of unity, since Vietnam was formerly favorite of Third World
but now retains only USSR and USSR bloc as its defenders.  Speakers demand that
Vietnam promptly withdraw its army, and British representative Ivor Richard and
others urge Council to take swift action.  Session, however, is recessed, and it
does not seem likely resolution criticizing Vietnam can be passed over USSR veto
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 14-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 5

LENGTH: 52 words

West Germany agrees to accept 20 of 2,300 Vietnamese refugees aboard freighter
Tung An, in addition to 150 refugees from Manila (Philippines) transit camp.
About 200 refugees from Tung An have now been granted resettlement by various
countries, and several others are still considering accepting more (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 15-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 81 words

Vietnamese troops strike Cambodian village of Nimit, about 2 miles from Thailand
border, but fail to press forward to border.  Cambodian troops seek to evacuate
300 to 400 wounded soldiers to Thailand, where officials had completed
arrangements with International Red Cross to accept wounded.  Western analysts
fail to find logistical reason for Vietnam's pause in advance so close to
border, since all major Cambodian towns are believed in Vietnamese hands.  Map
of Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 15-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 15, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 50 words

Vietnam accuses China of sending warships to Vietnamese waters and provoking
almost daily border clashes since capture of Cambodian capital Phnom Penh.
Vietnamese Foreign Ministry has reportedly warned Chinese Embassy that China
must bear full responsiblity for consequences of such action (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 15-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY JOHN J O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 3; Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

Documentary 'The Boat People', on plight of stateless Vietnamese refugees in
Southeast Asia, reviewed by John J O'Connor.  Work of CBS News correspondent Ed
Bradley, producer Andrew Lack and executive producer Howard Stringer noted.
Malaysian Home Minister Ghazali Bin Shafie holds refugees are outgrowth of
American Vietnam policies.  United States State Under Secretary David Newsome
holds matter is international issue (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 16

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DANIEL SCHORR

SECTION: Page 15, Column 5

LENGTH: 153 words

Article adapted from speech given by Daniel Schorr to Calif Bar Assn.  Holds
there is mistaken belief held by many Amers that reporters endanger natl
security by finding out about things Govt calls secret.  Notes this is despite
fact that most outrageous security violations have nothing to do with press.
Cites instance in which Amb Graham Martin, bitter about Vietnam, lost trunkfull
of secret documents in his car that was stolen.  Recalls CIA's letting copies of
its spy-satellite manual wander away, 1 to be sold to Russians.  Cites case of
CIA analyst passing top-secret documents to Sen Henry Jackson's staff to help
fight arms-control treatyholds Amer is reaching point where politician will be
able to run against news media as he used to be run against Communism, crime or
corruption.  Holds if press becomes totally discredited, its ability to fulfill
its function of public watchdog will be destroyed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 16

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 106 words

Analysis of implication of Vietnam's military occupation of most of Cambodia.
Washington appears split between factions that feel move is outgrowth of
regional emnities and other group that fears it is precedent for expansion and
consolidation of Soviet bloc.  General agreement that Soviets have benefited
from move, whether or not they instigated it, noted.  Former Secretary of State
Henry A Kissinger holds Vietnam attacked Cambodia because it was independent and
pro-Chinese.  Says support by Soviets display their irresponsibility.Move
further polarizes nonaligned nations in their support or opposition to Soviet
dominance (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 16

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 61 words

Thai military commanders monitoring fighting between Cambodia and Vietnam near
Thailand's border with Cambodia say action has dropped drastically.  Say
Cambodia forces split into two group after insurgents and their Vietnamese
allies took Nimit and groups diverged north and south.  Flood of Cambodian
refugees expected by Thais has not materialized.  Map (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 16-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 127 words

Cambodian forces still loyal to Pol Pot Government are massing for final stand
in mountainous southwest Cambodia.  Heavy fighting is reportedly going on in
approaches to region.  Fighting continues around Pursat and Siem Reap and
temples in Ankgor are reportedly not out of danger.  Considerable fighting is
still reported in areas east of Mekong River.  Diplomats and analysts in Bangkok
believe fighting may continue for some time but troops outside southwestern area
seen not under Pol Pot's control.  Diplomats believe Vietnamese military are
forces now governing Cambodia.  Whereabouts of Prime Minister Pol Pot are
unknown and diplomats question how much loyalty he can command from troops and
population he can no longer communicate with.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 16-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 16, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics uses its 111th Security Council veto to
defeat resolution calling on Vietnam to withdraw its forces from Cambodia.  Is
joined only by Czechoslovakia in 11-2 vote.  China pledges to assist people's
war in Cambodia.  Vietnam scores Chinese move.  Further UN intervention in
dispute now seems unlikely (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 16-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 17, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BURNHAM

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 84 words

Attys for Vietnamese student convicted of espionage appeal case on grounds that
Govt case was tainted by illegal use of electronic surveillance.  Student, David
Truong (Truong Dinh Hung), and his alleged accomplice, former USIA employee
Ronald L Humphrey, are free on bail pending completion of their appeals.
Presidents have claimed inherent right to wiretap without judicial warrant in
natl security cases, but Truong's attys claim purpose of probe was to bring
criminal case against Truong (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 17-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 17, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 49 words

US officials say broadcasts from opposing factions in Cambodian struggle are
both broadcasting from outside Cambodia.  Say broadcasts from Pol Pot Government
are emanating from Peking while his opponents, who say they are in Phnom Penh,
are transmitting from outside Ho Chi Minh City (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 17-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 17, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 99 words

Pol Pot forces reportedly retake port of Kompong Som, giving Vietnamese first
major setback since their invasion of Cambodia.  Vietnamese naval vessels
reportedly shell coastline near Khemarak Phouminville and sink several Cambodian
coastal ships.  Sources say Chinese vessels are seeking to resupply Pol Pot
forces but such activity is seen as difficult since Vietnamese capture of Kong
Island.  Heavy fighting is reported through- out Cambodia, particularly in
southwestern region which Government forces are apparently determined to make
center of continued resistance.  Illus.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 17-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 18, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 59 words

Pres Carter, in Quotation of the Day, says 'Certainly we have no desire, nor
ability, to intrude massive force into Iran or any other country to determine
the outcome of domestic political issues.  This is something that we have no
intention of ever doing in another country.  We tried this once, in Vietnam.  It
didn't work well--as you well know' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 18-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 18, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 95 words

President Carter says US has warned Vietnam and Soviet Union to respect security
of Thailand and not allow Cambodian fighting to endanger Thailand, news
conference.  Says no move threatening Thailand has been detected.  Reports that
goal of getting China to make public commitment to peaceful solution of Taiwan
question was unreached in normalization process.  Says Soviet leader Leonid I
Brezhnev expressed some concern that normalization of relations with China would
be used against Soviets.  Holds this is not case.  Denies Soviets have military
edge over US (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 18-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 18, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

Cambodian refugees in Thailand hope to be able to return home now that Pol Pot
regime has collapsed.  Some say newly proclaimed President Heng Samrin will have
to turn against Vietnamese or lose faith of Cambodians.  Leader most often
mentioned as capable of uniting various factions is Prince Norodom Sihanouk.
Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 18-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 18, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 97 words

Western sources report fighting has intensified in Cambodian coastal areas
captured by Vietnamese forces, causing Vietnam to rush heavy reinforcements into
Cambodia.  Note bombing in provincial capital Kampot, captured Jan 7, indicates
significant resistance has arisen there.  State fighting has also continued off
west coast, where undisclosed number of Thai fishermen are reportedly wounded.
Meanwhile, Vietnamese units are moving to remote northern regions, with Samrong
and Choam Khsan reported under attack.  Details of fighting in other areas
cited.  Map of Cambodia (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 18-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 4

LENGTH: 69 words

Hunter College Professor Donald S Zagoria letter asserts Vietnam's treaty with
Soviet Union was intended to secure its border with China in preparation for its
invasion of Cambodia.  Suggests Soviets are using client states to weaken China
and West and project its own power.  Scores Soviet behavior as irresponsible.
Fears moves may inspire China, United States and Japan to make concerted
countermove (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 19

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Hong Kong officials tell captain of Heuy Fong, ship with 2,700 Vietnamese
refugees that has been anchored near harbor for 27 days, that he will not be
barred from entering Hong Kong waters but he may be arrested and jailed under
Hong Kong law that bars carrying unscheduled passengers.  Advise he proceed to
Taiwanese port of Kaohsiung but reportedly he will not be allowed entry by port
officials there (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 19-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 19, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 131 words

Vietnamese reportedly retake Cambodia port of Kompong Som but still suffer
reverses in southwestern territories.  Pro-Vietnamese Cambodian Government asks
Thailand to close border to Cambodian refugees.  Thailand officially says it
will not take refugees but unofficially will accept those it cannot dissuade
from entering.  Vietnamese naval forces continue to shell southwest coast and
blockade coast from Kompong Som to Thai border.  Cambodian forces loyal to Pol
Pot continue to destroy bridges and culverts, adding to Vietnamese supply
problems.  Vietnam still faces widespread resistance from Cambodian forces and
major resurgence of resistance reportedly is underway in Mondulkiri province.
Pol Pot radio asserts normal agricultural work continues in Pursat province.
Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 19-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

Hong Kong reents and decides to temporarily admit almost 3,400 Vietnamese who
had been stranded aboard Taiwanese freighter.  British royal Navy patrol boats
escort Taiwanese freighter Huey Fong into harbor where they will be processed by
immigration officials.  Spokesperson says news that refugees numbered 3,400 and
not 2,700 and fears of illness and effects of colder weather on board made
officials reverse decision.  Says where appropriate UN High Commissioner for
Refugees will be responsible.  Calls for aid from international community (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 20-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 117 words

Western analysts in Bangkok (Thailand) report that Vietnamese troops in Cambodia
have attacked famous temple ruins of Preah Vihear, 11th century structure near
Thai border.  No indication that sanctuary itself has been damaged has yet been
received.  Sources also report recapture by Cambodian forces of provincial
capital of Takeo.  Heavy fighting is reported for control of major roads in
region.  Vietnamese are also reported taking Cambodian islands on its west coast
with aid of patrol boats.  Cambodians are reportely resisting heavily on largest
island, Kong.  Photo, released by Vietnam, of insurgents in Phnom Penh and map
of Cambodia showing Preah Vihear, Takeo and western islands (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 20-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 21, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 43 words

Increased resistance by Pol Pot forces to Vietnamese and Cambodian insurgents
reviewed.  Pockets of resistance have emerged in countryside and port city of
Kompong Som.  Soviet veto of Security Council resolution calling for Vietnamese
withdrawal noted (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 21-8-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 21, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 106 words

Swedish Prime Min Ola Ullstein warns Vietnam that unless it withdraws from
Cambodia it risks 'reconsideration' of millions of dollars in nonmilitary aid
from Sweden and other Nordic nations.  Says his government has protested to
Vietnam's ambassador in Stockholm but has been met with denials of having
invaded Cambodia.  Reports he is under pressure from political opponents and
others to reconsider aiding Vietnam.  Is in United States to participate in 50th
birthday of Dr Martin Luther King Jr.  Says his meeting with President Carter
politically confirmed improving relations between nations that were strained by
Vietnam war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 21-8-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 21, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

327 Vietnamese refugees come ashore at Hong Kong after being on freighter Huey
Fong for 29 days.  3,000 remain on board.  Officials say refugees with Hong Kong
birth certificates will be allowed to remain and those with valid 3d nation
documents will move on.  All will be segregated until processed (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 21-7-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 6

LENGTH: 19 words

Argentina says it will accept up to 100 Vietnamese refugees from group that
recently landed at Hong Kong (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Vietnamese forces and Cambodian insurgents clash with Pol Pot forces in
southeastern provinces of Takeo and Kampot.  Rush of refugees expected has not
occured but Thai border officials report 4 policemen were wounded while driving
back soldiers seeking refuge in Thailand.  2,400 Cambodians reportedly have
gathered 500 yards from eastern Thai border.  Are believed to be families of
Cambodian soldiers (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 22, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 96 words

Carter Administration Southeast Asia specialists express concern over mounting
tensions between Vietnam and China.  Cite possibility of Chinese invasion and
term situation 'very dangerous'.  Feel troop movements on Chinese side of common
border and large scale reinforcment of army in area presages action.  Say
exchange of protest notes between nations heightens concern.  Feel that
Cambodian crisis bolsters Chinese political position in area and weakens
Vietnam's.  Both nations have accused other of border crossings, firing across
border and killing border guards (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 23, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM G BURCHETT

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 98 words

Australian journalist Wilfred Burchett offers impressions of recent trip to
Vietnam, including visit to Chinese border.  Notes military preparations and
reinforcements of border areas by both sides.  Argues that Sino-Vietnamese
dispute and Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia have little to do with USSR-China
conflict, and a lot do do with ancient hatreds and unsuccessful attempts by
China to take over Southeast Asia.  Mentions Nov 26 '78 assassination in Saigon
of leading actress Thanh Nga, killed for playing leading roles of heroines in
Vietnam's resistance to Chinese occupation (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 23

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 23, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY IVOR PETERSON

SECTION: Page 14, Column 2

LENGTH: 55 words

20 refugees from freighter Hai Hong land at Los Angeles after sailing around
Pacific for 3 months.  Are first of many refugees from Laos, Vietnam and
Cambodia who are expected to find homes in West.  Are preceeded by charter
flights carrying 340 others, joining l86,000 already in United States.
Newcomers comment.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 23-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 23, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 95 words

Communist guerrilla activity in Thailand has slowed since outbreak of fighting
between Cambodian Pol Pot loyalists and insurgents supported by Vietnam.  Thai
guerrilla are viewed as following China's policy but analysts feel their
position may change if Vietnam is victorious and Thai Communist are forced into
accommodation with Hanoi.  Western analysts have identified several Communist
training and indoctrination camps manned by Thais but supplied and secured by
Cambodians near their common border.  Some feel Thais may be biding time to see
what develops (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 23-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 23, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 2

LENGTH: 59 words

UN official says former surgeon gen of South Vietnam and and several other high
ranking officers are among 3,383 refugees landed at Hong Kong from freighter
Huey Fong.  1,418 have already disembarked and remaining 1,965 will come ashore
today.  Official says many refugees will be eligible for entrance to nations
where their relatives now live (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 23-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 24, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 142 words

Western and Asian analysts say Vietnam has attained its principal political and
military goals in Cambodia and is embarking upon consolidation phase despite
still being under attack.  Vietnamese forces reportedly hold all major towns and
roads and have reduced Cambodian forces to bands of independent guerrilla units.
Pol Pot forces are seen as capable of mounting effective 'spoiling' actions
despite limited communications and raids near Phnom Penh are reported.  Vietnam
is said to control Cambodian coast.  Pol Pot is believed either to be dead or in
China despite broadcasts from China by Deputy Prime Minister Ieng Sary that
Government is still in Cambodia.  Analysts believe if Pol Pot is still alive in
Cambodia he is effectively cut off from commanding his forces and his Chinese
allies are effectively barred from supplying them.  Map (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 24-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 25, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 85 words

Asst Sec Richard C Holbrooke says US will not get involved in Southeast Asia and
has no direct involvement in area, speech, Asia Society, NYC: says widening of
conflict between Vietnam and Cambodia would endanger Administration goal of
'equilibrium' in region.  Says visit of Chinese Deputy Prime Minister Teng
Hsiao-ping will have crucial impact on relations in many areas.  Holds United
States must not ignore Asia because strategic position would be impaired by loss
of trade or security in region (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 25-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 25, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 9 words

Photo of Vietnamese refugees arriving in Israel (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 25-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 25, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 92 words

Highly decorated Vietnam veteran David A Christian is removed from post of jobs
counselor to veterans by Labor Department.  Contends he was dismissed because he
was 'too visible' in his job.  Christian actively urged veterans to organize
politically, take advantage of Government training programs and take pride in
having served in Vietnam.  Labor Dept officials deny that Christian is being
'purged'.  Hold that Christian's one-year consultancy job has expired and that
department is making effort to find him another job.  Photo of Christian (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 25-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 26, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 40 words

New Cambodian President Heng Samrin stages victory celebration in Phnom Penh and
concedes that Vietnam played role in defeating forces of Pol Pot govenment.
Radio broadcasts of Pol Pot forces deny defeat and assert fighting continues
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 26-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 5

LENGTH: 38 words

Repub Pres aspirant John Connally tells group of businessmen that concern for
Vietnam and consternation of Watergate has deflected attention from nation's
deteriorating econ position, speech, YMCA-sponsored luncheon, NYC (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 27-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ALEX ALEXIEV

SECTION: Page 21, Column 3

LENGTH: 83 words

Rand Corp consultant Alex Alexiev sees Rumania's denunciation of Soviet-inspired
invasion of Cambodia by Vietnam as evidence of Rumania's insecurity and growing
fear that it might be next object of Soviet military intervention.  Contends
Rumania's rejection of Soviet call for increased military spending reflects
unspoken desires of majority of Warsaw Pact nations, which see diminished threat
from West and have grown increasingly dependent on West for trade, technology
and investment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 27

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 95 words

Vietnamese Prime Min Pham Van Dong reportedly says he will visit Phnom Phen to
sign variety of accords including proviso allowing stationing of troops in
Cambodia.  Meets with Western envoys to inform them of plans.  Pact reportedly
will relieve Cambodian Govern- ment of President Heng Samrin and Vietnam from
having to maintain there are no Vietnamese forces in Cambodia.  Vietnamese
forces reportedly still face heavy resistance from forces loyal to Pol Pot.
Analysts believe heavy forces will have to remain in Cambodia if Heng Samrin
Government is to survive (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 27-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ALBERT WOHLSTETTER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

Univ of Chicago Prof Albert Wohlstetter warns against drawing from Vietnam war
lesson that, instead of playing policeman to world, US should be making peace
for world.  Questions whether peace can be made anywhere without military power
to guarantee it.  Holds that world is no longer 'bipolar' and that its
complexity makes it no less dangerous.  Mentions Iranian crisis and dangers it
poses for Pakistan, Oman, Saudi Arabia and other Persian Gulf states, and for
Israel and Turkey (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 28

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY GUS HALL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 61 words

US Communist Party ad offers excerpts from letter by party general secretary Gus
Hall to Chinese Communist Party calling China soft on imperialism.  Cites new
diplomatic and trade relations with US as well as China's past statements on
Cuban missile cisis, failure to recognize Angola, relations with Vietnam,
support of South Africa and Chile.  Hall portrait (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Advertisement 28

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 73 words

Plight of Vietnamese refugees, who have been shunned by most nations in
Southeast Asia, reviewed on occasion of landing of first group of refugees from
freighter Hai Hong in Los Angeles.  United Nations has had little success in
handling problems of refugees or convincing nations to accept them.  Chart of
refugee polulations in 22 nations.  United States, Canada, France and West
Germany have accepted majority of refugees.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 28

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOHN T MCQUISTON

SECTION: Section 21; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

NY Repr John W Wydler of Garden City declares that abortion is most emotional
issue among his constituents since Vietnam War.  200 voters traveled to
Washington (DC) to urge Wydler to support amendment to 'protect the unborn,'
which he has opposed in past because wording might create legal problems.  Calls
for full debate of issue on floor of House.  Portrait of Wydler (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 28-6-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 3

LENGTH: 55 words

Veterans Administration head Max Cleland asks Senate Veterans Affairs Committee
for appropriations for new readjustment counseling program for Vietnam veterans.
Cites high suicide and alcoholism rates among Vietnam veterans as significant
'danger signals'.  Program is expected to cost $43 million over first five years
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 28

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 32 words

Article analyzes mil problems besetting China, including threats on borders with
Vietnam and USSR.  Chinese interest in US troop withdrawal from S Korea and its
effect on area noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 28

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY IVER PETERSON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 90 words

Iver Peterson discusses adjustment problems for 'boat people' refugees from
Vietnam as they attempt to settle in southern California.  States that many
refugees have found hope despite environment of poverty, loneliness,
homesickness, guilt feelings over families left behind, language barriers and
lack of skills except for rice farming and fishing in small boats.  Mental
health of refugees is described as fragile by David Reinhardt of US Catholic
Conference, 1 of 9 private agencies that sponsor and aid refugees.  3
illustrations (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 28-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 29, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 77 words

Thai and Western experts say troops loyal to Pol Pot Government have won major
victories over Vietnamese invaders and Cambodian insurgents.  Reportedly retake
port of Kampot, Ream naval base and most of Takeo Province.  Analysts say
Vietnamese troops have lost their initial impetus and are having trouble moving
modern equipment along highways whose bridges have been destroyed.  Unconfirmed
reports say Government forces now control Angkor temple complex (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 29-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 30, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

Terence McCarthy dies Jan 29 at age 69.  Economics consultant and former
Columbia University professor was best known for writings on civil rights and
lectures on Vietnam War.  Career reviewed (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 30

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 30, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

China charges Vietnamese troops have shelled town in Yunan Province and
Vietnamese counter charges that Chinese troops have made incursion into Lang Son
Province (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 30-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 30, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

Western analysts report Vietnamese forces in Cambodia have retaken provincial
capital of Takeo after losing it to Pol Pot forces (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 30-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 30, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

Pol Pot forces reportedly are closing in on Phnom Phen, which is still held by
insurgents and Vietnamese.  Voice of Democratic Cambodia, believed to be
broadcasting from China, claims retaking most of southern Cambodia and having
penetrated to within 6 miles of capital.  Ports of Kompong Som and Kampot
reportedly immobilized by fighting (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 30-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 31, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Malaysian Deputy Home Minister Ahmad Shahhabuddin calls on militia to prevent
Vietnamese refugees from landing in Malaysia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 31-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 31, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Philippine Foreign Ministry says Vietnam may be permitting more emigration.
Says 1 boat may have already left and 3 more may be taking on refugees at Ho Chi
Minh City (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 31-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 31, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

United Nations Secretary General Kurt Waldheim postpones visit to Southeast
Asia.  Was to visit Vietnam and Cambodia.  Will receive Thailand Prime Minister
Kriangsak Chamanan on February 8th (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 31-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 31, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY TERENCE SMITH

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 83 words

American intelligence sources say Vietnam is massing troops along Chinese border
and is repositioning aircraft to guard against possible air strike.  Say China
has assembled 100,000-man force with 150 planes and several hundred tanks on its
side or border.  Deputy Premier Teng Hsiao-ping and President Carter reportedly
discussed border situation with Carter reportedly warning Chinese against any
action.  Teng, at Capital Hill luncheon, refuses to rule out using force against
Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 31-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 31, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

Newly installed Cambodian Pres Heng Samrin charges Pol Pot Government with
genocide and death of millions since taking power in '75, speech to nation
celebrating capture of capital, Phnom Penh.  Holds education system has been
destroyed.  Vice Pres Pen Sovan echoes Samrin and praises Vietnam.  Speech is
reported by press agency allegedly representing Cambodian Government, but
believed based in Hanoi.  Samrin photo (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 31-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 31, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 97 words

Visiting Chinese Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping tells Congress that China hopes to
reunite Taiwan to mainland by peaceful means but cannot categorically rule out
use of force.  Also says China cannot dismiss possibility of using armed forces
against Vietnamese in Cambodian conflict.  In talks with Pres Carter, Teng
discusses pending economic issues, including end to discriminatory trade
legislation, and exchange of students and journalists.  Photos of Teng with
Senators Jacob K Javits and Frank Church, and with House Minority Leader John J
Rhodes and Speaker Thomas P O'Neill (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 31-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 1, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 3

LENGTH: 116 words

Thai Prime Min Kriangsak Chamanand says Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia might
upset Thai plan to spend more than $1 billion for rural development and force
him to transfer some funds to defense spending, int.  Kriangsak is scheduled to
begin US visit Feb 1 after stop in GB.  Will meet with Pres Carter, State Sec
Vance, Defense Sec Harold Brown, UN Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim and World Bank pres
Robert S McNamara.  Notes Vietnamese response to his request to keep Vietnamese
troops away from Thai border area was positive.  Says he will seek more US mil
aid.  Urges Amer businessmen to invest in country.  Plans to ask for active US
and UN assistance in resettling Indochinese refugees.  Por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 32

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 1, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 124 words

Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping makes public information on his personal and
pol life, luncheon with reporters, Blair House, Washington, DC.  Says he spent
period of his eclipse, from '66 to '73, in Kiangsi Prov.  Says he dislikes spicy
Szechwan cuisine.  Says he wishes he were young again, enjoys playing bridge,
lives with 2 grandchildren.  Warns China is prepared to take mil action against
Vietnam for its invasion of Cambodia.  Meets with Cambodian Prince Norodom
Sihanouk and former Pres Richard Nixon.  Visits Natl Air and Space Museum and
Lincoln Memorial.  Says 'honeymoon' with US will continue.  Says visit is aimed
at familiarizing him with Amer life and enabling Chinese to 'absorb everything
of benefit to us'.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 32-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 2, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Ed on Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia.  Urges Vietnam to leave Cambodia to be
governed by Cambodians (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 33

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 2, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 38 words

Vietnam, in series of official protests and published articles, accuses China of
massing troops and army along northern border and staging raids 'causing many
casualties'.  Similar protests previously voiced by China noted (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 33-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY LEO CHERNE

SECTION: Page 19, Column 5

LENGTH: 26 words

Article by Internatl Rescue Com chmn Leo Cherne on plight of 30,000 Vietnamese
'boat people' living in Malaysia's Pulau Bidong Island refugee camps (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 34

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Class-action suit is filed, Fed Dist Ct, Manhattan, on behalf of 4.2 million
Amers who allegedly were exposed to cancer-causing chem defoliants during
Vietnam war.  Suit supersedes one filed on behalf of vet Paul Reutershan, who
assertedly died from cancer caused by contaminated defoliants mfrd by Dow Chem
Co.  New suit names 3 additional chem mrfs and various Govt agencies as
defendants.  Defendants listed (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 34-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

6 US mfrs of alleged cancer-causing defoliants are named as defendants in
class-action suit brought in behalf of 4.2 Million Vietnam war veterans
allegedly exposed to chem (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 34-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

Article on scarcity of Cambodian refugees seeking shelter in Thailand and silent
attitude Cambodians have taken during current unrest caused by Vietnamese
invasion.  Notes that while Thai border prov officials expected outpouring of
refugees, fewer than 1,000 have crossed into Thailand since beginning of
large-scale fighting.  Illus.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 34-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

Casualties mount as armed border clashes between China and Vietnam increase,
with each side accusing other of intrusions and shooting incidents.  Vietnam
Foreign Min sends protest note to Chinese Embassy accusing Chinese troops of
intruding in Lai Chau Prov.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 34-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 112 words

Philippine Govt refuses entry to newly arrived Vietnamese boat refugees and sets
up blockade to prevent freighters with refugees from entering Manila Bay.  Coast
Guard spokesman says blockade is intended to keep out 2 freighters that had put
more than 600 refugees ashore on Palawan Is and are believed heading for bay
with more refugees.  Small refugee vessel is refused entry and towed 13 mi to
where freighter Tung An has been waiting for more than mo with 2,100 Vietnamese
aboard.  Foreign Min says Tung An will be sent to next port of call within 10
days unless more countries accept its passengers.  Deputy Foreign Min Jose
Ingles comments on refugee flow (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 34-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 4, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 62 words

Wis Univ Prof Edward Friedman article explains China's position on Vietnam.
Says Chinese feel they can either stand up now to Vietnamese expansionism or
remain passive and appear to be a pushover to USSR.  Notes China sees Carter
call for self-restraint as signal to USSR that China is 'paper tiger,' signaling
invitation to USSR to move aggressively into China (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 35

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 4, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Page 46, Column 4

LENGTH: 27 words

David Berry, author of play G.R. Point, being performed at Baltimore's Center
Stage Theater, comments on play, which is about 4 soldiers in Vietnam.  Illus
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 35-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 4, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 28 words

Vietnam charges China with sending soldiers into northern border prov, attacking
sugar mill, wounding undisclosed number of workers and destroying several houses
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 35-4-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 76 words

US Vietnam war veterans seen emerging from pol isolation and organizing for
strong challenge of Carter Adm policies toward them.  Accuse Adm of neglecting
health, employment, educ and psychological needs, while favoring veterans of
earlier wars.  Note they were given about 6 of 700 key pol apptmts.  Robert O
Muller, paraplegic who heads Council of Vietnam Veterans, comments.  Por.
Summary of key areas in which Adm and veterans groups differ (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 36-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 5

LENGTH: 56 words

Thai Prime Min Kriangsak Chamanand arrives, Washington, DC, for talks with Pres
Carter amid disclosures by Adm officials that significant increase is being
planned in number of Indochinese refugees that will be allowed to enter US.  Is
greeted by State Sec Cyrus R Vance.  Plans to meet with Vance and Defense Sec
Harold Brown (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 36-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 5, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 89 words

Article on closing of 'Friendship Pass', narrow-gauge rr between Nanning, China
and Hanoi, Vietnam, as result of increased tension between 2 countries.  Recalls
roll pass played during Vietnam war, when China supplied materials to Vietnam to
fight 'Amer aggression'.  Notes that since mid-Dec '78 both sides have
reinforced border guards with regular Army troops and have positioned tanks and
fighter planes within striking distance.  Recalls ancient animosities between
China and Vietnam that resurfaced after end of war.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 36-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 6, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM SHAWCROSS

SECTION: Page 17, Column 5

LENGTH: 48 words

Article by William Shawcross, author of book 'Side Show: Kissinger, Nixon and
the Destruction of Cambodia,' on roles former US Pres Nixon and State Sec
Kissinger played in ultimate Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia.  Recalls events,
beginning in '60s, that led to present situation (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 37

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 7, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 45 words

Panamanian freighter believed to be carrying 3,000 Vietnamese refugees moves
into Hong Kong waters under cover of darkness.  Hong Kong police launches set up
guard, with no one allowed to approach ship, which had been anchored outside
Hong Kong for past 4 wks (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 38-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 7, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY SCOTT STOKES and HENRY SCOTT STOKES

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 127 words

Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping arrives, Tokyo, en route from US trip
for 2d Japanese visit in 3 mos.  Visit seen underscoring China's trianguler
relationship with US and Japan.  To discuss variety of topics with Japanese
leaders, including relationship of North and South Korea, Vietnamese invasion of
Cambodia and his visit to US.  Teng's Japanese visit is at time when Tokyo's
relationship with USSR is strained over Soviet mil buildup on Kunashiri and
Etorofu islands off Hokkaido.  Japanese Foreign Min Sunao Sonoda says China and
US welcomed Japan's efforts to influence developments in Cambodia, via cutoff of
$70 million in econ aid to Vietnam, but that USSR viewed move as anti-Soviet.
Teng and Japanese Prime Min Masayoshi Ohira illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 38-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 8, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE HABERMAN and ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 50 words

Repr Elizabeth Holtzman, new head of HR Immigration, Refugees and Internatl Law
Subcom, and Repr Hamilton Fish plan 2-wk trip to Far East countries, including
Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Indonesia and Vietnam, to discuss problems of
'boat people' awaiting resettlement in other countries (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 39-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 8, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY MICHAEL BACON

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 17 words

Michael Bacon lr disputes Wilfred Burchett's Jan 23 Op-Ed article on Vietnamese
invasion of Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 39

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 8, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD BURT

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

Carter Adm officials say USSR has expanded naval presence near Vietnam by
stationing small task force off Vietnamese coast and sending 2 large warships to
region.  Describe buildup as 1st sign of Soviet mil reaction to stationing of
some 100,000 Chinese troops on Vietnamese border.  Confirm Yang Teh-chih, 1 of
China's most experienced generals, has been put in command of border forces (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 39-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 8, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY SCOTT STOKES

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 151 words

Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping meets with former Japanese Prime Min
Takeo Fukuda, Tokyo.  Says Amer failure in Iran may have repercussions in Saudi
Arabia, Pakistan and India and may ultimately undermine hopes for world peace by
encouraging Soviet aggression.  Says measures taken by US to deal with Iran and
Cuba are no good.  Says US should move responsibly, since USSR will never be
impressed with 'halfway positions'.  Calls on Japan to suspend econ aid to
Vietnam.  Tells Prime Min Masayoshi Ohira Vietnam should be 'punished' for its
invasion of Cambodia.  Says China will apply 'sanctions'.  Japanese authorities
reptdly uneasy over Teng's anti-Soviet remarks.  Their efforts to avoid
involvement in Chinese-Soviet dispute noted.  Remarks on Middle East reptdly
strikes sensitive nerve among Japanese, who depend oil area's oil producers for
3/4 of domestic fuel supplies.  Illus (M)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 39-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 8, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

Hong Kong officials cordon off Panamanian-registered ship carrying 3,000
Vietnamese refugees after it enters harbor.  Fishing trawler deposited 224
Vietnamese refugees earlier on deserted beach.  Hong Kong authorities are
investigating possibility that new ship and freighter Huey Fong could be part of
organized syndicate paying off Vietnamese Govt to let it transport people
willing to buy their way out of country (S)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 39-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 8, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY TERENCE SMITH

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 98 words

Thai Prime Min Kriangsak Chamanand says Pres Carter has agreed to speed
deliveries of tactical fighters, weapons and ammunition to Thailand in response
to continued fighting in Indochina, Washington, DC, news conf.  Says US would
take 'definite action' if Cambodian fighting threatens Thai security.  Predicts
Vietnam will be involved for 'yr or 2' in Cambodia in efforts to rout Pol Pot
loyalists.  Avoids answering directly whether Thailand is permitting Chinese to
resupply Cambodians through Thailand.  Pres Carter seeks Cong approval for $30
million in mil sales to Thailand (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 39-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 9, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY PAUL H ALLEN

SECTION: Page 30, Column 4

LENGTH: 35 words

Paul H Allen lr on Henry F Arnold's Jan 25 lr suggesting Melbourne, Australia,
plant large shade trees on its sts recalls charms of Saigon (now Ho Chi Minh
City), where trees and ornamentals were planted (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 40-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 9, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5

LENGTH: 54 words

China's sr leaders, led by Chmn Hua Kuo-feng, welcome Deputy Prime Min Teng
Hsiao-ping, Peking, on arrival from visit to US.  Vietnam scores Amer visit as
part of China's 'sinister policy' to ally with US against it.  Japanese Defense
Agency repts China is massing hundreds of warplanes at bases near Vietnamese
border (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 40-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 9, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

Deposed Cambodian ruler Prince Norodom Sihanouk, on visit to US, says Chinese
Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping told him China expects to use ports and routes
in Thailand to supply guerrillas fighting new Vietnam-backed regime in
Cambodia.Teng's assertion conflicts with statement by visiting Thai Prime Min
Kriangsak Chamanand that Thailand would not allow use of its territory for arms
shipment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 40-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY CRAIG R WHITNEY

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 86 words

Soviet Prime Min Aleksei Kosygin complains to Amer science and tech adviser Dr
Frank Press over remarks by Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping during US visit.
Says remarks were 'outrageous' and should have been 'refuted' by Carter Adm.
Says Teng's remarks about USSR were tantamount to 'declaration of war'.
Izvestia repts Teng told Japanese that China was considering taking actions
against Vietnam for invasion of Cambodia.  Pravda charges China with stepping up
mil 'provocations' on Vietnamese border (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 41-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

Drew Middleton mil analysis of Chinese-Vietnamese border conflict.  Holds
punitive mil operation into northern Vietnam is probably most attractive option
open to China if it decides to 'teach Vietnam a lesson'.  Mil buildups by both
sides outlined.  Illus.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 41

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 66 words

US, in statement read by State Dept spokesman Tom Reston, warns China against
attack on Vietnam.  Indicates it will view attack on Vietnam with same
disapproval that it has viewed Vietnam's actions on Cambodia.  Administration
officials assert that overt warning is made to dissociate US from any Chinese
action on Vietnam, in view of recent normalization of relations between US and
China (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 41-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 11, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROSANNE KLASS and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 32 words

US warnings to China about possibility of Chinese attack on Vietnam following
Vietnamese troop buildup at Chinese border revd.  Similar warnings to Vietnam
and its ally, USSR, noted (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 42-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 11, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROSANNE KLASS and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Comment on Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping's remarks on Amer Middle East
policy, situation in Iran, Soviet aggression and Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia
during his visit with Japanese officials in Tokyo (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 42-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 11, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD BURT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 108 words

Article discusses some drawbacks of Amer client-state diplomacy.  Discusses
current foreign-policy problems arising from pol turmoil in Iran and from
efforts to sever diplomatic ties with Taiwan.  Says problems are forcing
decisionmakers to reassess costs and benefits of relying on foreign client
states to further Adm's global aims.  Discusses evolution of client-state
system, noting it blossomed at height of Cold War under former Sec of State John
Foster Dulles.  Discusses unreliability and high costs of maintaining
client-states, citing Amer involvement in Iran, Vietnam, Philippines, S Korea
and Saudi Arabia as examples.  Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 42-3-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 11, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

George Lai, Amer Consulates' Indochina refugee coordinator in Hong Kong,
suspended following charges he solicited sexual favors from female refugees at
Shamshuipo transit camp in return for favorable consideration for US visas.  3
refugees are detained by Hong Kong police after attacking Lai while he processed
resettlement applications (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 42-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 2

LENGTH: 57 words

US Sen Henry Jackson says Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping informed him
China had evacuated city in Sinkiang Prov near Soviet border because of decision
to take mil action against Vietnam for invasion of Cambodia.  Says Teng
anticipated Soviet retaliation and warned that China might make countermove
along Sino-Soviet border (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 43-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 12, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 91 words

Article assesses impact Vietnamese incursion into Cambodia has had on Laos.
Notes pol restrictions Vietnam has introduced in Laos has caused armed
resistance, detention of thousands of educated Laotians and refugee exodus that
is largest per capita in SE Asia.  Diplomatic observers in Asia reptdly fear
that Vietnamese actions have so hardened divisions among Communist nations that
Laos has lost thin margin of independence and been pushed firmly into
Hanoi-Moscow camp.  Map.  Illus of Pres Souphanouvong and Educ Min Phoumi
Vongvichit (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 43-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 34 words

Canadian group of companies begins drilling exploratory oil well off Vietnam in
South China Sea.  Bow Valley Industries, operator for group, reports that well
should be completed in about 3 weeks (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 44-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

China and Vietnam rept new border clashes that have killed undetermined number
of people.  Each side blames other for incidents.  China warns Vietnam not to
ignore its say on situation.  Vietnam says it has sent identical messages to UN
Security Council pres Abdalla Yaccoub Bishara and Sec Gen Waldheim, complaining
about Chinese border activities (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 44-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 6

LENGTH: 52 words

US announces that it will accept 1,200 refugees from Indochina who had sought
refuge in Philippines, including 600 from freighter that has been anchored in
Manila Bay for 48 days.  Canada also confirms acceptance of from 300 to 350
refugees from same vessel.  Australia says it will resettle 200 refugees (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 44-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 34 words

George Lai, local employee of US Consulate Gen, Hong Kong, resigns, 3 days after
he is assaulted and accused by Vietnamese refugees of making advances to
Vietnamese women seeking resettlement in US (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 44-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 14, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 86 words

Vietnam begins using MIG-21 fighter planes to patrol frontier with China,
raising chance of accidental encounter between Vietnamese and Chinese air
forces.  USSR reptdly has increased warplane patrols along Soviet-Chinese
frontier in Singkiang region.  Peking reptdly has evacuated large numbers of
civilians near Soviet border.  Some analysts believe Hanoi might be deliberately
causing border incidents to provoke Chinese into attack that could only harm
Peking's stature but not seriously affect Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 45-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 15, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JOHN GEDDES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 125 words

European bankers and officials predict a deep-seated lack of faith in Carter Adm
and its economic policies will continue to undercut efforts by US to support its
dollar.  Indicative of low opinion of US policy-making is the little attention
given to US dollar by recent conference on world finance and trade held in
Frankfurt, while great attention was given to the delayed introduction of
European Monetary System.  Widespread distrust of US is traced by bankers to the
cumulative effect of political and economic policy-making over last 10 years,
marked by high inflation and huge US deficit in international dealings.  On
political front, widespread perception of American weakness after Vietnam has
been resurrected by recent events in Iran (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 46-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 15, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

Vietnam calls on 'all friendly countries' to intercede to prevent China from
waging war against Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 46-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 15, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

Hanoi charges that Chinese troops have moved into Lang Son Province and are
shelling villages every day.  Map (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 46-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 15, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 104 words

State Dept spokesman Hodding Carter 3d says US Govt has received word that Amer
POW in Vietnam who chose to stay behind when others were repatriated now wishes
to come home.  Identifies him as marine PFC Robert Russell Garwood, who was
captured in Sept '65.  Repr Benjamin A Gilman, member of now defunct HR Select
Com on Missing Persons in Southeast Asia, says com heard testimony that Garwood
cooperated with Vietcong.  Repr Gillespie V Montgomery, chmn of com, calls
Garwood a deserter who led Vietnamese groups against Amer forces.  Carter says
Vietnamese Govt has been asked to allow Garwood to leave Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 46-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 16, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

China charges that in 1st 6 wks of yr 22 Chinese soldiers and civilians were
killed and 20 wounded by mines planted by Vietnamese forces on Chinese side of
common border.  Vietnamese Foreign Min accuses China of making 'frantic war
preparations' against Vietnam, asserting that 40 Vietnamese soldiers and
civilians were killed in Jan and Feb by Chinese.  Other allegations by both
sides noted.  Illus purported to show wounded Vietnamese border guard (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 47-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 17, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 32 words

Thousands of Cambodians greet Vietnamese Prime Min Pham Van Dong at Pochentong
airport, Cambodia.  Dong is met at airport by Prime Min Heng Samrin.  Fighting
continues in Cambodian provs (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 48-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD B DUDMAN

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10

LENGTH: 22 words

Book Many Reasons Why.  The American Involvement in Vietnam by Michael Charlton
and Anthony Moncrieff revd by Richard Dudman (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 49

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 12 words

Chinese invasion of Vietnam, and resulting pol implications, revd (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-4-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FRANK EMBLEN

SECTION: Section 11; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 58 words

Article on plans by Victor E Dahn Jr, chmn of USS New Jersey Battleship Comm, to
tow vessel from Bremerton, Calif, to NY Harbor, where it will remain as monument
to 'blood sacrifices' of Amers.  Battleship is most decorated vessel in US Naval
history.  Last saw action off Vietnam in '68.  Has not yet been decommissioned
by Navy.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-4-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 80 words

Vietnam Foreign Min Nguyen Duy Trinh, in lr to UN Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim and
Security Council pres Abdulla Yaccoub Bishara, accuses China of launching 'war
of aggression' and asks UN to force Chinese to withdraw its forces.  Says China
must bear war's responsibility.  Chinese UN delegate Chen Chu says that if
council meeting is called, he will insist that members deal 1st with request by
Cambodian loyalists that council re-examine charges of aggression by Vietnamese
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-5-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOSEPH B TREASTER

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 16 words

Mil analysts compare China's recent attacks on Vietnam with its '62 invasion of
India (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 19 words

More than 500 demonstrators gather at Chinese Embassy in Moscow, protesting
Chinese invasion of Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-4-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID K SHIPLER

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 38 words

USSR gives no indication of whether it will use mil forces to help Vietnam repel
Chinese invasion.  Events raise possibility of clash between USSR and Chinese
forces because of friendship treaty between Vietnam and USSR (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-4-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 12 words

Texts of Chinese and Vietnamese statements on border conflict (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Text 49

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 10 words

Career sketch of Chinese mil leader Yang Teh-chih (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Former US Pres Ford says he is concerned about Chinese invasion of Vietnam, but
says US should remain in background of dispute (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY D MCFADDEN ROBERT

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

Article recounts ancient enmities between China and Vietnam in light of recent
invasion of Vietnam by Chinese (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 16 words

Illus of elderly Vietnamese refugee waiting on freighter Tung An in Manila
Harbor, Philippines.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-4-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 76 words

Quotation of Day, from Vietnamese broadcast on invasion of Vietnam, says 'Early
in morning of 17 Feb '79, the Chinese powerholders mobilized a large armed force
composed of infantry, artillery and armored forces to launch an aggressive
offensive on our territory'.  Chinese statement says 'After counterattacking the
Vietnamese aggressors as they deserve, the Chinese frontier troops will strictly
keep to defending the border of their own country' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-5-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 159 words

Chinese Government reports Chinese troops have invaded four Vietnamese provinces
along 480-mile China-Vietnam border.  Hsinhua, Chinese press agency, calls the
action 'counterattacks' provoked by Vietnam's attacks on Chinese frontier guards
and inhabitants.  Maintains China is not seeking Vietnamese territory.  Vietnam
News Agency reports Chinese troops, supported by aircraft and artillery,
attacked Vietnam's border from Quang Ninh in east to Hoang Lien Son in west.
Chinese attack began at 4 AM Feb 17 Peking (China) time (3 PM Feb 16 New York
time).  Attacks come six weeks after Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia and 15 weeks
after Vietnam and USSR signed peace and cooperation treaty.  China is still
supporting Cambodian forces loyal to ousted Prime Min Pol Pot.  Vietnam calls on
USSR and other nations to support and defend Vietnam.  Sends letter to UN
Security Council calling on China to cease its 'invasion'.  Map details Chinese
attack (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 168 words

Drew Middleton observes China's invasion of Vietnam was classic military
operation which followed pattern of attacks over wide front, leaving defending
Vietnamese in doubt about principal axis of advance.  Points out action of
Chinese army in area of Lao Cai (Vietnam) appears to be most dangerous because
control of that area would give Chinese control of railroad from Hanoi (Vietnam)
to China.  Observes duration of action by Chinese is unknown factor in strategic
analysis.  Notes analysts had thought that any Chinese military action against
Vietnam would follow pattern of China's '62-'63 operation in India, with China
attacking limited area, consolidating its positions and halting its advance.
Emphasizes China has less freedom of action in Vietnam than in India due to
possibility of retaliatory Soviet attack on border between USSR and China.
Reports China's overall command in Vietnam operation is believed to be
controlled by Gen Yang Teh-chih, who won recognition during Korean War (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 49

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 151 words

US cautions USSR publicly and privately against retaliating and attacking China
in support of USSR's ally Vietnam.  Calls on China to withdraw its forces from
Vietnam.  Pres Carter and other US officials reportedly had tried to persuade
Chinese not to attack Vietnam in retaliation for Vietnamese invasion of China's
ally Cambodia in Dec '78.  US intelligence sources report that 150,000 Chinese
troops are involved in invasion, equal to number of Vietnamese troops believed
to be in Cambodia.  Senior US official says it is possible Chinese troops might
remain in Vietnam to be used in exchange for withdrawal of Vietnamese forces
from Cambodia.  Reports US plans no military involvement, but notes US naval
vessels will be engaging in long-planned maneuvers in region.  US officials
regard Chinese invasion as major military move, but are hopeful that Chinese
troops will not remain in Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 45 words

USSR Govt statement, in Quotation of Day, says 'The Soviet Union will honor its
obligation under the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation between the USSR and
the Socialist Repub of Vietnam.  Those who decide policy in Peking should stop
before it is too late' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM L SAFIRE

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

William Safire comment on events leading up to Chinese invasion of Vietnam.
Discusses possible moves USSR might make in effort to aid Vietnamese.  Describes
possible power plays between USSR and China (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 50

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Ed on Vietnamese-Chinese border action sees ugly nationalism triumphing even
among fellow-Communist states.  Claims armed conflicts anywhere threaten people
everywhere (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 50

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY DONALD G MCNEIL JR

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 106 words

Amer experts say invasion of Vietnam by China is either strategic move to force
Vietnam to move its troops from Cambodia to northern border, or attempt by
Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping to consolidate nationalist feelings within
China behind his leadership.  Say brief, successful invasion will avenge border
troops who have been killed, will quiet domestic opposition to Teng's policies
and will avenge ethnic Chinese who have been persecuted by Vietnamese Govt.
Several experts compare current Chinese move to '62 invasion of India.  None
expect Chinese to remain until they provoke Soviet invasion of China.  Experts
comment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

Chronology of some major events in SE Asia and on Soviet-Chinese border in last
25 yrs (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Chronology 50

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 3

LENGTH: 32 words

Illus of Chinese soldiers marching to guard duty in Peking.  Some Chinese repts
say strong forces of infantry, arty and tanks are moving to attack-assembly area
north of Vietnamese frontier.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 11 words

Article outlines career of Chinese border Comdr Yang Dezhi (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

Text of declaration by USSR on Chinese-Vietnamese hostilities (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Text 50

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 120 words

UN Sec Gen Waldheim appeals for end to Indochinese fighting as Security Council
members meet privately on how to respond to Chinese invasion of Vietnam.
Vietnam calls on UN to take 'appropriate measures' to compel Chinese to withdraw
troops.  US State Sec Vance reptdly offered strong support for Council meeting.
Amer officials reptdly are undecided on whether timing is appropriate for debate
now.  USSR reptdly is reluctant to have open debate, in which confrontation with
Peking would be unavoidable.  Pol Pot regime renews formal request to Council
that it meet again to consider 'aggression' by Vietnam against Cambodia.
Waldheim's call for end to 'all hostilities' seen intended to cover both
conflicts (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 2

LENGTH: 25 words

Radio Hanoi repts Vietnamese Prime Min Pham Van Dong and Cambodian Pres Heng
Samrin sign treaty of peace, friendship and cooperation, Phnom Penh (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 104 words

Taiwan Govt officials say Amer decision to normalize relations with China led to
invasion of Vietnam by China.  Govt spokesman James Soong says US policy
heightened tension in region and sharpened hostility between China and USSR.
Ranking mil official says attack should be 'warning' to US that it should not
base its policy on mere 'expectation' of peaceful intention of China.  Accuses
China of purposefully spreading misinformation in saying that it removed most of
troops on coast facing Taiwan to indicate tension in Taiwan Strait had
diminished.  Intelligence sources say more than 300,000 troops are in area (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Indian Foreign Min Atal Bihara Vajpayee ends mission to China 1 day early as
wave of protest over Chinese invasion of Vietnam sweeps Govt and pol circles in
India.  Prime Min Morarji R Desai expresses 'profound shock and distress' over
invasion and calls for immediate withdrawal of troops.  Scene in New Delhi
described as all pol parties join protest.  Parliament expected to take up
matter of invasion (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

Article describes war scene in Lang Son, Vietnam, 13 mi from Chinese border.
Illus of demonstrators in Stockholm protesting Chinese invasion (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Boat carrying 103 Vietnamese refugees lands near Marang, Malaysia, and guards
detain them pending decision to move them to refugee camps (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY CRAIG R WHITNEY

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 113 words

USSR demands immediate withdrawal of Chinese forces in Vietnam, statement issued
by official Soviet news agency Tass.  Makes no explicit threat of military
retaliation across 4,000-mile USSR-China border.  Reports Vietnam's Ambassador
has been received in USSR by Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei A Gromyko.  Warns
China that USSR will honor its obligation to Vietnam under Nov 3 '78 friendship
and cooperation treaty, which provides for 'mutual consultations' in the event
that one of signatories comes under attack.  Western diplomats believe that
under treaty USSR would probably provide Vietnam with extensive military
supplies and equipment if Vietnamese requested it (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 97 words

Carter Admistration officials assert that US will avoid direct involvement in
conflict between China and Vietnam.  Hold immediate US interests are not
affected but a widening of conflict would be dangerous.  Also assert that
security of US allies in Asia is not threatened now but US would be concerned
with any threat to them, that normalization of relations with China is an
'accomplished fact,' and that US will work with others to promote principle of
not interfering militarily in affairs of other nations.  Sens Howard Baker, John
Glenn and Jacob Javits comment noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 116 words

Drew Middleton analysis of Chinese invasion of Vietnam finds pause in fighting
on 2d day of battle as Chinese are apparently consolidating their gains and
moving up reinforcements.  Notes official Chinese representative has indicated
that offensive will continue.  Concludes, after talks with American and European
experts on region, that Chinese advance owed its success to element of surprise,
prolonged and heavy artillery barrage before troop and tank advance and fact
that Chinese troops did not face Vietnamese Army regular units.  Experts contend
that Chinese offensive has been coordinated with increase in guerrilla activity
against Vietnamese invaders in Cambodia.  Map of Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 50

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 19, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 149 words

Vietnam reports its army has destroyed 60 Chinese tanks and killed hundreds of
Chinese soldiers in checking Chinese invasion six miles inside Vietnamese
border.  Information about fighting remains extremely sketchy.  Intelligence
analysts report it is impossible to determine how far Chinese have actually
pushed into Vietnam, or what China's objectives might be.  Official Chinese
press agency Hsinhua says only that fighting is continuing, but gives no
details.  Vietnam News Agency reports heavy fighting is going on from Quang Ninh
Province on coast to Lai Chau Province in west, with Chinese seizing several
small towns and attacking Lao Cai, where railroad from China to Hanoi (Vietnam)
crosses border.  Hanoi radio reports Chinese planes have bombed factories, power
plants and communications facilities, inflicting 'terrible damage' and causing
many civilian casualties.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY TOM WICKER

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 26 words

Tom Wicker article holds China's major purpose for invasion of Vietnam was to
maintain its reputation for toughness and willingness to defend an ally (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 51

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Ed comments on confusion surrounding Pres Carter's foreign policy.  Says Carter
needs to define his course and to convey 'firmness even in restraint'.  Cites
events in Middle East and Iran and current Sino-Soviet conflict over Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 51

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 106 words

US and other Western members of UN Security Council support request for council
debate on Chinese invasion of Vietnam and Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia.  US
Amb Andrew Young says smaller Asian countries, which are not council members but
have strong regional interests in conflicts, might want to take initiative on
requesting debate.  5 members of Assn of SE Asian Nations reptdly are discussing
regional approach.  Several council members fear debate delay may appear to be
demonstration of inaction or impotence.  Some diplomats insist pressure of
opinion might have contributed to China's apparent decision to halt advance (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 7

LENGTH: 16 words

Cuba scores invasion of Vietnam by China and says it is ready to aid in
Vietnamese defense (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 4

LENGTH: 10 words

Laos condemns Chinese actions in invading Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 2

LENGTH: 14 words

Rumania calls on both sides of Chinese-Vietnamese conflict to withdraw troops
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY TANNER

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

Ital Communist leaders issue public rebuke to Peking for invasion of Vietnam.
Party leader Enrico Berlinguer comments.  Failure of Berlinguer and party
foreign-affairs specialist Giancarlo Panetta to score invasion of Cambodia by
Vietnam seen reflecting Ital Communist policy of supporting Soviet foreign
policy (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Thousands of Czech and Vietnamese youths demonstrate outside Chinese Embassy,
Prague, against what they call Chinese aggression in Vietnam.  Illus.  Hungary
denounces Chinese attack as violation of UN Charter and internatl law (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 50 words

Article 0n ages-old animosity between China and Vietnam recalls Oct 6 '78 int
with Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min Nguyen Co Thach, who predicted that border
incidents with China would escalate and recalled Vietnam's mil successes against
more powerful adversaries dating back to 13th century (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 39 words

Japan's Kyodo News Service repts China has banned all demonstrations, public
gatherings and wall posters by citizens on war with Vietnam.  Says Hsinhua,
Chinese press agency, is only authorized to disseminate news of conflict (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 77 words

Analysis of possible reasons behind Chinese invasion of Vietnam.  Cites series
of border incidents and Hanoi's signing of friendship treaty with Moscow, as
well as expulsion of 180,000 ethnic Chinese from Vietnam and its overthrow of
Pol Pot regime in Cambodia.  Pol consequences of Chinese risking new
relationship with US and fears by conservative supporters of Taiwan that Peking
cannot be trusted to work for peaceful reunification with Taiwan cited (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 51

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 93 words

Vietnamese Amb to France Vo Van Sung says country has no immediate plans to
sever diplomatic relations with China and is ready to discuss all issues, Paris
news conf.  Scores Chinese attack.  Say Vietnamese regional forces are to be
augmented by regular army forces and people's militia if fighting continues.
Says there were 800 border incidents between China and Vietnam in '78.  Citing
Chinese Deputy Premier Teng Hsiao-ping's visit to US, says he believes attack
was 'undertaken with Amers' approval, if not encouragement or collusion.  Illus
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 25 words

Illus from Vietnamese News Agency purported to show workers and cadres at Tien
Bo Printing Factory, Hanoi, demonstrating against Chinese invasion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Drew Middleton mil analysis of invasion notes threat posed by Soviet forces
along Chinese frontier and Soviet '45 blitzkrieg in Manchuria have constrained
Chinese offensive in Vietnam.  Says US and Western Eur analysts believe initial
Chinese drive 6 mi within Vietnam is not 'stop line,' citing intensification of
air war by both sides as evidence that mil operation continues.  Mil options
open to USSR outlined (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 51

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY CRAIG R WHITNEY

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

USSR newspaper Izvestia says West shares blame for invasion.  Maintains US is in
'ambiguous and pol vulnerable position'.  Soviet Foreign Min Andrei A Gromyko
says 'heroic people of Vietnam are not alone,' statement at luncheon for
visiting Czech Foreign Min Bohuslav Chnoupek.  Soviet journalist Victor Louis
says leaves have been canceled for some Soviet army reservists.  Cartoon from
Pravda on Chinese 'provocations' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 155 words

Chinese military invasion into Vietnam has apparently halted, at least
temporarily, six miles inside border.  Reuters dispatch from Peking (China)
quotes diplomatic sources there as saying that Chinese troops were believed to
be withdrawing from Vietnam.  China issues no official confirmation that attack
on Vietnam has been ended or that withdrawal is either under way or in
preparation.  Western analysts say Chinese presumably feel that they have
accomplished stated objective of punishing Vietnamese for their invasion of
Cambodia and for series of border incidents.  Intelligence sources are skeptical
about earlier Vietnamese claims that Chinese planes had bombed factories and
other facilities along border, inflicting heavy destruction.  Chinese attack
came while top Vietnamese leaders were in Phnom Penh (Cambodia) to sign
friendship treaty with new Cambodian Government.  Map details Chinese drive into
Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 76 words

China's recent invasion of Vietnam is expected to increase support in Congress
for strong legislative language that would commit US to defend Taiwan against an
attack by China.  Pres Carter is expected to veto such legislation, because it
would suggest Government-to-Government ties between US and Taiwan, and US has
officially severed diplomatic relations with Taiwan.  Congressional support for
legislation committing US to defend Taiwan discussed (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY VARTANIG G VARTAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 5

LENGTH: 48 words

Dow industrial average closes up 7.54 points at 834.55 on trading volume of 22
million shares.  Gain is led by energy-related and blue chip stocks as investors
display calm in initial response to China's invasion of Vietnam.  Other stock
trading activity detailed.  Market profile (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 52-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 70 words

Polychrome Corp vice chairman Bernard Gold announces that French company
Rhone-Poulenc SA has made offer to purchase up to 375,000 shares of Polychrome
stock at $17.25-per-share.Rhone Poulenc now owns 40% of Polychrome' stock.  In
unrelated development, Rhone Poulenc announced that it has established joint
subsidiary with Cie Generale Pharmaceutique du Vietnam for production of
pharmaceutical goods in Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 52-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 3

LENGTH: 21 words

US State Dept spokesman Hodding Carter 3d denies Soviet allegations that US gave
China 'green light' to invade Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 52-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 26 words

USSR says Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping told US Govt, during recent
visit, that China intended to attack Vietnam and US did not object (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 52-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 17 words

GB Govt summons Chinese Amb Ke Hua to express concern over invasion of Vietnam
by Chinese forces (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 52-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 61 words

Indian Foreign Min Atal Bihari Vajpayee says nonaligned nations are acting to
defuse conflict between China and Vietnam.  Says Sri Lanka, chmn of coordinating
bur of nonaligned countries, will send foreign min to Hanoi and Peking in
mediation effort.  Vajpayee asserts China should immediately withdraw forces as
1st step toward negotiated peace settlement (S)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 52-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 72 words

PLO official Saleh Khalef criticizes China for invasion of Vietnam, apparently
ending friendly relationship between orgn and country that has lasted for 14
yrs.  Lebanese Moslem and leftist pol alliance accuses China of serving
imperialist designs in SE Asia, recalling Chinese backing of Middle East policy
of Egyptian Pres Sadat.  Lebanese, Syrian, Iraqi and Jordanian Communist parties
issue statements critical of China (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 52-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 61 words

Indian Foreign Min Atal Bihari Vajpayee says nonaligned nations are acting to
defuse conflict between China and Vietnam.  Says Sri Lanka, chmn of coordinating
bur of nonaligned countries, will send foreign min to Hanoi and Peking in
mediation effort.  Vajpayee asserts China should immediately withdraw forces as
1st step toward negotiated peace settlement (S)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 52-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 136 words

Vietnamese Govt celebrates signing of Treaty of Peace and Friendship with new
Cambodian regime.  Treaty gives Vietnam right to station 'advisers' in Cambodia
to 'preserve territorial integrity'.  Pact appears to place Cambodia in client
relationship with Vietnam, formalizing pre-eminence of Vietnam in SE Asian
peninsula.  Importance of pact is seen in fact that high-ranking Vietnamese
delegation, led by Prime Min Pham Van Dong, remained for signing in Phnom Penh
for 2 days after Chinese invaded Vietnam.  Mil significance was underscored by
presence in delegation of Vietnamese Chief of Staff Gen Van Tien Dung.
Festivities in Phnom Penh described.  Skirmishes between troops loyal to Pol Pot
and those supporting Hanoi-backed regime continue.  Vietnamese reptdly have
lifted blockade of Cambodian coast (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 52-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

Drew Middleton mil analysis of fighting between Chinese and Vietnamese in
Vietnam.  Mil action described.  Casualty repts noted.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 52

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 6

LENGTH: 76 words

US Sen Jacob Javits says he believes Carter Adm is troubled by 'gnawing fear'
that nation will not back it if it gets into posture involving risks in foreign
policy, speech, Rochester Engineering Soc.  Attributes uncertainty of attitude
to concern that 'dissillusionment of Vietnam still exists'.  Lists Middle East
peace agreement, mandatory energy conservation to reduce oil imports and
reassessment of defense posture as high-priority policy areas (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 52-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 90 words

US reptdly is prepared to call for UN Security Council session on Indochina
crisis on its own if other countries continue to hesitate.  Amer approach will
be to have debate broad enough to cover attack by Chinese mil forces on Vietnam
and intervention by Vietnam in Cambodia.  US reprs have been insisting during
private consultations that as matter of credibility, UN cannot avoid taking up
developments in SE Asia.  US request for broad debate on SE Asian conflicts
would allow US to take pol neutral position between China and USSR (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 52-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

Analysis of Pres Carter's foreign policy finds his current problems stem from
his efforts to steer middle course and to adhere to belief that US must
accommodate change in world at large rather than fulminate against periodic
reversals and become drawn into new quagmires abroad.  Notes belief runs counter
to current mood among Dems and Repubs, who sense that US needs leader strong in
foreign policy.  Discusses Carter's handling of pol turmoil in Iran and
Sino-Vietnamese conflict (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 52

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 176 words

Chinese invading army and Vietnamese defenders have reportedly renewed fighting.
Analysts in Hong Kong believe Chinese penetration is now about 10 miles into
Vietnam.  Soviet press agency Tass reports from Hanoi (Vietnam) that Vietnamese
border town Lao Cai has fallen to Chinese troops.  Other reports indicate
Chinese may have halted advance, possibly to resupply and consolidate positions.
Some analysts suggest apparent halt in fighting may reflect China's decision to
limit campaign.  Hanoi attributes halt to 'stiffened Vietnamese resistance'.
China is believed to have committed 100,000 regular troops to the attack against
estimated 60,000 to 80,000 Vietnamese troops.  Chinese appear to have good
intelligence on Vietnamese defenses.  Chinese press has not reported any news on
fighting since initial attack.  Western diplomats report atmosphere in Hanoi is
relaxed and that there is no evidence that Vietnamese have moved up regular
troops to reinforce militia and regional forces holding frontier.  Map.  Photo
of Chinese jet fighters (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 52-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 22, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Loyalist troops of ousted Cambodian Prime Min Pol Pot reptdly are continuing war
with persistent and widespread attacks on forces of new Govt and Vietnamese
supporters.  Broadcasts by Pol Pot forces claim that heavy casualties have been
inflicted.  Chinese newspapers denounce Treaty of Friendship between Vietnam and
new Cambodian Govt as significant step toward making Vietnam 'overlord' in
Indochina (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 53-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 22, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 2

LENGTH: 23 words

Chinese Communist Party circulates communique saying China should be prepared
for 'armed intervention' by USSR in support of Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 53-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 22, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 2

LENGTH: 59 words

Vietnam says Chinese forces have pushed 15 mi inside Vietnamese border to Cao
Bang and are massing for new wave of attacks.  Deputy Foreign Min Nguyen Co
Thach says situation along rest of battlefront is static, news conf.  Says
Chinese planes have not flown beyond invasion areas.  Hanoi remains calm.  Says
diplomatic relations are not yet cut (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 53-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 22, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

UN Security Council members await expected US request for meeting on situation
in SE Asia.  As China urges Amers to delay move, reptdly hinting that they soon
will withdraw their troops from Vietnam.  Eur and 3d World countries appear
increasingly fearful that delay might cause USSR to intervene militarily or risk
appearing weak.  Amer spokesman says US favors broad-based approach taken by
ASEAN member nations of appealing to all parties, without naming them, to cease
hostilities and withdraw all foreign forces from Indochina illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 53-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 22, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY CRAIG R WHITNEY

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 93 words

News analysis of current world tensions and their effects of US-Soviet detente.
Notes increasingly heated exchs between Washington and Moscow are rapidly
spoiling improvement in relations that was laboriously achieved in summer '78.
Finds both sides blaming each other for events over which neither has had any
real control.  Cites pol turmoil in Iran, Sino-Vietnamese conflict and abduction
and death of Amb Adolph Dubs in Afghanistan.  Says unless situation improves
SALT accord and Carter summit with Leonid Brezhnev will 'recede' into distant
future.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 53

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 22, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ROBIN HERMAN

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

Amer 'hawks' and 'doves' of Vietnam war debate of '60s and '70s, including top
Govt officials in Johnson and Nixon Adms, including Sen George McGovern, Eugene
McCarthy, Robert Shaplen, I F Stone, Graham A Martin, Sen John G Tower, J W
Fulbright, John R Froines, Dean Rusk, Henry Cabot Lodge, William E Colby, Cora
Weiss, Arthur M Schlesinger, Maxwell D Taylor, Walt W Rostow and William C
Westmoreland and former Prime Min Nguyen Cao Ky comment on invasion of Vietnam
by China.  Pors (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 53-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 22, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 121 words

Chinese forces renew their advance into Vietnam after pause to resupply troops,
and Vietnam begins to move up reinforcements, including regular units that had
been held in reserve.  Soldiers and vehicles carrying weapons, ammunition and
fuel jam main road northeast from Hanoi to Lang Son.  Vietnamese on Lang Son
highway include large numbers of regular troops and are hauling American
105-millimeter artillery captured during Vietnam War.  Vietnam says that it
inflicted 2,000 more casualties on Chinese, bringing total number reported
wounded or killed to 7,000.  Most analysts believe these figures are inflated.
USSR sends four TU-95 reconnaissance planes south past Japan to observe fighting
in Vietnam.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 53-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 22, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 102 words

Drew Middleton examines maneuvers of Chinese and Vietnamese armies.  Says that
there is no evidence of imminent Chinese slowdown or withdrawal from Vietnam.
Notes that military opinion sees protracted struggle, which may lead to Soviet
intervention.  Adds that diplomatic sources believe that USSR may intervene by
bombing or naval bombardment of Chinese ports.  States that ground fighting
between Chinese and Vietnamese appears to be assuming new pattern, with
strongest attacks by Chinese developing on their left or seaward flank.  Photo
of Vietnamese regional militia fighting Chinese in Lang Son (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 53

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 22, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD BURT

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 100 words

Marshall D Shulman, special assistant on Soviet affairs to Sec of State Cyrus R
Vance, discounts possibility of Soviet Union retaliating against China for its
attack on Vietnam unless conflict intensifies significantly.  However, US
intelligence officals believe that possible Soviet involvement may occur as a
direct strike on China's northern border or expansion of Soviet military support
to Vietnam.  Meanwhile, Carter Administration is seeking to convene UN Security
Council to discuss Indochina situation.  Is concerned that fighting may
jeopardize future US economic ties with China (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 53-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY VARTANIG G VARTAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 40 words

Dow industrial average falls 5.98 points to 828.57 on trading volume of 26.29
million shares.  Gambling issues score largest gains, in market decline
attributed to rising world oil prices and Vietnam-China conflict.  Market
profile (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              260 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY JOHN H ALLAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 46 words

Bond prices decline sharply with intensification of Vietnam-China fighting and
spread of oil price increases.  Treasury's new 2-year notes, which sold at
average yield of 9.85% on Feb 21, declined enough to raise their rate of return
to 9.89%.  Trading activity detailed (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              261 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 5

LENGTH: 46 words

Former Cypriot UN Amb Zenon Rossides lr lauds US Sen Jacob Javits's
recommendation that US enlist UN Security Council and weight of world opinion to
keep Sino-Vietnamese conflict 'within bounds'.  Notes, however, that UN
machinery does not operate as intended by Charter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 54

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              262 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

Ed holds Pres Carter's stated intention to keep US out of Sino-Vietnamese
conflict is 'prudent response'.  Notes US is deeply involved in Chinese efforts
to undermine Soviet influence in Asia.  Holds Soviet contention that US tacitly
encouraged Chinese invasion cannot be dismissed as 'mere paranoid propaganda'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 54

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              263 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 5

LENGTH: 49 words

USSR and other Communist countries withdraw from West Berlin Film Festival to
protest showing of film The Deer Hunter, about Vietnam War.  Prof Rostislav
Yurenyev, head of Soviet delegation, and W Berlin Mayor Dietrich Stobbe comment.
Festival dir Wolf Donner defends decision to show film.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              264 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 4

LENGTH: 84 words

USSR reptdly informs Western diplomats that it will not intervene militarily in
Sino-Vietnamese conflict as long as scale of hostilities remains limited.
Reptdly feels China has been sobered by its stern warning to halt invasion
'before it's too late'.  Japanese intelligence repts passage of 16,000ton Soviet
cruiser through Tsushima Strait and mobilization of Mongolian troops near
Chinese border.  Asian diplomats expect increased pressure by USSR on Vietnamese
for mil base at Cam Ranh Bay (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              265 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 120 words

Sino-Vietnamese border war seen delaying China's plans for econ modernization,
as well as affecting its ongoing diplomacy.  Tours of some areas bordering
Vietnam have been canceled.  Petroleum indus delegation, on visit to Japan to
conclude agreement to develop China's oil resources, cut short its visit.
Japanese speculate that Peking was reluctant to commit scarce financial reserves
before outcome of war was clear.  China also cancelled visits to NZ and
Australia by Deputy Prime Min Keng Piao.  French news agency rept indicated that
war may have negative influence on trend toward greater freedom since Communist
Party's Central Com has banned meetings, demonstrations and wall posters on mil
situation (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              266 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 104 words

Vietnamese forces, though successful in installing client Govt in Cambodia and
controlling key points in country's most heavily populated areas, faces
formidable difficulties that reptdly have complicated their position.  Reptdly
faces severe supply problem since Pol Pot guerrillas have cut most main
hwys--neutralizing Vietnamese strongpoints and cutting off access to principal
ports.  Reptdly have little food in countryside and have been forced to ship
rice to troops in major towns of Siem Reap and Battambang.  Analysts say
Vietnamese are attempting to set up civil adm in Cambodian prov centers.  Illus.
Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              267 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 139 words

Carter Adm to press ahead with visit of Treas Sec W Michael Blumenthal to China,
despite strong reservations by officials who fear trip might seem to
substantiate USSR's charges of Amer collusion in Chinese invasion of Vietnam.
Pres Carter contends that normalization of relations with Peking should not be
affected by invasion.  Blumenthal's visit seen by Adm as crucial in cementing
ties with China.  Blumenthal reptdly will discuss Amer-Chinese problems and will
not become involved in immediate issues of war and peace.  Amb Andrew Young, at
urging of Pres, will request meeting of UN Security Council to seek withdrawal
of all outside forces from Indochina.  Joint C/S Chmn Gen David C Jones says
basic concerns about Taiwan and security in region have been satisfied under
terms of normalization of relations with Peking (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              268 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

30-yr friendship and mutual-assistance treaty between China and USSR technically
remains in effect, despite falling out between both nations in '69 and despite
China's invasion of Vietnam--Soviet ally (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              269 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Article notes 30-yr friendship and mutual-assistance treaty between China and
USSR technically remains in effect, despite falling out between both nations in
'69 and despite China's invasion of Vietnam--Soviet ally (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              270 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 180 words

Heavy fighting continues in Vietnam as Chinese troops continue to push down Red
River valley from border town of Lao Cai (Vietnam), captured early in Chinese
attack.  Western analysts report USSR appears to have begun airlift of military
supplies to Vietnam.  Analysts also report Soviet delegation, presumably
military, has left Moscow (USSR) for Hanoi (Vietnam).  Chinese forces are
reported to have entered provincial capital Lang Son, but it is not known
whether they have captured it.  Analysts in Hong Kong now have revised upwards
to as many as 300,000 their estimate of number of Chinese troops deployed in
Vietnamese border area.  Chinese appear to be ready to continue calculated risk
that they can 'punish' Vietnam and end conflict before USSR intervenes.  Bold
strategy is said to be characteristic of Chinese Deputy Prime Minister Teng
Hsiao-ping.  Action of planes so far has been limited by both sides.  Analysts
report that if Chinese purpose of invasion was to divert Vietnamese troops from
in or near Cambodia they have not as yet succeeded.  Maps.  Photos (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              271 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 23, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY TERENCE SMITH

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 94 words

Pres Carter, addressing conference of editors and broadcasters, cautions against
overly simple interpretations of complex international crises, such as the
revolution in Iran and fighting in Indochina involving Vietnam, China and
Cambodia.  Also warns against viewing all international changes in terms of US
national interests.  Suggests that Egypt could become a stabilizing force in
protecting smaller nations in Middle East, but asserts that US will not provide
Egypt with billions of dollars worth of armaments which it has requested.  Photo
of Carter (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              272 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 48 words

US Treas Sec Blumenthal, en route to China for trade talks, says trip is not
related to Sino-Vietnamese conflict.  Says it could lay foundation for normal
econ relations with China.  Says there is no reason for USSR to interpret visit
as indicating US support for Chinese invasion (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 55-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              273 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DAVID K SHIPLER

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Top Soviet mil leaders Gens Marshal Dmitri Ustinov, Viktor G Kulikov and Nikolai
Ogarkov assail China's invasion of Vietnam, (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 55-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              274 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

US urges cease-fire in Indochina, UN Security Council.  Amb Andrew Young
recommends withdrawal of Chinese troops from Vietnam and Vietnamese forces from
Cambodia.  Urges immediate cease-fire, commitment by both parties to settle
differences peacefully and council pledge of internatl efforts toward lasting
settlement.  Seems to score USSR for vetoing earlier resolution calling for
Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 55-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              275 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 9 words

Vietnamese gunners illus during combat with Chinese.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 55-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              276 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Comment on news reptg on Chinese mil activity in Vietnam.  Notes that 2
countries' broadcasts and printed publications conform staunchly to Leninist
idea that news is branch of agitation and propaganda designed not to inform but
to advance govt's pol goals.  Techniques for covering war include satellite
photography and intercepting of radio and other communications (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 55-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              277 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

Drew Middleton mil analysis notes mil sources in Washington, Tokyo and NATO hq,
Brussels, believe Chinese Army has missed chance for quick and relatively cheap
victory in Vietnam, largely because irregular Vietnamese forces evaded major
encounter.  Notes weapon superiority of Vietnamese armed forces (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 55

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              278 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 24, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 161 words

Fighting continues near Vietnamese provincial capital of Lang Son as Chinese
army maintains its heavy pressure on Vietnamese defenders.  One Western analyst
says Lang Son probably has been captured by Chinese.  Chinese have as many as
70,000 troops near Lang Son ready for what knowledgeable US sources say may be
attempt to lure Vietnamese into decisive battle.  Vietnam reportedly is
continuing to move regular troops north toward border, which is held largely by
regional militia units.  Chinese and Vietnamese air forces reportedly are
continuing to avoid engaging each other.  At least one of four Soviet cargo
planes is assumed to have reached Hanoi (Vietnam), presumably with priority
military supplies.  News of fighting continues to be sketchy, with China
remaining silent and Vietnam issuing imprecise reports, mainly on number of
enemy troops killed.  No journalists or impartial military attaches have visited
front on either side.  Map.  Photos (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 55-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              279 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 104 words

Article discusses current US foreign-policy setbacks and subsequent questioning
of Pres Carter's leadership, especially by '80 Repub Pres contenders.  Finds
criticism not only involves differing perceptions of Pres performance, but
highlights contrasting notions of the elusive nature of leadership itself.  Says
Repub definition of leadership has 'macho' ring, since it plays to rising
frustration among Amers who feel post-Vietnam retreat and retrenchment has gone
far enough.Says Repubs feel they have Carter at bay since Amers hanker for
strong leader who is held in esteem and awe in world at large.  Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-3-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              280 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 53 words

Article assesses possible Chinese motives for invasion of Vietnam.  Cites
Chinese irritation over Hanoi's close ties with USSR, Chinese desire to relieve
pressure on beleaguered forces of ousted Pol Pot regime in Cambodia and China's
historical enmity with Vietnam and rivalry for dominance in SE Asia.  Drawing
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-3-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              281 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 74 words

Drew Middleton on Chinese invasion of Vietnam.  Holds fighting has exposed
fragility of mil balance in E Asia and conflict of great-power interests there.
Says conflict has illuminated Japan's mil dependence on US and S Korea's
important role in Asian mil equation.  Says significant fact that emerges from
conflict is that Chinese forces, despite superiority in manpower, are not strong
enough to win swift, easy triumph they sought (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              282 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Comment on Chinese invasion of Vietnam.  Possible Chinese objectives discussed.
Internatl implications noted.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-3-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              283 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Estimated 1,000 persons from 15 pol groups demonstrate near Chinese Mission to
UN, NYC, against invasion of Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              284 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD COWAN

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 109 words

US Treas Sec W Michael Blumenthal, arrives, Peking, to open trade negotiations
with China.  Carter Adm optimistic agreement can be reached on frozen Amer
assets so that will boost lending, investment and tourism.  Blumenthal cautions
issue of frozen assets may not be fully resolved.  US Foreign Claims Settlement
Comm certifies as valid $196.8 Million in claims by Amer individuals and corps
for property seized by China when Communists took power in '49.  US has frozen
approximately $80.5 Million in Chinese assets.  Blumenthal carries message from
Pres Carter to Chinese leaders, which is believed to call for restraint by China
in Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-4-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              285 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD COWAN

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 105 words

US Treas Sec W Michael Blumenthal arrives, Peking, to open negotiations that
Carter Adm hopes will help US to make up for lost time in developing trade with
China.  Adm is optimistic agreement can be reached with China on issue of frozen
Amer assets, which US Foreign Claims Settlement Comm estimates totals $196.8
Million.  US has blocked removal of $80.5 Million in Chinese assets.  Blumenthal
carries message from Pres Carter to Chinese leaders that is believed to call for
restraint by China in its attack on Vietnam.  China's potential as new mkt for
US goods discussed.  Blumenthal and Finance Min Chang Ching-fu illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-4-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              286 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY SCOTT STOKES

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 54 words

Japan asks China and Vietnam to find peaceful solution to conflict.  Prime Min
Masayoshi Ohira asks third countries, notably USSR, to exercise caution.  Japan,
in disapproval of Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia, has frozen $70 million in
annual aid, but its attitude toward China's invasion has not been made public
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              287 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 137 words

China's invasion of Vietnam raises grave new concerns within Carter Adm that
USSR might use conflict as pretext to establish naval facility at Cam Ranh Bay,
1 of most strategically situated natural ports in Western Pacific.  Adm
officials feel such eventuality should force US to consider establishment of
similar security relationship with China.  Feel establishment of base at Cam
Ranh Bay would constitute major shift in mil deployments in SE Asia by giving
USSR control over vital sea lanes between China, Japan and West.  Sen Gary Hart
says base would have major security implications.  Notes statements by Chinese
intelligence officials that Vietnamese are clearing area of civilians for its
conversion into Soviet base.  Cam Ranh Bay was key Amer base during Vietnam
War.Was built at cost of $146 million (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              288 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 72 words

UN Security Council resumes debate on Sino-Vietnamese conflict with opposing
resolutions by China and USSR condemning each other for spreading conflict.
USSR calls for arms embargo against Peking, withdrawal of Chinese forces and
payment of war reparations to Hanoi.  China counters with condemnation of
Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia.  Resolution by US, Norway, GB and Portugal
calling for immediate end to hostilities noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              289 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 23 words

Japanese news agency Kyodo says Sino-Vietnamese conflict will continue until
border with Vietnam is drawn to China's satisfaction (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              290 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 48 words

Amer officials dispute repts from Western analysts in Asia over fighting near
Lang Son between Chinese and Vietnamese forces.  US officials say Chinese forces
appear to have increased pressure against Vietnamese in area.  Disputes repts
that heavy fighting already has taken place (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              291 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ALAN DAWSON

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

US Reprs Elizabeth Holtzman and Billy Lee Evans and reporters visit
Sino-Vietnamese battlefront near Dung Ho as guests of Vietnamese.  Briefly come
under Chinese artillery fire (M)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-4-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              292 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Chinese press agency Hsinhua says China's troops charged fortified Vietnamese
positions to call of bugles and that some deliberately sacrificed themselves to
destroy Vietnamese mountaintop bunkers.  Describes clashes with Vietnamese.
Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-4-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              293 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

US Acting Sec Warren M Christopher meets with Chinese and Soviet ambs,
Washington.  Urges restraint for all sides in Indochina conflicts (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              294 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Mil analysis of quality of training of Chinese soldier.  Says current
Sino-Vietnamese conflict is expected to demonstrate to Chinese leaders whether
they have succeeded in bldg army in which enterprise and combat flexibility
balance shortages in modern arms.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 56

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              295 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 122 words

Western analysts report major battle between Chinese invaders and Vietnamese
regular troops appears to have begun around Lang Son (Vietnam), with similar
action beginning near Lao Cai (Vietnam).  Chinese press agency Hsinhua reports
that Chinese troops have captured Lao Cai.  US Reprs Elizabeth Holtzman and
Billy Lee Evans, who are on study mission in Vietnam, confirm arrival of Soviet
cargo planes in Hanoi (Vietnam).  Report Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Minister Phan
Hien told them war was no longer border conflict, but war of aggression that
Vietnam was prepared to resist.  Vietnamese officials report their tactics are
to draw Chinese into Vietnam in order to trap and outflank them.  Map.  Photo of
Chinese prisoners (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              296 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 52 words

Chinese Deputy Prime Min Wang Chen, commenting on invasion of Vietnam, says, in
Quotation of the Day: 'We are still in the process of teaching Vietnam a good
lesson.  Our action will be limited in scope and duration.  What we intend to do
is defend our border region and safeguard peace in the border region'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 57-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              297 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM L SAFIRE

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 74 words

W Safire on Pres Carter's foreign policy holds Amers need 'global tout sheet
that Pres has been unwilling to provide'.Says Carter has offered Orwellian theme
that 'Weakness is Strength'.  Discusses Tanzanian conflict with Uganda, Iranian
pol turmoil, Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia, Chinese invasion of Vietnam,
China's ideological rift with USSR and strife between Yemen and South Yemen.
Offers advice on which sides Amers should root for.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 57

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              298 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY DAVID K SHIPLER

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Article describes reaction among Soviet citizens to China's invasion of Vietnam
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 57-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              299 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD COWAN

SECTION: Page 8, Column 2

LENGTH: 52 words

US Treas Sec Blumenthal delivers message to Chinese mins from Pres Carter
warning that invasion of Vietnam carries risk of 'wider war' and that it may
turn public opinion against 'transgressor,' Peking banquet.  Finance Min Chang
Ching-fu says China only seeks restoration of peace along common border (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 57-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              300 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

T T B Koh, Singapore's Amb to UN, assails Vietnam and China, Security Council
session.  Urges halt to hostility and withdrawal of forces from Vietnam and
Cambodia.  Says nations of SE Asia must not become 'pawns' in rivalry between
great powers.  Is backed by Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, Japan and
Philippines.  USSR warns against resolution that does not specifically condemn
China and call for withdrawal of Chinese troops (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 57-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              301 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 107 words

Chinese Deputy Prime Min Wang Chen asserts Chinese forces attacking Vietnam will
not advance from mountainous frontier region down toward populous Red River
Delta or to Hanoi (Vietnam), at Peking banquet for British Minister of Finance
Eric Varley.  US Treasury Sec W Michael Blumenthal, at another banquet in
Peking, delivers message from Pres Carter warning that China's invasion of
Vietnam carries risk of 'wider wars' and could 'turn public opinion against the
transgressor'.  Warning prompts banquet host Chinese Foreign Min Chang Ching-fu
to restate China's contention that it does not want to capture any Vietnamese
territory (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 57-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              302 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 26, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 159 words

US officials report Vietnamese and Chinese infantry and artillery are locked in
series of battles at three Vietnamese frontier towns, with heaviest fighting at
Lang Son and lesser action at nearby Lao Cai and Cao Bang.  Vietnamese press
agency reports counterattacks by Vietnamese forces at Tan Lang in Lai Chau
Province, Thanh Thuy in Ha Tuyen Province and Lao Cai, but US analysts claim
difficulties of terrain make it doubtful that battles are on larger scale than
single battalion.  US and foreign analysts believe that logistical problems and
hardening of Vietnamese resistance have caused Chinese offensive to lose
momentum.  Meanwhile, Chinese Deputy Prime Min Wang Chen tells British reporters
in Peking (China) that China does not intend to widen its offensive into Red
River delta and that Chinese operations will be 'limited in scope and duration'.
Map of battle areas.  Photo of Vietnamese supply truck delivering ammunition to
troops (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 57-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              303 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HARRISON E SALISBURY

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 98 words

Harrison Salisbury article on Sino-Soviet enmity and pol and mil implications of
China's invasion of Vietnam.  Says threat of Sino-Soviet war has never been more
critical than at present.  Says China has taken calculated risk that
newly-cemented relationship with US will deter Soviet retaliation.  Says gamble
may succeed, but notes body of opinion within Soviet gen staff that war with
China is inevitable and that sooner it is fought and won the better.  Notes USSR
may be willing to gamble since it fears achievement of China's tech and mil
goals via close collaboration with US.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 58

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              304 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 39 words

Sen, 82-9, confirms Pres Carter's apptmt of Leonard Woodcock as Amb to China.
Sen Charles McC Mathias Jr, leader of brief protest, fears prompt confirmation
is too friendly a gesture in midst of China's invasion of Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 58-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              305 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 19 words

D Middleton mil analysis of Sino-Vietnamese conflict.  Discusses some options
open to Vietnamese.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 58

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              306 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY CRAIG R WHITNEY

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 70 words

Soviet Foreign Min Andrei A Gromyko says US-Soviet relations are being
obstructed by China but that Moscow will seek more stable pol climate in
relations with Washington, speech, Minsk.  Reiterates warning to China to
withdraw forces from Vietnam 'before it is too late'.  Speaks in electoral
constituency in preparation for elections to Supreme Soviet.  Is optimistic for
early conclusion of arms accord with US (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 58-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              307 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 60 words

US mil sources see Chinese invasion of Vietnam reaching climax soon with major
attack on Lang Son.  Capture of city seen having more propaganda than mil value.
Vietnamese defense remains stubborn.  US sources hold USSR must make some overt
move soon if it hopes to make pol capital with Vietnam and other Soviet allies.
Illus of captured Chinese troops (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 58-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              308 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 5

LENGTH: 47 words

US Repr Elizabeth Holtzman, returning to US after 3-day tour of Vietnam, says
Vietnamese officials may consider allowing Cambodia to establish nonaligned govt
under Prince Norodom Sihanouk as long as there are assurances that govt will not
be completely dominated by China (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 58-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              309 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 90 words

Repr Elizabeth Holtzman, after touring 4 SE Asian nations, charges that
Vietnamese officials have extorted at least $30 million from refugees fleeing
country in what she labels 'racket in human beings'.  Believes corruption
involving refugees has reached 'highest levels' of Govt.  Says officials denied
Govt collusion in refugees' exodus but admitted some corruption by local
officials, including accepting kickbacks.Says Deputy Foreign Min Pham Hien has
instituted new regulations to insure more orderly handling of refugee problem
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 58-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              310 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 90 words

Vietnam reports Chinese forces have advanced as much as 25 miles into Vietnamese
territory, but does not specify in which areas.  Western analysts in Thailand
report major fighting is continuing in area of Lang Son (Vietnam), 85 miles
northeast of Hanoi, with both sides massing near Lao Cai (Vietnam).  Japanese
news agency Kyodo reports Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping has stated
that China's action against Vietnam will end in less than 33 days.  Map of
battle areas.  Photos of Teng, Vietnamese soldiers and Chinese medic (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 58-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              311 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 28, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY ELIZABETH M FOWLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 52 words

Silver futures surge following news that Vietnamese forces had launched border
raids on China.  Gain on NY Commodity Exchange was 18.50 cents per ounce.  Gold
futures also increased, from $3 to $5 per ounce, while copper futures rose 2.3
Cents per pound and soybean prices increased 8 1/4 cents per bushel (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 59-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              312 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 28, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

Ed scores Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping's contention that Amers should be
grateful for China's invasion of Vietnam, and that invasion was aimed at halting
Vietnam's 'swashbuckling' in Indochina.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 59

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              313 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 28, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 98 words

UN Security Council is deadlocked on how to deal with conflict in Vietnam and
Cambodia.  GB urges council to issue 'clear call' for withdrawal of foreign
troops.  Council ends 4th day of deliberations without apparent progress toward
resolution.  US Amb Andrew Young denies allegations by Cuba and Vietnam that
invasion was encouraged by US.  Notes Pres Carter's open opposition to any
Chinese mil action.  Kuwaiti Amb Abdullah Yacoub Bishara sponsors resolution
calling for cease-fire and for Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim to mediate end to
conflicts.  Chinese delegate Amb Chen Chu illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 59-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              314 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 28, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Former Pres Gerald Ford says US should remain calm over Sino-Vietnamese conflict
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 59-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              315 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 28, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 19 words

Western analysts say Vietnam is rushing mil reinforcements to stem Chinese
pressure at Lang Son and Lao Cai (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 59-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              316 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 28, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 12 words

USSR reiterates warning to China to withdraw quickly from Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 59-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              317 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 28, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 17 words

Indian Prime Min Morarji Desai says India has asked Vietnam to withdraw forces
from Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 59-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              318 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 28, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 120 words

Chinese press agency Hsinhua reports Vietnamese Army has made two small attacks
into Chinese territory.  Notes Chinese forces drove back attacks in Ningming
County (Kwangsi Chuang Autonomous Region) and Malipo area of Yunnan Province.
Reports retreating Vietnamese left behind two Soviet-made missile launchers and
30 casualties.  US analysts believe Vietnam's willingness to attempt offensive
operations reflects rising tempo of war.  Chinese, Vietnamese and Japanese
sources report heaviest fighting in Vietnam around Lang Son, Cam Duong and Quang
Ninh Province.  US Government sources say two Soviet nuclear-powered submarines
and destroyer are moving south to join Soviet squadron in South China Sea.  Maps
(L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 59-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              319 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 28, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD COWAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 99 words

US Treasury Sec W Michael Blumenthal delivers message from Pres Carter to
China's leadership calling for withdrawal of troops from Vietnam because
invasion runs 'unwarranted' risks.  Meets with China's Deputy Prime Min Teng
Hsiao-ping, who has said that military action in Vietnam would be limited.Soviet
newspaper Pravda repeats USSR's warnings for China to withdraw or risk spread of
warfare.  Teng gives no indication when troop withdrawal will occur.  Alludes to
Vietnam as 'Cuba of the Orient,' saying that both Cuba and Vietnam seem to be
emboldened by their relations with USSR (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 59-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              320 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 1, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY MARJORIE HOUSEPIAN DOBKIN

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 20 words

Marjorie Housepian Dobkin lr scores stand taken by Walt Rostow, in Feb 22 int,
on US's late presence in SE Asia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 60

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              321 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 1, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

UN Security Council negotiations designed to produce call for cease-fire in
Vietnam and Cambodia are deadlocked because of conflicting USSR and Chinese
positions.  Council pres Abdulla Yaccoub Bishara cites irreconcilable
differences.  Members agree to consult privately in hope of breaking deadlock.
Members comment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 60-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              322 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 1, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 29 words

Vietnam demands immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all Chinese forces in
what appears to be rejection of renewed Chinese call for negotiations to settle
war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 60-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              323 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 1, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 18 words

E Ger press agency repts E Ger and Hungarian youths are ready to help Vietnamese
fight against Chinese (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 60-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              324 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 1, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD COWAN

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 151 words

Amer and Chinese liaison offices in Peking and Washington are elevated to
Embassy status as both countries complete restoration of full diplomatic ties.
Visiting US Treas Sec W Michael Blumenthal hoists Stars and Stripes in Peking in
ceremonies attended by high-ranking Chinese officials and Amer charge d'affaires
J Roy Stapleton.  Ceremonies described.  Blumenthal repts considerable progress
in trade talks, which have been overshadowed by Sino-Vietnamese conflict.  Meets
with Prime Min Hua Kuo-feng.  Says Hua informed him Chinese invasion of Vietnam
will be of limited scope and duration.  Says talks are not being affected by
conflict.  Repts substantial progress on question of estimated $200 million in
claims against China for property seized after Communists assumed power in '49.
Told Chinese officials that Adm will recommend that Cong allow China
most-favored-nation trading status (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 60-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              325 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 1, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

US is relying on intercepted radio messages and satellite photos to monitor
China-Vietnam war in absence of diplomatic relations with Vietnam and because of
lack of battlefield observers.  Work described (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 60-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              326 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 1, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 111 words

Fighting around Lang Son (Vietnam) is reported to be heavy.  Lang Son appears to
be key goal sought by invading Chinese troops.  Analysts do not agree as to when
Chinese withdrawal from Vietnam might occur.  USSR issues new warning to China
for immediate withdrawal of troops.  Soviet warning, coupled with statement by
Vietnam's Ambassador in Tokyo (Japan) that Chinese are preparing major
offensive, have revived speculation in Japan and US about possibility of Soviet
military intervention.  US Government sources say latest warnings to China are
worded more emphatically than earlier statements.  Photos of Vietnamese
civilians and Chinese tank crewman (M)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 60-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              327 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY SCOTT STOKES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 136 words

China notifies Japanese trading companies that it has not yet approved large
number of recent industrial plant and equipment contracts valued at about $2.9
Billion.  Nippon Steel Corp chmn Yoshihiro Inayama claims that notification does
not represent change in Chinese policy, but indicates that China needs more time
to consider deals.  Spokesmen for Mitsui and Mitsubishi Groups express concern
over Chinese move.  Japanese businessmen suspect there is connection between
China's invasion of Vietnam on Feb 17 and its 'go-slow' policy on industrial
contracts.  Note various signs of possible change in China's entire long-range
economic development program.  Reports of confusion in Japanese-Chinese trade
contribute to fall of 97.3 Points, equivalent to 13-point drop on Wall Street,
on Tokyo Stock Exchange (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 61-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              328 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY PETER WEISS

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 122 words

Peter Weiss (Inst for Policy Studies) article holds current Amer foreign policy
is characterized by theory of 'contributory negligence,' in which liability of
of defendant in cases of joint wrongdoing is determined by degree to which each
party is at fault.  Discusses past and present Amer actions that may be
responsible for current lack of influence over some internatl crises.  Queries
whether current situation in Cambodia, Vietnam and Iran would have been
different in absence of past Amer influence.  Says Pres Carter should examine
whether his 'evenhandedness' is not new way for US to stumble into foreign
policy that means less peace and fewer human rights for world and less true natl
security for Amers.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 61

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              329 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY JOHN BICKFORD

SECTION: Page 26, Column 5

LENGTH: 19 words

John Bickford lr holds domino theory is being played out in Chinese invasion,
but all are Communist dominoes (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 61

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              330 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 3

LENGTH: 25 words

Ed sees irony in Chinese invasion through Friendship Pass.Notes translation of
Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping means 'little peace' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 61

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              331 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE HABERMAN and ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

Wilfred Burchett, journalist who resigned from staff of The Guardian reptdly
because pub was not taking sides on Vietnam invasion of Cambodia, has joined
staff of These Times (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 61-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              332 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 2

LENGTH: 24 words

US Deputy State Sec Warren M Christopher says there is congruence in Indian and
US policies on Indochina conflicts, New Delhi news conf (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 61-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              333 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 27 words

Lull in fighting reptd after loss of Lang Son to Chinese troops.  Chinese
capture Mong Cai, on eastern border.  Mil actions assessed.  Casualty rept.  Map
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 61-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              334 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 57 words

USSR Prime Min Kosygin terms Chinese attack on Vietnam 'cynical and barbarous
act of internatl piracy'.  Says Vietnam can expect continued support from USSR
and its allies.  Calls on other countries to take sides.  Hints USSR will reduce
trade with Western countries selling arms to China.  Says upheaval in Cambodia
was irreversible (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 61-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              335 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

China, for 3rd time, urges joint talks to end dispute with Vietnam.  Deputy
Prime Min Li Xiannian says country is near achieving goal of teaching Vietnamese
that armed provocations do no good.  Comments on mil gains.  Sketchy battlefield
rept suggests Chinese forces may have broken through border militia's front
ranks.  Historic boundaries noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 61-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              336 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY STEVEN V ROBERTS

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 124 words

NY Times/CBS poll finds Amers are increasingly critical of Pres Carter's
handling of foreign policy, but that most oppose use of Amer troops to settle
internatl disputes.  Finds 30% of Amers back Carter's foreign policy, 68% backed
decision not to take sides in Iranian upheaval, 79% cared about Israeli-Egyptian
peace and that 61% cared about criticisms of Carter during recent Mex visit.
Finds 43% think fighting in Vietnam will lead to Sino-Soviet war and that 75%
are concerned that US would become involved.  Finds 53% of Amers blame
Vietnamese for current Sino-Vietnamese conflict, 44% accused USSR and 43%
mentioned China.  Finds 34% of Amers believe that Amer policy favors China and
that 10% think Russia is preferred.  Chart (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 61-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              337 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 29 words

US completes reestablishment of full diplomatic relations with China.  Pres
Carter accepts credentials of of Amb Chai Tse-min.  Warns invasion of Vietnam
threatens war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 61-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              338 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT E HOOD

SECTION: Page 22, Column 6

LENGTH: 12 words

Robert E Hood lr supports Pres Carter's policy in Iranand Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 62

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              339 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DAVID K SHIPLER

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 84 words

Assessment of mil options open to USSR in light of Chinese invasion of Vietnam.
Notes some mil men want to launch retaliatory strike across border or
pre-emptive strike that would head off China's modernization program.  Others
seek restraint.  Disadvantages of attacking China outlined.  Impression that US
is giving world of favoring China noted.  Article notes there seems to be
tendency in Moscow to view Chinese as operating on carefully calculated
timetable to upset Soviet-Amer relations (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 62

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              340 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 52 words

Drew Middleton mil analysis of Chinese invasion of Vietnam as fighting
apparently nears end.  Says last act, which may be capture of Lang Son, could be
exploited in propaganda as evidence of Chinese victory or it could be phased
withdrawal that would leave thousands more casualties.  Mil actions assessed
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 62

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              341 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 52 words

Drew Middleton mil analysis of Chinese invasion of Vietnam as fighting
apparently nears end.  Says last act, which may be capture of Lang Son, could be
exploited in propaganda as evidence of Chinese victory or it could be phased
withdrawal that would leave thousands more casualties.  Mil actions assessed
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 62

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              342 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 36 words

Vietnam, rejecting Chinese proposal, makes its own proposal for peace talks on
condition that Peking 1st withdraw troops.  Chinese troops tighten grip around
Lang Son, cutting major hwys.  Casualty rept.  Maps (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 62-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              343 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 79 words

Soviet Pres Brezhnev, in speech before Supreme Soviet elections, scores China
for 'unprecedentedly brazen bandit attack' on Vietnam but stops short of
pledging military action if Chinese troops are not withdrawn from Vietnam.
Wide-ranging address on domestic and foreign policy also takes more conciliatory
attitude toward US than has been appearing recently in Soviet press.  Indicates
that strategic arms accord with US is virtually concluded.  Photo of Brezhnev
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 62-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              344 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 5

LENGTH: 104 words

Univ of Wis Prof Edward Friedman article discusses Amer perception of China,
which he maintains is fashioned in ways that suit foreign-policy preferences.
Says current Amer perception of China as 'Coca-Cola bonanza' is 'as erroneous as
ever'.  Says Chinese remain supremely nationalistic and committed to their
independence.  Cites invasion of Vietnam as evidence of China's commitment to
'proud sovereignty' and to its refusal to be pushed around by anyone.  Warns
China's continuing nationalism and militarized power politics is threat to
everything.  Says China should end its mil actions against Vietnam immediately.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 63

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              345 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ELIAS M SCHWARZBART

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 10 words

Elias M Schwarzbart lr on invasion of Vietnam by China (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 63

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              346 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 85 words

Article on Vietnam's econ prospects in light of current 2-front war.  Analysts
say hopes of foreign aid and investment are significantly diminished.  Note
Sweden and Japan have warned Hanoi that continue aggression against Cambodia may
result in nonrenewal of aid programs when current allotments expire.  Australia
has discontinued assistance.  Chinese tech aid was terminated in July '78.  Econ
difficulties, both inherent and caused by new Govt, outlined.  Illus.  Graph of
exports and imports, '61-79 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-3-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              347 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MILTON FREUDENHEIM and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 28 words

Vietnamese admission, based on Repr Elizabeth Holtzman's charges that high Govt
officials have extorted monies from refugees to aid them in leaving country revd
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              348 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD BURT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 99 words

Article on 'triangular relationship' between US, China and USSR, which it
maintains is more dynamic and more complicated than ever before.  Notes, despite
deepseated Sino-Soviet rift that gives US degree of leverage, open conflict
between China and Russia tends to reduce Amer flexibility in maneuvering between
them.  Cites effects of current Chinese invasion of Vietnam.  Notes situation
jeopardized Carter Adm's strategy for deepening ties with Peking and concluding
arms treaty with USSR.  Notes uncertainty over whether Adm's policy of
evenhandedness can succeed for long.  Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-3-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              349 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 174 words

US Marine Corps officials say they plan to bring PFC Robert Russell Garwood,
captured by Vietcong in '65, to US.  Garwood reappeared in Feb '79 when he
slipped message to anonymous traveler in Hanoi asking that State Dept be
informed that he wished to return to US.  Garwood has been listed as POW for 13
1/2 yrs.  Marines say they are continuing investigation of charges from other
POWs that Garwood defected to enemy and served as armed guard in Vietcong prison
camps.  Vietnamese officials say Garwood switched allegiance 'as matter of
conscience' and remained behind voluntarily when other prisoners where released
after war.  US Govt officials including Col William B Clark, organizer of
Operation Homecoming at close of Amer mil involvement, Marine Lt Penny
Williamson, State Dept official Frank Sieverts and Reprs Gillespie V Montgomery
and Robert Dornan, and former POW David N Harker, comment.  Reprs Elizabeth
Holtzman and Billy Lee Evans tried unsuccessfully, during recent trip to
Vietnam, to meet with Garwood.  Garwood por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-4-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              350 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY CRAIG R WHITNEY

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 80 words

USSR Communist Party daily Pravda denies allegations that Govt has engaged in
secret negotiations with China and US to end fighting in Vietnam.  Diplomats in
Moscow are unaware of such repts and Western press and radio are not believed to
have carried repts about peace negotiations.  Western official says Brezhnev's
speech confirms US impressions that USSR and US are not far from new
arms-limitation treaty despite strains in relations over events in Iran and
Indochina (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              351 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 24 words

Cuban Amb to Mex Fernando Lopez Muino says country will assist Vietnam,
including sending troops, if necessary, Mex City daily El Sol int (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              352 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia is being overshadowed in press by Chinese
invasion of Vietnam.  Intelligence repts indicate about 150,000 invading
Vietnamese troops continue to be challenged throughout country by well-armed and
well-supplied remnants of Pol Pot army.  Sketchy repts from field indicate there
are no signs of Cambodian life and Vietnamese Army is only presence journalists
have seen (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-4-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              353 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 86 words

Western intelligence analysts report that Chinese forces have seized strategic
Vietnamese town Lang Son and are now willing to withdraw from Vietnam.  Japanese
news agency Kyodo quotes unidentified Chinese official as having said that
Central Committee's Military Commission has decided on cease-fire and
withdrawal.  Reuters reports no confirmation on troop withdrawal.  Western
analysts say both sides are preparing to claim victory.  Vietnamese put Chinese
casualties around Lang Son at 3,000 to 4,000.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              354 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 65 words

Fox Butterfield discusses similarities between '50 invasion of Dong Khe (
Vietnam) by Communist Vietminh forces and recent seizure of Dong Khe by Chinese
troops.  Notes that current military action between Chinese and Vietnamese has
engulfed almost all spots where French built their outposts along border.
Reviews events of Indochinese war of independence from France.  Map.  Photos
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              355 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 21 words

James McCarthy, Vietnam veteran, is arrested, Boston, after exchanging gunfire
with imaginary enemy on roof of apt house (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 64-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              356 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 30 words

Vietnam war veteran James McCarthy is released on his own recognizance, Boston,
Mass, after being arrested for exchanging gunfire with imaginary enemy on roof
of apt bldg (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 64-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              357 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 55 words

Immigration and Naturalization Service spokesman Verne Jervis notes service has
stopped keeping records of amnesty granted by Pres Carter for Vietnam-era draft
evaders and some deserters.  Agency figures show 381 persons returned to US from
Jan 21 '77, when Carter declared amnesty, until record-keeping stopped in June
'78 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 64-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              358 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 21 words

NYS Gov Carey says Vietnamese-Chinese conflict has had effect on plans to travel
to China to promote trade with state (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 64-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              359 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 58 words

Fighting breaks out on Thai border between loyalist troops and those supported
by Vietnam.  Thai Govt spokesman says Thai soldier is killed by stray bullet
when more than 200 Cambodian soldiers crossed border briefly during fighting.
Casualty rept.  More than 1,500 Cambodians have sought refuge in Thailand since
start of fighting.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 64-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              360 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

Analysis of UN handling of Sino-Vietnamese conflict says Security Council debate
is another example of practical limitations of orgn in dealing with conflicts
when parties involved do not wish to act.  Notes Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim's
assertion that govts approach UN only when they are losing militarily and need
to be bailed out, and more often than not show lack of 'pol will' to use orgn.
Debate among Third World and Asian delegates and its ineffectiveness in
resolving conflict discussed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 64

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              361 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 149 words

Agence-France Presse reports Chinese Deputy Prime Min Li Xiannian has warned
Vietnam that any attacks on Chinese army during or after China's withdrawal of
troops from Vietnam would force resumption of Chinese invasion.  Official
Vietnamese press agency denies recent reports of fall of Lang Son, Vietnamese
communications center whose retention by Chinese is viewed by US analysts as
crucial to an orderly withdrawal.Vietnamese radio broadcast exhorts Vietnamese
to continue fight against Chinese.  Continues to report escalation of Chinese
war effort, asserting that China is preparing for invasion of Laos that would
destroy 'solidarity between Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia'.  US intelligence
sources cannot confirm Vietnamese reports of further Chinese troop
concentrations.Confirm that China is preparing phased withdrawal of troops from
Vietnam.  Map of Vietnam shows Lang Son area (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 64-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              362 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY VARTANIG G VARTAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

Favorable news from overseas touches off strong Wall Street rally, sending Dow
Jones industrial average up 11.61 points to close at 827.36, second best
performance in '79.  Trading volume increased slightly to 25.69 million shares.
Analysts cite report that China would withdraw from Vietnam, hopes for resuming
stalled Middle East talks and resumption of oil shipments from Iran.  Trading in
some issues detailed.  Market profile (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 65-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              363 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY PAUL M ATANASIO

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6

LENGTH: 25 words

Paul M Atanasio lr on Feb 22 comments by some prominent Amer Vietnam war-era
hawks and doves on current Chinese invasion of Vietnam.  Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 65

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              364 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY CRAIG R WHITNEY

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 51 words

USSR press asserts that China failed to provoke mil conflict between USSR and US
by its invasion of Vietnam.  Notes there is no indication China is withdrawing
troops.  Accuses China of sending additional forces into Vietnam and menacing
Laos by concentrating troops in border area.  Casualty rept (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 65-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              365 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 26 words

Soviet, Vietnamese, Laotian and Afghan officials walk out of UN econ conference
to protest Cambodian speech condemning Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 65-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              366 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

Text of Chinese announcement of troops withdrawal from Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Text 65

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              367 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 74 words

Drew Middleton mil analysis holds Chinese operations illustrate classic mil
truth: mass without mobility cannot easily or swiftly achieve war aims.  Notes
Amer and W Eur experts agree that militarily invasion did not come up to
Peking's expectations.  Notes Politburo statement circulated in Peking that army
was not equipped to fight modern war.  Notes China's armed forces are scheduled
for modernization under Govt's present programs (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 65

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              368 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 107 words

New China News Agency announces that China has begun withdrawing its troops from
Vietnam.  Asserts Chinese troops have 'attained the goals set for them' in
17-day border war, but does not specify what goals were.  Vietnam makes no
immediate response to announcement.  Earlier, Vietnamese Communist newspaper
Nhan Dan charged that foreign press reports of impending Chinese withdrawal were
smokescreen to cover further Chinese military action.  Called for general
mobilization of Vietnamese troops.  Meanwhile, analysts in Vietnam report
continued fighting.  Map shows several provincial capitals in northern Vietnam
captured by Chinese (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 65-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              369 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 7, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY EUGENE V ROSTOW

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 132 words

Yale Univ Prof Eugene V Rostow lr comments on Feb 28 ed on Amer's post Vietnam
foreign policy, especially in light of Chinese invasion of Vietnam.  Concurs
that there is common law of internatl behavior that is codified in rules of UN
Charter regarding internatl use of force.  Says China's invasion of Vietnam is
not violation of Charter, but is limited and proportional act of self-defense in
behalf of Cambodia, which is victim of illegal armed attack by Vietnam.  Says
China's action stands on exactly same legal footing as NATO treaty and many
other Amer security arrangements, and that to characterize them as 'vigilantism'
and 'lynch law' is unfair.  Says when Security Councml is paralyzed, inherent
right of self-defense is only possible method for fulfilling principles of
Charter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 66

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              370 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 7, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 43 words

1 of largest Soviet tank landing ships is reptd off Japan headed south
accompanied by guided-missile destroyer.  Japanese mil repr says ship is making
1st southbound cruise by such a vessel off Japan since border war between China
and Vietnam on Feb 17 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 66-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              371 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 7, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 10 words

Illus of Chinese soldiers patrolling Lang Son, Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 66-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              372 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 7, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 122 words

Vietnam reports it is ready to negotiate with China if China carries out plan to
withdraw all its forces from Vietnam.Adds that Chinese attacks have continued
despite announcement of troops withdrawal.  Warns that war will continue if
China is using withdrawal announcement as subterfuge.  Diplomatic observers say
Vietnamese declaration indicates Vietnam is willing to allow Chinese forces to
withdraw without harassment.  Some diplomats think Chinese demonstrated ability
to control events by delivering punishing blow and withdrawing at proper time
from Vietnam.  Others see invasion as advantageous to Vietnamese who can contend
that they repelled Chinese with no Soviet assistance except deliveries and
supplies.  Photo (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 66-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              373 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 8, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 84 words

Article on decreased presence of US mil advisers in Thailand despite Pres
Carter's pledged support.  Notes that since withdrawal of nearly 50,000 US
troops from Thailand was completed in '75, donations of mil equipment have
dropped to nothing in '79 and low-interest sales credits have been sharply
curtailed by Carter Adm.  Notes number of officers at Joint US Mil Assistance
Group, Bangkok, has dropped from hundreds before end of Vietnam war to current
level of 35.  Thai mil strength noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 67-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              374 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 8, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 41 words

Vietnam charges Chinese troops are continuing 'barbarous acts' despite China's
announced troops withdrawal.  Hanoi radio broadcast declares Chinese troops have
been 'badly defeated' and that Peking was forced to announce retreat.  Illus (M)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 67-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              375 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY SEYMOUR M HERSH

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 83 words

Classified documents show CIA did far more surveillance within US during Vietnam
War than has been admitted in past.  Papers, released under Freedom of
Information Act request by Peace and Freedom Party, show that agency's Office of
Security kept files on 50,000 members of that party alone.  Morton H Halperin of
Center for Natl Securities Studies questions whether agency withheld or did not
rept all its surveillance to Cong at time 2 major probes were being conducted
into such activities (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 68-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              376 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

Chinese are withdrawing troops from Vietnam and destroying bridges, rail and
road facilities and other installations as they move toward border.  Analysts
say Vietnamese troops are not interfering with retreat.  Say major movement of
Vietnamese regular army troops is underway from south to aid provincial troops,
who bore brunt of fighting.  Impact on Vietnam econ noted.  Illus of Vietnamese
civilians digging trenches in downtown Hanoi.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 68-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              377 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 10, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 37 words

Vietnam says Chinese troops are still occupying Vietnamese territory 2 days
after 'withdrawal deadline'.  Chinese charge retreating troops are being
harassed by Vietnamese.  Illus of Chinese troops returning to China (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 69-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              378 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 10, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 207 words

Fed Judge Robert W Warren issues temporary restraining order prohibiting The
Progressive magazine from publishing article that, Govt contends, describes 'how
a hydrogen bomb works'.  Rules that although magazine argued 1st Amendment
forbids 'prior restraint' of publication such guarantee is 'not absolute and
unlimited'.  Says he found enough evidence that article could cause 'irreparable
harm' to temporarily restrain publication.  Order sets stage for 1st ct battle
over Govt authority to prohibit pub of material in newspapers or magazines since
it lost Pentagon papers case in '71.  Warren schedules hearing for Mar 16 on
Govt's request for permanent injunction to prohibit defendants, Progressive,
editor Erwin Knoll, managing editor Samuel H Day Jr, and article's author Howard
Morland from ever publishing it.  Warren, in brief statement before his ruling,
says contrary to NY Times case, 'you have specific expression of public policy'.
Thomas S Martin, Deputy Asst Atty Gen who presented Govt's case, says that when
editors of Progressive were asked to make some deletions so they would not
violate law, they refused.  Govt has not charged that Morland obtained any of
information he used in article illegally.  Knoll illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 69-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              379 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 11, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 55 words

Non-Communist ASEAN members--Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines and
Thailand--who have maintained discreet neutrality during Chinese invasion of
Vietnam, apparently are reasonably content with outcome although cautious about
future.  Singapore Straits Times ed comments on failure of USSR to directly aid
Hanoi (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 70-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              380 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 11, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MILT FREUDENHEIM and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 9 words

Chinese troops withdrawal from Vietnam revd (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 70-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              381 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 11, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 63 words

Peking's People's Daily repts 'major breach' in Chinese Community Party
leadership.  Describes 'struggles' affecting party.  Vietnam asserts problems
relate to internal opposition to Chinese invasion.  Contends anti-war feeling in
China forced Govt decision to withdraw forces.  Says dissident radio station in
China has been making clandestine broadcasts against war (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 70-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              382 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 11, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD C BURKS

SECTION: Section 22; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 102 words

Repr Hamilton Fish Jr, ranking Repub member of HR Subcom on Immigration and
Refugees, returning from Asian trip, says that in addition to approx 220,000
Vietnamese refugees in several Asian countries or on boats, there are 500,000 to
1 million others in Vietnam, mainly ethnic Chinese, who are potential refugees.
Sees heavy impact on US, particularly since Asian officials repeatedly told him
that refugee situation is 'Amer problem'.  Accuses Hanoi regime of operating
'financial racket' in forcing refugees to pay huge sums to be allowed to leave
country.  Will seek special legis to combat problem (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 70-4-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              383 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 11, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

Disabled Vietnam veteran Charles Pettibone holds guard hostage for 2 hrs in
Santa Rosa, Calif, office of Repr Don Clausen who he wanted to talk to.
Surrenders without struggle (S)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 70-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              384 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 12, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 65 words

China accuses USSR and Vietnamese pressure has caused Laos to expel Chinese
advisers.  Accuses Vietnam of tightening hold on Laos as part of drive to
dominate Indochina.  Vietnam accuses Chinese Deputy Prime Min Deng Xiao-ping of
forging 'devilish alliance' with US.  Fighting between Chinese and Vietnamese in
Vietnam continues.  Hanoi insists Chinese are not withdrawing troops (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 71-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              385 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 13, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 5

LENGTH: 26 words

US Marine PFC Robert Russell Garwood receives permission from Vietnamese
authorities to return to US.  Garwood stayed in Vietnam after having been POW
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 72-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              386 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 13, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

Chinese officials say that while most soldiers are being withdrawn from Vietnam,
some bases will be retained in areas from which Vietnamese have raided China.
Withdrawal continues, accompanied by light fighting.  Vietnam has accused
Chinese of moving border markers in Lang Son area.  Vietnam continues building
up forces in north.  Illus of Chinese soldiers returning from Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 72-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              387 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 14, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 37 words

Vietnam says troops have 'wiped out' 2 Chinese infantry battalions and 3
artillery cos in reptdly fierce fighting in northeastern Lang Son Prov.  Foreign
Min accuses Chinese of committing atrocities during invasion (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 73-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              388 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 14, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 86 words

Vietnam again accuses China of continued fighting despite Peking's announcement
that soldiers are withdrawing.  Asian and Western observers agree that fighting
is substantially over.  Says China gained mil advantage in war.  ASEAN
non-Communist Asian nations--Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia and
Singapore--view China as pol threat but see Vietnam as more direct mil menace in
area.  SE Asians tend toward view that USSR and Vietnam lost face in Chinese
invasion.  Illus of returning Chinese troops (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 73-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              389 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 14, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

Vietnam continues to accuse China of continued fighting despite Peking's
announcement that soldiers are withdrawing.  Asian and Western observers agree
that fighting is substantially over.  Says China gained mil advantage in war.
ASEAN non-Communist Asian nations--Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia
and Singapore view China as pol threat but see Vietnam as more direct mil menace
in area.  SE Asians tend toward view that USSR and Vietnam lost face in Chinese
invasion.  Illus of returning Chinese troops (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 73-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              390 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 15, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 4

LENGTH: 59 words

Econ and Soc Com for Asia and Pacific approves resolution defining areas of
cooperation in searching for oil and other mineral resources.  A Johannes of
Indonesia, project mgr for Coordinating Com on Offshore Prospecting, says
surveying has already begun in Andaman Sea off Thailand and is planned for
waters off Indonesia, Philippines and Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 74-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              391 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 15, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 140 words

Carter Adm, as result of Sino-Vietnamese conflict and increasing tensions
between Moscow and Peking, is formulating policy that seeks to confine any
conflicts in SE Asia to Communist nations.  Goals reptdly are to steer clear of
direct involvement in disputes between Communist nations and to insure that
conflicts do not engulf pro-Western countries.  Adm will pursue 'quarantine
strategy' designed to limit impact of Communist fighting on Amer security
interests in area.  To offer increased econ and mil assistance to non-Communist
nations in Asia and reaffirm earlier decision to remain power in region.
Effects of Chinese invasion of Vietnam on security concerns of neighboring
nations discussed.  Adm's decision to help Thailand in modernizing armed forces
and its suspension of withdrawal of Amer forces from S Korea noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 74-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              392 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 15, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 57 words

Chinese official says most of Chinese troops have pulled out of Vietnam and full
withdrawal will be complete in 'day or so'.  New China News Agency says
Vietnamese are launching harassing attacks and Chinese are retaliating.  Hanoi
says Chinese apparently plan to remain in some border areas.  China has called
for frontier readjustment (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 74-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              393 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 15, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 119 words

Soviet Prime Min Aleksei N Kosygin, during official visit to India, says Chinese
are lying when they say they are withdrawing forces from Vietnam.  Uses word
'proximity' rather than agreement in describing foreign policy aspects of
discussions with Indian Prime Min Morarji R Desai.  Desai and Kosygin sign
agreements calling for long-term program of commercial exchanges and scientific
and tech cooperation over next 10 to 15 yrs and setting guidelines for mutual
health and med programs.  Other officials sign agreement for exchanging Indian
rice for 600,000 tons of Soviet crude oil and 2-yr cultural exchange program to
include visits by sports teams and children's groups.  Illus of Kosygin and
Desai (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 74-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              394 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 15, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 57 words

Chinese official says most of Chinese troops have pulled out of Vietnam and full
withdrawal will be complete in 'day or so'.  New China News Agency says
Vietnamese are launching harassing attacks and Chinese are retaliating.  Hanoi
says Chinese apparently plan to remain in some border areas.  China has called
for frontier readjustment (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 74-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              395 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 16, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 6

LENGTH: 36 words

Carter Adm officials say they have no information indicating that Chinese troops
have crossed into Laos.  Describe repts of incursion as ploy by USSR to distract
attention from troops withdrawing from Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 75-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              396 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 16, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 6

LENGTH: 35 words

Carter Adm officials have no information indicating that Chinese troops have
crossed into Laos.  Describe repts of incursion as ploy by USSR to distract
attention from troops withdrawing from Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 75-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              397 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 16, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 58 words

US State Dept asks Vietnam for explanation for delay in returning former POW PFC
Robert Russell Garwood to US.  Internatl Red Cross spokesman says Garwood was to
have arrived in Bangkok, Thailand, Mar 15.  Garwood was listed as POW but US mil
is investigating his activities after charges by Congressman that he helped N
Vietnamese in war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 75-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              398 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 16, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 101 words

Soviet planes and ships begin major movement of Vietnamese troops and equipment
from Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, and Kompong Som, Cambodia, to northern Vietnam.
Transport supplements Vietnam's troop and equipment movements that began on Feb
17.  Hanoi radio reiterates Vietnamese offer to negotiate with China after
Chinese troops withdraw.  Chinese withdrawal continues.  Casualty rept.  Western
analysts rept large-scale Vietnamese conscription of young men and women is
underway.  Heavy fighting in Cambodia continues.  Vietnam apparently is shifting
inmates from re-educ camps to Cambodian front (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 75-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              399 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY MAX M DONER

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 28 words

Max M Doner lr supports stand taken in '60s and '70s by Vietnam war resisters in
light of recent invasion of Cambodia by Vietnam and Chinese invasion of Vietnam
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 76

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              400 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 120 words

Laos broadcasts protest against what it says are Chinese incursions and other
hostile activities.  Accuses China of not complying with earlier requests to
withdraw construction workers who have been bldg roads in northern area since
early '60s and Chinese technicians who it says are working in Laotian offices
and orgns.  Charges that instead of leaving, construction groups, which are
presumed to be mil-engineering units, have 'dug trenches in preparation for
combat'.  Diplomats view protest as further move by Laos toward
Soviet-Vietnamese camp, noting that charges that China is violating Laotian
territory and preparing invasion originated in USSR, were picked up by Vietnam
and only then repeated by Laos (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 76-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              401 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ROBIN HERMAN

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 54 words

USSR vetoes UN Security Council resolution formulated by Indonesia, Malaysia,
Philippines, Singapore and Thailand calling for end to Vietnam's armed
intervention in Cambodia and China's invasion of Vietnam.  Action is 2d time in
'78 that USSR has vetoed cease-fire resolution in SE Asia supported by council
majority (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 76-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              402 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD BURT

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 141 words

US intelligence sources rept USSR is conducting large-scale mil maneuvers near
its southern border with China.  Doubt mil forces will undertake invasion of
China in wake of Chinese invasion of Vietnam.  Suggest action may be aimed at
reminding Peking of Soviet mil strength along common border.  Defense Dept
officials rept Soviet aircraft carrier Minsk is traveling through S Atlantic
toward Cape of Good Hope.  Speculate carrier is aiming for Arabian Sea, where US
carrier Constellation is headed, before moving into Pacific.  US and USSR have
increased naval presence in area as result of fighting between Yemen and
Southern Yemen.  Amer naval aides confirm reconnaissance satellites spotted
large ship under construction at Severodvinsk naval shipyard.  Speculate vessel
could be Soviet Union's 1st nuclear-powered aircraft carrier (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 76-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              403 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 18, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MILT FREUDENHEIM and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

Chinese troops withdrawal from Vietnam and Laotian charges that Chinese troops
have crossed its border revd (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 77-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              404 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 18, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Chinese Deputy Prime Min Deng Xiaoping indicates that negotiations with Vietnam
over 2 countries' disputed border could begin within wk (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 77-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              405 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 18, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

Vietnamese Govt proposes that talks with China on restoring normal relations
begin Mar 23 at Hanoi or common border point.  Vietnamese Foreign Min Nguyen
Thinh stresses that all Chinese troops must be withdrawn before talks can begin.
Hanoi radio says China is still occupying many parts of Vietnam and accuses
Chinese troops of looting in 5 provs.  Vietnamese statement alleges China is
'intensifying acts of intervention' in Laotian internal affairs.  Laotian press
agency says up to 10,000 people attended rally in Vientiane as tension mounted
following reptd massing of Chinese troops along border (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 77-3-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              406 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 18, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 130 words

'black paper' issued in Cambodia some time ago confirms then-Pres Nixon's
assertion in '70 that Amer invasion of Cambodia was intended to strike at
Communist mil hq of S Vietnam.Document, issued in Phnom Penh by Govt of Prime
Min Pol Pot, was dedicated to theme that Vietnam is sworn enemy of Cambodian
revolution, not only now, when countries are at war, but throughout long period
when world viewed Vietnam and Cambodian Communists as allies in struggle against
US.  Cambodian revelations have particular relevance to Amers because invasion
of Cambodia and protests it provoked throughout US contributed to Nixon's
downfall.  Document provides evidenct that despite long history of deception
over Amer mil activities in Cambodia, not all of Nixon's contentions were false
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 77-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              407 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 18, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 28 words

UN Deputy High Comr for Refugees Dale S de Haan says flow of Vietnamese 'boat
people' should diminish now that UN and Vietnam have agreed on emigration
program (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 77-4-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              408 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 19, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A GUBERMAN

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 35 words

David A Guberman lr on Paul Atanasio's Mar 6 lr on US antiwar movement during
Vietnam war era.  Holds bulk of those opposing war did not want to see Amer
defeated but rather wanted to 'cleanse the flag' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 78

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              409 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 20, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ALFRED R RUBIN

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 62 words

Tufts Univ Prof Alfred R Rubin lr on Prof Eugene V Rostow's Mar 7 lr responding
to Feb 28 ed on Chinese intervention in Vietnam and Vietnamese invasion of
Cambodia.  Rubin, noting questions on common law of internatl behavior have not
been fully answered, holds it is not clear that Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia
was 'illegal' in light of humanitarian rules of law (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              410 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 20, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

China suggests talks on settling dispute with Vietnam begin about Mar 28 in
Hanoi, with further sessions rotating between Hanoi and Peking.  Vietnam has
suggested Mar 23 as beginning date.  Note sent by Chinese said Chinese side
should be led by Deputy Foreign Min Han Nianlong (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 79-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              411 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 23, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Vietnam accuses China of holding on to some Vietnamese territory in attempt to
provoke new war.  Concedes for 1st time that it suffered 'many difficulties and
losses' during invasion.  Says 19 border dists have been destroyed.  Foreign Min
Nguyen Tien says Chinese still are occupying 18 areas inside Vietnam, Hanoi
radio broadcast.  Accuses China of trying to change border by moving marker
posts into Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 82-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              412 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 23, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 156 words

Laotian Foreign Min aide Soubanh Srithirath acknowledges implicitly that
Vietnamese troops are stationed in Laos and have used country as base in
Cambodian invasion.  Cites Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation between both
countries as basis for stationing troops.  Affirms that Laos has supported
Cambodian insurgents fighting against Pol Pot loyalists.  Diplomatic and Govt
sources put number of Vietnamese troops in Laos at more than 30,000, of which
significant number are believed to have marched southward into Cambodia.
Soubanh says country has asked UN Secretary Gen Kurt Waldheim to take measures
to obtain withdrawal of Chinese troops that are in Laotian territory.  Says
force of 2,000 'reactionaries,' consisting of Pol Pot troops, ethnic Chinese
driven from Vietnam, Meo tribesmen of army set up by US CIA during Vietnam war,
and followers of Laotian rebel officer Kong Lee, have been gathered on border by
China (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 82-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              413 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 23, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 139 words

US Marine PFC Robert Russell Garwood arrives, Bangkok, Thailand, from Ho Chi
Minh City, Vietnam, Mar 22.  Garwood remained in Vietnam after ''73 release of
Amer POWs and has been listed as POW for past 13 1/2 yrs.  Other Amer prisoners
say he guarded them for Vietcong in POW camp and was informer.Andrew Antippas,
Amer Consul in Bangkok, boarded jet with messages from Garwood's NY atty Dermot
G Foley 'demanding' that he say nothing.  Garwood, in Hanoi conf with
journalists, contended he did not betray US but 'betrayed the involvement of the
US in Vietnam'.  Says he collaborated with Amers against involvement of US Govt
in Vietnam.  Is flown to Okinawa, home of 3d Marine Div, from which he
disappeared near Danang on Sept 28, 1965.  Garwood is expected to rejoin family
in US in few days.  Garwood and Antippas illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 82-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              414 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 24, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 25, Column 3

LENGTH: 113 words

Cos drilling for oil off Vietnam's coast are encountering numerous problems in
dealing with Vietnamese, ranging from red tape to lack of petroleum expertise.
Cos, from Canada, Italy and W Ger, have no US ties, since use of Amer equipment
or personnel is forbidden by US Trading with the Enemy Act.Amer-trained
Vietnamese have vanished, aparently becoming refugees, and Soviet-trained
technicians have little knowledge of offshore development.  Oil execs agree that
Vietnam is unlikely, under present circumstances, to achieve its goal of oil
self-sufficiency within a decade.  Map shows offshore tracts leased before and
after Communist takeover.  Drilling platform illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 83-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              415 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 24, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 81 words

US Defense Dept spokesman Capt Bob Bowen says Marine PFC Robert Russell Garwood,
accused of collaborating with enemy during Vietnam war, could be sentenced to
death if convicted on preliminary charges pending against him.  Garwood arrives
at US Navy base, Okinawa.  Preliminary charges are: desertion, communication,
corresponding or holding intercourse with enemy, misconduct as prisoner,
attempting to cause insubordination, disloyalty and refusal of duty, and
solicitation (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 83-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              416 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD K BETTS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

Article by Brookings Inst research assoc Richard K Betts on lessons US has
learned from Vietnam war experience.  Outlines stands taken by Presidents
Eisenhower, Truman, Kennedy and Johnson and possible reasons behind such
actions.  Holds lesson is: never commit massive conventional forces in civil war
on behalf of weak govt against disciplined revolutionaries with sanctuaries.
Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 84

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              417 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 25, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 63 words

China, contending there are no more Chinese troops in Vietnam, describes Hanoi's
charges that withdrawal is not complete as bad omen for early start of peace
talks.  Says border disputes exist but these should be settled through
negotiation.  Chinese say troops have been withdrawn to boundary line delimited
by treaties concluded between former Chinese and French Govts (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 84-4-

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              418 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 227 words

Former Laotian Prime Min Souvanna Phouma, now Govt adviser, says 10,000 to
15,000 civilian officials and mil officers who served under him have been
detained since Communists seized power in '75, int.  Despite his implication
that only corrupt officials have been deported, action was by all accounts
general, affecting all civil servants and soldiers from medium rank up.  Many
businessmen also have been banished.  Souvanna says they are living in rigorous
conditions and have been integrated into soc.  Family members who receive lrs
say almost all prisoners continue to be confined to camps in Vieng Say.  Some
medium-rank officials and those not associated with former Govt have returned,
but it widely believed that banishment is permanent for sr officials.  As many
as 250,000 Laotians have sought in refuge in Thailand and flow continues.  Reprs
of internatl and development orgns believe most of small class of educated
people either have been imprisoned or fled.  Souvanna says King Sisavang
Vatthana is in Vieng Say and former Queen is in old royal capital of Luang
Prabang.  Nothing is known about alleged contacts with former Maj Gen Vang Pao,
who commanded Amer-organized army of Meo tribesmen during fighting against N
Vietnam.  Vang Pao left for US in '75.  Souvanna appears to regret that US did
not press war in Indochina all the way (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 84-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              419 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 6

LENGTH: 41 words

Govt of routed Cambodian Prime Min Pol Pot, in statement believed to have been
broadcast from southern China, disavows all agreements signed by pro-Vietnamese
Govt of Heng Samrin, who has agreed to allow Vietnam to base troops in Cambodia
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 85-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              420 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 65 words

US Marine POW PFC Robert Russell Garwood arrives, Great Lakes Naval Training
Station, Chicago, proclaiming 'I love Amer'.  Mil legal counsel accompanying
Garwood, who remained behind when US prisoners were repatriated from Vietnam in
'73, and who faces charges including desertion, told him not to comment on
charges.  Garwood meets privately with family.  His father comments.  Illus (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 85-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              421 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 104 words

Rept by US Repr Les Aspin says US intelligence community made 'prescient
forecast' of Chinese invasion of Vietnam and did a good job of informing policy
makers of moves of Asian nations in recent crisis.  Commends CIA Dir Stansfield
Turner for encouraging publication of differing views in intelligence documents.
Rept is based on HR Intelligence subcom on oversight hearings conducted by
Aspin.  Notes intelligence experts tended to discount Vietnam's intention to
seize much of Cambodian territory and overestimated possibility that USSR would
take action against China in retaliation for its Vietnamese invasion (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 85-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              422 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

China allows foreign journalists to inspect camp for Vietnamese prisoners of war
about 60 mi from China-Vietnam border (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 85-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              423 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 2

LENGTH: 60 words

Vietnam accuses Chinese forces of shelling Vietnamese territory and taking new
positions 12 mi inside border.  USSR accuses China of escalating its
'provocations' against Laos.  China counters Hanoi allegations with charges that
Vietnam has continued to increase war mobilization and backed down from
agreement to hold talks about normalizing relations (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 85-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              424 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

US Atty Gen Griffin Bell advises Cong that he plans to approve immigration of
35,000 refugees from Vietnam and 25,000 Soviet refugees, most of them Jews
during next 6 mos.  Says he is proposing additional quota because immigration
authorization law will expire on Apr 30 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 86-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              425 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY JEAN THORAVAL

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 69 words

Agence France-Presse correspondent Jean Thoraval, visiting Vietnam on special
assignment, describes conditions in country following Chinese invasion.  Notes
damage is extensive and it is impossible to determine how much was caused by
Chinese troops during occupation or withdrawal, how much was deliberate and how
much was caused by Vietnamese troops as they attempted to regain Vietnamese
territory.  Illus (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 86-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              426 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 28, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY IVER PETERSON

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 62 words

Article on reaction of Greensburg, Ind, residents to return of US Marine POW PFC
Robert Russell Garwood, who faces charges of desertion and collaboration with
enemy during Vietnam war.  Greensburg residents, including many Amer Legion
members, are reserving judgment on Garwood's actions until facts are known.
Garwood's difficult childhood traced.  Illus.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 87-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              427 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 28, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 165 words

China's Liberation Army Daily says recent border war with Vietnam 'helped clear
away some erroneous ideas,' apparently including primacy Peking has attached to
Mao Zedong's doctrine of guerrilla warfare.  Newspaper did not refer by name to
Mao's concept of people's war, that men rather than weapons decide wars, but
Hong Kong analysts note that at no point during conflict did China mention Mao's
classic precepts on guerrilla fighting or contend that its troops in Vietnam
were applying them.  There is no indication that peace talks with Vietnam will
begin Mar 28, as Peking proposed 2 wks ago.  Each accuses the other of
obstructing negotiations.  Hanoi contends Chinese troops are still in country
and reiterates position that talks will not start until troops leave.  China
denies having soldiers in Vietnam.  Liberation Army Daily ed hints there is some
opposition to departing from Mao's mil thinking, as there evidently has been to
departing from his pol and econ policies (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 87-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              428 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 28, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JOHN FRASER

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Article describes treatment Chinese mil is giving to Vietnamese prisoners of
war, captured during recent China-Vietnam war, particularly treatment of female
soldiers.  Camp conditions described.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 87-79

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              429 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 29, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 3; Page 20, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Book Many Reasons Why: The American Involvement in Vietnam by Michael Charlton
and Anthony Moncrieff revd by Herbert Mitgang (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 88

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              430 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 29, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD BURT

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

Carter Adm officials express concern over arrival in Cam Ranh Bay, Vietnam, of
Soviet guided-missile cruiser, frigate and minesweeper.  Say it is 1st time
Soviet warships have visited facility, which was built by US in '60s.
Intelligence aides rept that USSR has begun construction of submarine base in
Cuba.  State Dept spokesman Hodding Carter 3d says USSR and Vietnam have been
warned about turning facility into Soviet base.  Carter Adm aides suggest Moscow
might have made naval access to Cam Ranh Bay its price for supporting Vietnam
during recent conflict with China.  Mil implications outlined (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 88-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              431 of 431 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 31, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 57 words

Justice Dept says it will not prosecute former Amb to S Vietnam Graham A Martin
on allegations that he mishandled top secret intelligence documents.  In Jan '78
NC State Police recovered Martin's car, which he had reptd stolen.  They
discovered many top secret files taken from Saigon embassy in car and scattered
about in nearby woods (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 90-79

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
