
                               1 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 1, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOAN M WEINER, ROBERT W MOTTA and ELIZABETH A NORTON

SECTION: Section 6; Page 46

LENGTH: 20 words

Joan M Weiner, Robert W Motta and Elizabeth A Norton letters replying to May 27
article on Vietnam veterans.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 18

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 1, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 21 words

Soviet Communist Party daily Pravda accuses China of creating problem of
Indochinese refugees to put pressure on Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 182-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 1, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 130 words

UN Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim invites 71 countries to meeting to help find new homes
for thousands of Vietnamese, Cambodian and Laotian refugees.  Session will be
held in Geneva beginning July 20, at ministerial level, with likelihood that US
State Sec Cyrus R Vance will represent US.  Singapore and Malaysia are expected
to voice concern that Vietnam will continue to encourage exodus of all 1.2
million ethnic Chinese.  No invitation has gone to Cambodia in order to avoid
controversy over which government is to represent country--former pro-China
regime of Pol Pot or new pro-Vietnam Government installed in January.  UN High
Commissioner for Refugees Poul Hartling says his office is caring for 405,000
refugees and minimal assistance is $10 million monthly.  Waldheim por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 182-4

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 1, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 159 words

Non-Communist members of Association of Southeast Asian Nations--Indonesia,
Thailand, Philippines, Malaysia and Singapore--announce formally that they will
not accept new Vietnamese refugees and castigate Vietnam for exodus.  Contend
they have right to repatriate all refugees.  Transit camps in area, which house
close to 300,000 refugees, are supported by UN High Commissioner for Refugees,
which cares for them on condition that they will not be repatriated against
their will.  Statement appears to be contradiction to UN position.  American
officials in Indonesia awaiting arrival of US Sec of State Cyrus Vance are
disappointed at hardened attitude.  Communique comes at urging of Singapore
Foreign Min Sinnathamby Rajaratnam.  Statement stops short of demanding
withdrawal of Vietnamese forces in Cambodia.  Calls on Vietnam to withdraw
troops from Thai-Cambodian frontier.  Calls on world to support Cambodia's right
to self-determination (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 182-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 2, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY STAUGHTON LYND

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 28 words

Staughton Lynd letter says that while he signed letter deploring human-rights
violations in Vietnam, he does not question his opposition to Vietnam War in
60's (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 18

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 3, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 175 words

US State Sec Cyrus R Vance apparently makes headway in persuading Association of
Southeast Asian Nations--Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and
Philippines--to soften new policy of barring new Indochinese refugees from
landing in their countries and of expelling those already in camps.  Vance, in
opening speech, says US strongly supports principle of temporary shelter and
asylum.  Joins statement by ministers condemning Vietnam as source of refugee
problem and urges international community to deal with it.  Says US has not been
able to persuade Vietnam to stop pressing ethnic Chinese population to leave
country.  American officials say Japanese offer to double its share of
contributions to UN High Commissioner for Refugees is expected to allow US to
decrease its share, substantial factor in view of expected doubling of American
refugee quota.  Vance says US recognizes neither Vietnamese-created Cambodian
Government of Pres Heng Samrin nor overthrown regime of Pol Pot.  Calls for
international relief program for Cambodia (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 184-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 5, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 4

LENGTH: 53 words

More than 1,000 ethnic Chinese from Vietnam smashed boats and swam to eastern
Malaysian shore in last 3 days, evading Government's ban on landings.  US
officials say Association of Southeast Asian Nations has agreed to consider
lifting ban on temporary asylum for refugees if resettlement program is speeded
up (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 186-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 5, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 4

LENGTH: 53 words

More than 1,000 ethnic Chinese from Vietnam smash boats and swim to eastern
Malaysian shore in last 3 days, evading Government's ban on landings.  US
officials say Association of Southeast Asian Nations has agreed to consider
lifting ban on temporary asylum for refugees if resettlement program is speeded
up (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 186-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 6, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Topics editorial notes participation in high school ROTC training is increasing
after loss of appeal during Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 18

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 6, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

Topics editorial notes participation in high school ROTC training is increasing
after loss appeal during Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 18

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 6, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Vietnam tells China it will remove troops from Cambodia and Laosonly when danger
it says China poses for Indochina is removed (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 187-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 6, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

Representatives of ANZUS defensive alliance, Australia, New Zealand and US, call
on Vietnam to resolve refugee problem, news conf, Canberra, Australia.  Say
international community must increase permanent resettlement opportunities for
refugees.  Australia indicates plans to raise refugees quota of 10,500 annually.
3 nations endorse appeal by Southeast Asian nations for withdrawal of Vietnamese
troops from Cambodian-Thai border.  Sec Vance says it is necessary to maintain
contacts with Vietnam in order to resolve problem in Cambodia (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 187-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 7, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 66 words

US hopes countries that have not accepted significant numbers of Indochinese
refugees will increase quotas substantially at coming Geneva conference.
Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia have urged Sec Vance to bring US influence to
bear on Vietnam to stop expelling ethnic Chinese.  Sources close to Vance say
several Southeast Asian countries are prepared to offer islands as refugee
centers (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 188-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 8, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY TOM WICKER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 6

LENGTH: 28 words

Tom Wicker notes ex-Pres Nixon's prediction of 'bloodbath' in Vietnam has not
come to pass, but says there is vast tide of human misery throughout Southeast
Asia (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 18

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 8, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOSEPH J SISCO

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 124 words

Article by former US Under Sec of State Joseph J Sisco on American foreign
policy.  Says US is projecting uncertain image abroad because of changing world
environment and diffusion of power and subsequent inability of US and USSR to
manage developments in volatile Third World nations or within their own
alliances.  Says US is in midst of developing policy of selective engagement in
more unpredictable world.  Says US strength abroad has been based in part on
demonstrated capacity to resolve domestic issues.  Says inability to deal
sensibly with energy and economy has shaken friends overseas and contributed to
picture of uncertainty.  Says there has been profound fragmentation of American
political system in aftermath of Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 18

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 8, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 80 words

Vietnam broadcast denies responsibility for refugee exodus and places all blame
on US and China.  Offers to cooperate with UN on organizing legal departures.
Responds to strong criticism by Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Philippines and
Singapore.  Vietnamese-backed Cambodian regime demands to be included in any
internatl discussion of situation.  UN Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim reptdly plans not
to invite Cambodians to Geneva conf on refugees, to avoid seating squabbles (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 189-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 32 words

Illus of George Kauffman, who was forced to abandon his plan to swim around
Manhattan twice in attempt to call attention to Vietnam veterans who were
exposed to defoliant Agent Orange (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 192-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Mark Pinsky comment on Vietnam war holds real American heroes of war, if there
are any, were civilians who, rather than serve, went to jail, went underground,
went into exile.  Says Americans can longer expect to fight automatically or to
support a 'bad war' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 19

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY MARK PINSKY

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

Mark Pinsky article on current feelings of guilt among liberals and others
regarding Vietnam veterans.  Holds contentions that veterans have been cheated
of their due, and that they have received only apathy and abuse instead of honor
and gratitude, are fallacious.  Says veterans went to Vietnam because they
wanted to and inflicted far more suffering on people of SE Asia than they as
group endured.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 19

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY SCOTT STOKES

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 139 words

Japanese official says Japan expects to allow fewer than 100 Indochinese
refugees to settle in Japan permanently despite its pledge to accept up to 500
refugees under expanded program announces 3 months ago.  Says Japan's lack of
experience in dealing with refugees and wish of refugees to settle elsewhere,
notably in US, are reasons numbers are small.  Japanese Government would like to
help on refugee problem by making its economic aid program for Vietnam
conditional on agreement by Hanoi Government to slow exodus of 'boat people'.
Foreign Ministry calls in Vietnamese Amb to Tokyo, Nguyen Giap, to brief him on
conference in Bali, Indonesia, last week.  Illus of Vietnamese refugees waiting
at Charles de Gaulle Airport, Paris, after arrival from Malaysia.  About 5,000
refugees are expected in France in coming weeks (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 192-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 11, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 34 words

Cuba's Vice Pres Carlos Rafael Rodriguez says Cuban soldiers would be willing to
defend Vietnam in event of another conflict with China.  Notes that there are no
Cuban troops in Vietnam at present (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 192-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 12, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JOSEPH B TREASTER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 3

LENGTH: 40 words

Maj Gen John D Lavelle, who retired after being relieved of his duties as
commander of US Air Force in Southeast Asia and being demoted for ordering
unauthorized air attacks against North Vietnam, dies at age 62.  Biography.
Portrait (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 19

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 12, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 139 words

Malaysian Government formally proposes establishment of holding centers in
Southeast Asia for all refugees from Vietnam under UN auspices.  Centers would
receive all boat people now in camps and any new arrivals.  Proposal is in line
with US statements by key members of Secretary of State Cyrus Vance's party
during recent meetings with regional leaders in Indonesia and Australia.
Southeast Asian nations' reluctance to admit Indochinese refugees is based
primarily on fear that they will be left with residue of unwanted people.  US
officials have told Malaysian Home Affairs Minister Tan Sri Ghazali bin Shafie,
plan's author, that US finds idea of establishing centers in US or US-controlled
territory--Guam--legally difficult and much more costly than setting up holding
centers in Southeast Asia.  Proposal outlined (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 193-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 12, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Vietnam says Chinese battalion of 1,500 soldiers struck more than 2 miles inside
Vietnamese territory in worst reported clash since border war earlier in 1979.
Chinese spokesman accuses Vietnamese of 'making provocations inside the Chinese
border' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 193-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 14, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 41 words

Vietnam voices hope that upcoming UN Econ and Soc Council meeting in Geneva will
achieve 'concrete and realistic solution' to Indochina refugee problem.
Representative Truong Quan Phan says success of conference is major concern of
Govt (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 195-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 15, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 15, Column 6

LENGTH: 57 words

Vietnamese refugees claim that those who wish to leave Vietnam are
systematically robbed of their 'escape capital' and that Hanoi Government's
departure program is not working because of official greed.  Governement changed
currency from old South Vietnamese piasters to new piasters, virtually wiping
out 90% of banked wealth in south (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 196-4

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 16, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 74 words

4,000 people, most of them Chinese-Americans, gather across from UN to protest
plight of Vietnamese 'boat people' and to appeal to UN, US and countries
neighboring Vietnam to rescue refugees.  Committee Against Genocide by Vietnam
organized march.  Among speakers are Stephen Cohen, deputy secretary for human
rights, who represented Pres Carter, Repr Elizabeth Holtzman and Bayard Rustin,
president of A Philip Randolph Institute.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 197-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 16, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM L SAFIRE

SECTION: Page 17, Column 5

LENGTH: 43 words

William Safires holds Vietnam's tactics at removing many of its citizens by boat
and letting them arrive in other nations as warring on nation's that accept
Vietnamese as bombing and costs of war had on other nations during height of
military conflict (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 19

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 16, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY CRAIG R WHITNEY

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

Vietnam's Deputy Foreign Min Hoang Bith Son acknowledges that acute economic
difficulties in Vietnam is reason why hundreds of thousands of people have fled
country, but denies that any have been forcibly expelled, interview in Hanoi
with Soviet press agency Tass official.  Is quoted as saying that Vietnam will
attend Geneva conference on refugees only if meeting takes up question of aid to
Vietnam and to Vietnamese refugees (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 197-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 17, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Editorial holds efforts to cut Congressional spending is resulting in series of
foreign policy setbacks since practical aid programs are threatened by
'senseless and impractical gestures'.  Cites amendment to prohibit International
Development Assn from using any US funds for aid to Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 19

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 17, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 101 words

Groups of Vietnam veterans, joined by scientists, public interest lawyers and
church organizations, announce formation of coalition to deal with unresolved
problem of Agent Orange.  Coalition is called National Veterans' Task Force on
Agent Orange.  Drs Steven and Jeanne Stellman of American Health Foundation
agree to develop extensive questionnaire to send to thousands of Vietnam
veterans who may have come in contact with defoliant when it was used to destroy
Vietnamese jungles decade ago.  Repr Bob Eckhardt has urged HEW Dept to study
effects of Agent Orange.  Veteran Ron DeYoung comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 198-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 19, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 5

LENGTH: 30 words

Illus of Max Cleland, head of Veterans Administration, during special service at
Washington Chapel in honor of prisoners of war that those still missing in
action in Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 200-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 20, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Mrs Chiang Kai-shek, in NY Times advertisement, condemns Vietnam for expelling
thousands of ethnic Chinese and calls on nations and individuals for help (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Advertisement 20

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 20, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

Vietnam, denouncing what it calls international campaign of 'lies and
calumnies,' warns that it will not tolerate cross-examination at special UN
conference on refugees opening July 20, Geneva (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 201-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 20, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 36 words

NJ Assembly passes bill to set up commission to compile data on Vietnam War
veterans who might have been exposed to Agent Orange.  Assemblyman Richard Van
Wagner says 250,000 New Jerseyans might be involved (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 201-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 20, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 19 words

Advertisement, appeal from Mme Chiang Kai-shek, scores mass expulsion of ethnic
Chinese from Vietnam.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Advertisement 20

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 21, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 159 words

Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min Phan Hien calls for airlifts and shipping services
to be set up to transport more Vietnamese refugees from temporary camps in
Southeast Asia to permanent asylum in Western countries.  Makes suggestions on
opening day of 65-nation conference on problem of Indochinese refugees.  Chinese
Deputy Foreign Min Zhang Wenjin ignores request of conference chairman Kurt
Waldheim to refrain from acrimonious debate and accuses Vietnam of exportation
of refugees.  Philippine Foreign Min Carlos P Romulo announces that Philippines
is ready to open refugee-processing center for 50,000 persons but only if
guarantees are given that refugees are temporary residents in Philippines.
Malaysian Home Affairs Min Muhammad Ghazali bin Shafie submits his country's
proposal to resume refugee admission for temporary asylum.  Indonesian Foreign
Min Mochtar Kusumaatmadja does not offer to open temporary refugee camps.  Phan
Hien photo (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 202-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 22, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 2

LENGTH: 10 words

Vietnam's Vice Pres Nguyen Luong Bang dies at age 75 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 20

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 22, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 3

LENGTH: 30 words

NY-NJ-Conn House roll-call vote on amendment that no American funds be used by
World Bank's International Development Association for aid to Vietnam, which
passed 291-122 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 203-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 22, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 57 words

UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim, in Quotation of Day announcing arrangement
with Vietnam to halt flow of refugees, says 'As a result of my consultations the
Government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam have authorized me to inform you
that for a reasonable period of time it will make every effort to stop illegal
departures' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 203-4

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 22, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 105 words

UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim announces that Vietnamese officials told him
they would try to stop flow of refugees from Vietnam for unspecified period.
Reports Hanoi agrees to cooperate in organizing orderly and safe departure of
persons leaving Vietnam.  Vice President Walter Mondale announces US program
that includes support for moratorium on expulsions by Vietnam.  Reports
President Carter ordered four ships from Military Sealift Command to South China
Sea to transport tens of thousands of refugees to processing centers and to
assist refugees at sea.  Photo of Mondale at conference on Indochinese refugees
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 203-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 23, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY BARBARA BASLER and ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

California Senate rejects Governor Edmund G Brown Jr's nomination of actress
Jane Fonda to State Arts Council because of her role as antiwar activist during
Vietnam war (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 204-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

Henry Kamm analysis of UN Indochina Refugees Conference, Geneva.  Notes many
refugee officials and delegates were dismayed by UN Secretary General Waldheim's
announcement that Vietnam would try to stem flow of refugees leaving country
'illegally'.  Notes one official contended that Waldheim should be last person
to abandon publicly such basic tenets of Universal Declaration of Rights of Man
as right to travel and that of choice of residence (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 20

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ARTHUR OCHS SULZBERGER JR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 107 words

US and Vietnam, after discussions with each other and United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, have agreed in principle to allow US consular
officers into Ho Chi Minh City to process people wishing to come into US.  First
to be considered under proposal are 5,000 Vietnamese whose names have already
been given to Vietnam by State Dept and who are considered qualified to come
into US as immigrants under family reunification program.  Most are fiances or
children of people already living in US.  Group does not include Vietnamese boat
people whom US has already agreed to accept as refugees at rate of 14,000 a
month this year (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 205-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 25, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 76 words

James Sterba chronicles voyage of Vietnam refugee boat number 0105 from Kien
Giang (Vietnam) to Pasir Bayat (Anamabas Islands).  Refugees began making
arrangements for trip Nov '78, left Vietnam April 4 '79 and arrived in Pasir
Bayat June 17 '79.  Boat was towed ashore in Malaysia after engine breakdown,
but ordered back to sea.  Thai pirates had robbed refugees of all valuables and
20 people died during course of trip.  Map of route and photo (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 206-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 27, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 2

LENGTH: 63 words

Editorial holds USSR currently finds itself in kind of 'messy' choices in
Afghanistan that once confronted US in Vietnam.  Says increase in Soviet
military assistance will 'add tinder' to insurgent nationalism and political
settlement would be unpalatable since it would mean confession to gross
misjudgment in attempting to impose Marxist govt on country that is 99% Moslem.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 20

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 27, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 23 words

Vietnam charges that 26,000 people were massacred over 3-year period at
Cambodian concentration camp set up by former Pol Pot regime (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 208-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 29, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 4

LENGTH: 53 words

Voice of Vietnam radio, quoting editorial in Vietnamese newspaper Nanh Dan,
describes US Navy's rescue of refugees as 'show-off' operation by which
President Carter hopes to distract American voters from other issues.  Says US
and China are responsible for 'outflow of refugees,' many of whom are ethnic
Chinese (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 210-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 30, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 6

LENGTH: 25 words

Vietnam denies allegations from Philippines that Vietnamese soldiers massacred
Vietnamese refugees whose boat ran aground near Spratly Islands (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 211-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 31, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

Yang Gongsu, deputy head of Chinese delegation to Vietnamese-Chinese peace
talks, Peking, says China sent 300,000 soldiers, including antiaircraft crews,
to Vietnam during Vietnam war.  Vietnamese dispute figures, saying number was
'tiny'.  Negotiations over border war earlier in year remain at impasse, with
each side accusing other of border provocations and preparations for new war.
China says soldiers did not enter South Vietnam, indicating that casualties, put
by Chinese at 1,000, were result of American air raids on North Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 212-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 1, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JOHN R GRIERSON

SECTION: Page 22, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

John R Grierson letter disputes Mark Pinsky's July 11 Op-Ed article contending
that Americans who fought in Vietnam war need 'revisionist absolution and
vindication'.  Drawing (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 21

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 2, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 90 words

Shipping industry officials in Hong Kong say merchant ships in South China Sea
are showing new willingness to help Vietnamese boat people now that Western
nations have adopted 'climate' for accepting them quickly without hindering
commerce.  Ships are again charting courses through seas near Vietnam that they
have been avoiding.  International Association of Independent Tanker Owners
chairman Y K Pao issues statement appealing to fellow shipowners to aid
refugees.  Aid given by US Navy and Air Force in recent weeks recalled (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 214-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 3, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY TOM BUCKLEY

SECTION: Section 3; Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Review by Tom Buckley of Robert Richter documentary film Vietnam: An American
Journey 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 21

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 3, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY CHARLOTTE ZABUSKY and JOAN MORRISON

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Joan Morrison and Charlotte Zabusky article recounts tale of Vietnamese refugee
woman who escaped Vietnam and resettled in US (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 21

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 3, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 106 words

Australia's Prime Min Malcolm Fraser urges heads of Commonwealth governments to
play more courageous role in helping promote international economic recovery,
address, Commonwealth conference, Lusaka, Zambia.  Complains that other
countries were mere spectators when US, Japan and other industrialized nations
of Europe held their economic conferences.  Criticizes Vietnam, suggesting it is
in collusion with Soviet Union in effort to 'destabilize' Southeast Asia.  Notes
Australia's decision not to aid Vietnam.  Leaders discuss plight of Uganda.
Ugandan Pres Godfrey Binaisa says 26,000 more Tanzanian troops will leave soon
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 215-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 3, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 33 words

Vietnam Foreign Ministry demands end to US 7th Fleet search for refugee boats in
South China Sea.  Contends activity is aimed at 'encouraging and inciting the
illegal departure of Vietnamese' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 215-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 4, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY NHU TRAN TUONG

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Tran Tuong Nhu letter scores William Safire's article suggesting US punish
Vietnam for treatment of refugees through economic sanctions (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 21

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 4, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 159 words

China has nearly completed series of agreements with foreign oil companies for
comprehensive seismic surveys of offshore oil reserves.  US companies involved
are Mobil, Exxon, Texaco, Standard Oil (Calif), Arco, Phillips and consortium of
Standard Oil (Ind), Cities Service, Pennzoil and Union Oil.French, British and
Japanese consortiums also have blocks of offshore area to survey.  Areas range
from Gulf of Tonkin through South and East China Seas to Bohai Bay and include
some waters that might be contested by Vietnam.  China indicates it will invite
bids for exploration and development in mid '81.  Oil industry sources note that
although bidding will be be open to all firms, firms which did geophysical
surveying should have advantage.  Indicate oil will not flow until late '80s.
Believe China may adopt Brazilian contracting system, which entails supplying
domestic needs first.  Map shows surveying areas for different oil companies
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 216-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 5, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 2

LENGTH: 15 words

China accuses Vietnam of more armed border provocations in last 10 days of July
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 217-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 5, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 38 words

US Congressmen hear accounts of Communist persecution from refugees who escaped
Vietnam, tour of Hong Kong refugee camp.  Representative Robert F Drinan accuses
Vietnam of committing large-scale human rights violations (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 217-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 6, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY JOHN F THOMAS

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 38 words

John F Thomas letter on recent Stephen S Rosenfeld article on refugee exodus
from Vietnam.  Notes UN Conference on Indochina refugees did not reach solution
on how to deal with refugees and Vietnam's attitude toward them (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 21

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 6, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

Vietnamese newspaper Nhan Dan acknowledges that China sent thousands of troops
to fight US soldiers during Vietnam war, but says Peking had no right now to
make Vietnamese policy (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 218-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 6, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

Vietnam confirms that National Assembly Deputy Chairman Hoang Van Hoan has
defected to China.  Vietnam News Agency says he slipped away during stopover at
Karachi airport on July 5 while on flight to Berlin (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 218-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 6, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

US Navy Rear Admiral Ernest E Tissot, commander of task force cruising South
China Sea in search of disabled refugee boats, says flow of boat people fleeing
Vietnam seems to have dropped considerably.  Says only 1 of more than 130 boats
that task force made contact with on August 4 was carrying refugees, despite
contentions by Vietnam that presence of US task force was encouraging people to
leave (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 218-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 7, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY THACH NGUYEN CO

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 50 words

Vietnamese Acting Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, in Quotation of Day
discussing relations with US, says, 'I think they would like to arrange
normalization with China and normalization with Vietnam, and the China card
prevailed above the normalization of Vietnam.  This is my assessment' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 219-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 7, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 55 words

Vietnam cancels scheduled visit by 9-man delegation from US House led by
Representative Benjamin S Rosenthal.  Group is touring Southeast Asia to study
refugee problems.  Vietnamese apparently are upset by statement by
Representative Robert F Drinan that 'new economic zones' in Vietnam amounted to
'concentration camps' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 219-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 7, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY SEYMOUR M HERSH

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 107 words

Vietnam's Sec of State for Foreign Affairs Nguyen Co Thach claims, in interview,
that Vietnam and US reached full agreement on normalizing their relations during
secret talks in NYC in Sept '78, after Vietnam dropped its demand that US agree
to major aid commitment before normalization.  Contends, however, that Carter
Administration failed to follow through and instead announced recognition of
China.  Maintains he and US negotiators had settled such matters as size of
diplomatic missions and who would head them.  Thinks US would have liked to
normalize relations with China and Vietnam, but China prevailed.  Portrait of
Thach (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 21

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 8, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 115 words

Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Minister Phan Hien, in cablegram, reinvites US
Congressional delegation, including Repr Robert F Drinan, to Hanoi to discuss
refugee situation day after it barred delegation because Drinan accused Hanoi of
human-rights violations.  Drinan, had said so-called new economic zones were
really 'concentration camps,' adding that Vietnam was 'engaged in one of the
most fundamental violations of human rights that we have seen in this century'.
Reversal of decision reportedly came after Vietnamese Government received
message from US Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs
Richard C Holbrooke, suggesting that new invitation be extended (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 220-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 9, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY PETER W RODINO JR

SECTION: Page 21, Column 5

LENGTH: 74 words

Article by Repr Peter W Rodino Jr, who presided over Nixon impeachment hearings
as chairman of House Judiciary Committee, claims nation is still suffering from
Watergate trauma because nation focused on an individual, Pres Nixon, rather
than on deeper question of whether constitutional system of government would
survive.  Says current political alienation in America can be traced to
Watergate, Vietnam war, inflation and energy crisis (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 22

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 9, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

China confirms that Hoang Van Hoan, deputy chairman of Vietnamese National
Assembly, is living in Peking after defecting from Vietnam in July (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 221-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 9, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

US Congressional delegation arrives, Hanoi, to begin talks about refugee crisis
after Vietnam lifts ban imposed because of Representative Robert F Drinan's
harsh criticism of Vietnam's human rights policies (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 221-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 9, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY SEYMOUR M HERSH

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 148 words

Seymour M Hersh article describes economic problems in Vietnam, particularly
those resulting from exodus of skilled ethnic Chinese workers.  Notes nation is
facing major 'brain drain' because of exodus and there have been serious
setbacks in day-to-day operations of bureaucracy.  Notes economy is stagnant,
with little manufacturing and little foreign-trade revenue, inflation has
created 100% price increases over last 18 months for some basic consumer goods,
millions of tons of food are being imported to meet minimum food needs with much
of that now being diverted to famine-stricken Cambodia, most Western nations,
shocked by refugee situation, have cut aid programs in retaliation, war with
China and Cambodia's Pol Pot regime have thrown Vietnamese planning programs
into disarray, transportation systems are antiquated and housing is dilapidated
and inadequate.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 221-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 10, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY FRANK MCCARTHY

SECTION: Page 24, Column 5

LENGTH: 42 words

Agent Orange Victims International president Frank McCarthy letter on July 20
letter from Lt Gen Paul W Myers, Air Force Surgeon General.  Disputes Myers'
claim that Ranch Hand members, Vietnam veterans, are not suffering from Agent
Orange poisoning.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 22

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 10, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 121 words

Vietnamese acting Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach says Hanoi and US are holding
talks on normalizing relations, statement to US Congressional delegation
visiting Hanoi.  Declines to say where talks are taking place or who is involved
in them.  Says Vietnam hopes that trade embargo with Vietnam imposed by US would
not be renewed when it expires in September.  Reportedly told US Congressional
delegation that there are still million ethnic Chinese waiting to leave Vietnam.
Says one issue that could be discussed with US is that of allowing American
planes to take out legal refugees.  Deputy Foreign Min Hoang Bich Son says
Government authorities have captured 4,000 people who have tried to leave
country illegally (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 222-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 10, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY SEYMOUR M HERSH

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 106 words

Seymour M Hersh article describes thriving black market in Ho Chi Minh City,
Vietnam.  Notes that during visit to city it seemed clear that Vietnamese
Government is unchallenged otherwise in its control of life in city.  Notes
virtually all of old Saigon's private shops and restaurants are closed,
nightclubs and bars are gone and office buildings that once housed American and
South Vietnamese military missions now serve as Government offices.  Notes there
is heavy emphasis on mass education and ending illiteracy.  Notes those who seem
to be suffering most under new regime are those who did well during US presence.
Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 222-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 10, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 120 words

Hoang Van Hoan, former Vietnam National Assembly deputy chairman and comrade of
late Ho Chi Min, holds press conference in Peking (China) after defecting from
Vietnam.  Calls Vietnam's treatment of ethnic Chinese worse than Hitler's
treatment of the Jews.  Scorns Vietnam for becoming economically, politically
and militarily subservient to a foreign power.  Disapproves of Vietnam's drift
from China to pursue stronger ties with USSR.  Criticizes Vietnamese Communist
Party leaders for mishandling post-war recovery.  National Assembly expelled
Hoan and proposed he be tried for treason.  Hoan's defection is expected to
weigh heavily on delicate tripartite relationship among Vietnam, China and USSR.
Hoan photo (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 222-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 11, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 2

LENGTH: 46 words

US Representative Andy Ireland, member of delegation visiting Southeast Asian
nations to discuss refugees, believes refugee issue and possibility that missing
American soldiers are still alive in Indochina will delay normalization of
relations between US and Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 223-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 11, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD BURT

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

Pres Carter is undecided about whether to approve Defense Sec Brown's
appointment of Robert W Komer as Under Secretary for Policy because of Komer's
identification with unsuccessful American policies in Vietnam war.  He was in
charge of Johnson Adm's pacification program in late 60's.  Komer illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 223-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 12, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JANE BLANKSTEEN

SECTION: Section 11; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 24 words

Article on Ai-Linh Huynh and children, ethnic Chinese refugees who escaped by
boat from Vietnam and now live in Morristown, NJ.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 224-4

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 12, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 64 words

Vietnam reportedly told US Representative Lester L Wolff that Vietnam would
allow US planes to fly to Ho Chi Minh City at any time to pick up 258 refugees
who are awaiting reunification with families in US.  Says Vietnam will permit
American military representatives to visit Hanoi periodically to seek
information on Americans still listed as missing in action from Vietnam war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 224-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 12, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 77 words

US State Department officials say US never sought to have separate American
consular office in Vietnam but rather to send 1 or 2 Americans into Vietnam on
UN passports to work in UN High Commissioner for Refugees' office.  Says they
would be American consular officers, because under existing US law, they would
be only ones allowed to stamp American visas into passports.  Purpose of
officers would be expedite departure of Vietnamese with relatives in US (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 224-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 12, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 48 words

Correction on July 1 article that erroneously identified last Roman Catholic
cardinals to be named by a Pope 'in pectore' and year in which they were chosen.
Notes Joseph Marie Cardinal Trin Nhu Khue of Vietnam and Frantisek Cardinal
Tomasek of Czechoslovakia were so named in '76.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 224-4

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 12, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 105 words

Vietnamese Min Nguyen Co Thach, hosting American Congressional delegation headed
by Repr Lester L Wolff, raises doubts over US hopes of sending consular
officials to Ho Chi Minh City (Vietnam) to screen thousands of US emigration
requests by Vietnamese citizens.  Declares so long as US refuses to 'normalize
relations' with Vietnam, no American consuls will be allowed.  Says only
American staff members of UN High Commission for Refugees will be allowed.  Move
is seen as attempt to impress legislators and journalists with importance
Vietnam attaches to its relations with US.  Photo of refugees in Bangkok
(Thailand) (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 224-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 13, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY SEYMOUR M HERSH

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 55 words

Article on Tin Sang, non-Communist newpaper that publishes in Ho Chi Minh City.
Editor Ngo Cong Duc comments on his return from exile to Saigon on May 29, 1975,
1 month after Communist takeover of city.  Notes that more critical news has
been published under current Government than under regime of Nguyen Van Thieu.
Por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 225-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 13, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

US Congressional delegation returning from visit to Hanoi, Vietnam, reportedly
made progress on issues delaying establishment of diplomatic relations.
Representative Lester L Wolff comments on talks, news conference.  Wolff says
progress was achieved on Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia, refugee question and
Americans still listed as missing in action in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.
Wolff and Vietnamese Foreign Affairs Minister Nguyen Co Thach illus (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 225-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 14, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY SEYMOUR M HERSH

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 23 words

Seymour M Hersh article describes life in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam and in 'new
economic zones' established by Government.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 226-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 15, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 5

LENGTH: 24 words

USSR newspaper Sovetskaya Kultura criticizes Joan Baez's published open letter
denouncing Communist Vietnam for human rights violations (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 227-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 15, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 36 words

New China News Agency reports Vietnam launched several border raids into China
during week of August 5 and bombarded Chinese territory with artillery fire.
Says 1 civilian was wounded.  Incidents outlined (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 227-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 15, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 111 words

Vietnam and China end 10th round of talks on normalization of relations, Peking,
with each side accusing the other of carrying out irrelevant propaganda campaign
and continuing provocations and war preparations along border.  Both sides agree
to meet again in Peking.  While numbers of border incidents reported by each
side appear to have risen again to levels similar to those earlier in 1979,
there are few apparent signs that China is preparing for another Vietnam
invasion.China has said that it may have to invade Vietnam again if Vietnam does
not stop border provocations, withdraw from Cambodia and Laos, and stop
expelling ethnic Chinese.  Illus (M) .

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 227-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 16, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 2

LENGTH: 67 words

Federal District Judge George Pratt rules that EPA, not courts, should be 1st to
make decision on such 'allegedly serious environmental hazards' as herbicide
Agent Orange.  Sets hearing for Oct 3 on damage suit brought by Vietnam veterans
who say they were harmed by exposure to chemical.  Defendants are Dow Chemical
Co, Hercules Inc, Diamond Shamrock, Monsanto Co and North American Philips (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 228-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 16, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE HABERMAN and ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

David S Fine, anti-Vietnam War activist sentenced to 7-yr prison term for '70
bombing at University of Wisconsin that resulted in death of 1 man, is freed
after serving 3 years.  Dwight and Karelton Armstrong are still in prison and
Leo Burt, who was also implicated in bombing incident, is still at large (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 228-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 16, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 100 words

Entertainment industry is sharply divided over separate disputes involving
political views of Jane Fonda and Vanessa Redgrave.  Many people are offended at
decision to cast Redgrave, outspoken defendor of Palestinians and staunch
anti-Zionist, as Jewish survivor of Nazi death camp in TV movie.  Furor began in
July when California Legislature rejected Gov Edmund G Brown Jr's nomination of
Fonda to State Arts Council because of her opposition to US involvement in
Vietnam War.Producer Robert Radnitz says disputes have divided industry.TV
producer Bud Yorkin and Rabbi Marvin Hier comment.  (M)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 228-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 17, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT S BROWNE

SECTION: Page 24, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

Robert S Browne, program officer of US AID mission in Cambodia and Vietnam,
'55-61, letter scores apparent apathy of US Government toward plight of
Indochinese people who are starving.  Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 22

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 17, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 108 words

Carter Adm officials say Amb to UN Andrew Young had to resign because he misled
Govt about his meeting with PLO representative Zehdi Labib Terzi.  Young, in
interview with Atlanta Constitution reporter Andrew Alexander, says US should
establish diplomatic relations with Vietnam.  Says US bears responsibility for
Indochinese refugees because of its refusal to recognize Vietnam and its bombing
of food-producing areas during war.  Opposes Carter Adm's decision to build $30
billion MX missile system and to increase military spending.  Says US should end
its economic embargo of Cuba despite presence of Cuban troops in Angola and
Ethiopia.  (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 229-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 18, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 168 words

Vietnamese State Secretary for Foreign Affairs Nguyen Co Thach says Vietnam
continues to hold without trial several thousand people in 're-education' camps
and does so largely for their own protection, interview.  Says Vietnam has
released more than 90% of political prisoners who were arrested for their
military or civilian roles in former South Vietnamese Government.  Says
Government has continued to incarcerate only 'criminals'.  Repeats contention
that there was no 'blood bath' as expected following '75 Communist victory.
Says Government has practiced policy of clemency.  Sources hold many
intellectuals have also been imprisoned without charges since '78.  People
released from camps who later fled country describe them as grim and primitive
places in jungle.  Thach, commenting on 'new economic zones' to which many city
dwellers have been consigned, contends Government has supplied settlers with
food.  Concedes that standard of living is low, but assures settlers of refusing
to work (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 23

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 19, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 57 words

Article describes stoic attitude of Lang Son, Vietnam, residents, who have gone
through decades of war with various countries and factions.  Notes deep
pessimism is evident in conversations about likelihood of renewed war with
China.  Notes once-flourishing town of 50,000 now lies in ruins as result of
recent war with China.  Map (M) .

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 231-6

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 20, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 177 words

Dr Ton That Tung, Vietnam's most renowned physician, says 'whole generation will
bear the stigmata all their lives' because Vietnamese people do not have enough
to eat, interview.  Tung, speaking in presence of Foreign Ministry officials,
expresses mounting concern over nationwide malnutrition.  Notes that while
nutrition was always problem during decades of war, it is worse since China cut
off its aid, including great quantities of food, in 1978.  Reports of
malnutrition were also obtained from foreign residents who employ Vietnamese and
from foreign teachers, who say that after 2 hours, their students seem incapable
of absorbing instruction.  Other officials say Vietnam is headed for another
year of serious food shortages but that people can easily tighten their belts
and even share meager rations with famine-stricken Cambodia.  Tung emphasizes
that continued malnutrition has left urban population in particular in state of
low resistance to all infectious diseases.  Notes scarcity of animal proteins
and high cost of food on private market (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 232-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 21, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 64 words

Rev Joseph E Lowery, SCLC head, meets with PLO representative, signaling that
SCLC has taken another controversial step into a political area outside its
traditional civil rights concerns.  Meeting recalls actions of SCLC's first
president, Dr Martin Luther King Jr, who widened organization's concerns in
mid-60's when he publicly opposed war in Vietnam as immoral and when he.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 233-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 21, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 191 words

Expectation of renewed attack by China is common theme in conversations with
Vietnamese officials and public.  Renewed campaign to persuade US to 'normalize'
relations with Vietnam appears to be closely associated with fear, although
Vietnamese officials deny it.  Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, in extensive
interview on foreign policy, paints somber picture of Chinese aggression.  Says
China is carrying on subversive activity among Laotian mountain tribes,
continues to use Cambodia as anti-Vietnamese front by sending supplies daily to
deposed Pol Pot forces by way of Thailand and accuses China of fomenting
subversion inside Vietnam by using ethnic Chinese as 'fifth column'.  Cites Ho
Chi Minh City as particular point of Chinese activity.  Says that if China had
not cut off large-scale aid to Vietnam in '78, Vietnamese Government would not
have joined Comecon, economic association of Soviet bloc.  Says Vietnam
concluded friendship and cooperation treaty with USSR in November '78 only after
China concentrated troops in preparation for invasion of Vietnam and Pol Pot
regime in Cambodia began taking similar border action (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 23

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 22, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE HABERMAN and ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4, Column 2

LENGTH: 46 words

Nguyen Cao Minh, nephew of former Prime Minister of South Vietnam Nguyen Cao Ky,
is among number of Vietnamese boat refugees who were rescued recently by Italian
vessels.  Minh says he left Vietnam June 18 on fishing boat after bribing
officials with $2,000 in gold (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 234-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 23, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 84 words

Cambodian Prince Norodom Sihanouk, in 'open letter' to conference of nonaligned
countries to be held in Cuba, asks that Cambodian seat be left vacant.
Cambodian representation is issue because Cuba supports Vietnam's claim that
country should be represented by regime installed after Vietnamese invasion.
Sihanouk argues that deposed Pol Pot regime should legitimately hold seat
because it is still recognized by UN.Sihanouk is seeking to mobilize Cambodian
exiles in support of a new regime (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 235-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 26, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 140 words

US Vice Pres Walter Mondale arrives, Peking, on August 25 for week-long visit.
Is greeted by Deputy Prime Min Deng Xiaoping.  Aides discount report by Sen
Henry M Jackson that Chinese officials are unhappy over lack of substantive
progress in relations between both nations, especially carrying out of mutual
trade agreement.  Note Adm has sent 7 Cabinet-level missions to China over past
8 months, that joint commission has been established to coordinate transfer of
technology and that progress has been made in other areas.  Mondale is expected
to discuss range of problems, including lessening of tensions between North and
South Korea, as well as policies toward Vietnam and exodus of Vietnamese
refugees.  Some highlights of Mondale's trip noted.  Illus with wife, Deng
Xiaoping and other Chinese officials on arrival in Peking (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 238-5

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 27, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY GINIGER

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 163 words

Leading jurists, politicians and civil servants from 21 nations gather at
Campobello Island, New Brunswick, Canada, where they urge world to accept peace
as a human right.  Delegates are members of International Inst of Human Rights.
Conference, in final document, affirms right to peace among 'third generation'
of human rights, but avoids precise definition of right that would include right
of individual to refuse military service if it constitutes threat to peace and
to join with others across national boundaries and zones of conflict to oppose
military preparations beyond needs of self defense.  Soviet delegate Samuel Zivs
says conscientious objectors who fled US to avoid Vietnam War were less
effective than those who demonstrated opposition to war within US.  Delegates
also voice strong support for proposed SALT accord.  Soviet delegate Grigory
Tunkin illus with US Sen John Glenn and Japanese and Danish delegates Shigeru
Oda and Ole Espersen respectively (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 239-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 29, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 192 words

1st planeload of what UN and Red Cross officials hope will become steady flow of
relief to Cambodia will leave Bangkok, Thailand, during week of August 26.
Diplomats report that no active negotiations appear to be under way to alleviate
Cambodia's fundamental problem of generalized famine.  22-ton cargo will consist
of medical supplies and powered milk and sugar for children.  Some mimeograph
equipment for possible restoration of education will also be carried.  Cost of
aid program is estimated at $100 million for 6 months.  No firm pledges of funds
have been received for joint UNICEF-Red Cross program or in response to request
for vast quantities of food aid that Heng Samrin Government submitted to UN
World Food Program representative in Hanoi, Vietnam.  Diplomats are discouraged
by general inaction of potential donors and such international figures as UN
Secretary General Kurt Waldheim on broad relief program for all Cambodians.
Swedish Government, increasingly pessimistic over possibility of mounting
international rescue operation in face of apathy and political maneuvering, is
considering independent action to deliver food (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 241-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 29, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 111 words

Vice Pres Mondale ends two days of official talks with Chinese leaders in
Peking.  Asserts new friendship is not directed against another country.
Announces that Communist Party Chairman Hua Guofeng has accepted Pres Carter's
invitation to visit US in '80 and that Carter would visit China.  Reports he
will officially open US consulate in Canton later in week.  Asserts US does not
anticipate 'military relationship' with China.  Agrees with Chinese officials
that 'puppet government' installed by Vietnam in Cambodia is not supportable.
Signs expanded cultural exchange agreement and protocol under which US will help
China develop hydroelectric power (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 241-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 30, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 47 words

US Navy plane cites about 10 people believed to be Vietnamese refugees clinging
to pieces of wood in South China Sea and drops them food, water and rubber raft.
Also aides boatload of 25 Vietnamese refugees.  Danish merchant ship Anna Maersk
rescues 76 refugees near Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 242-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 30, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 47 words

US Navy plane sites about 10 people believed to be Vietnamese refugees clinging
to pieces of wood in South China Sea and drops them food, water and rubber raft.
Also aides boatload of 25 Vietnamese refugees.  Danish merchant ship Anna Maersk
rescues 76 refugees near Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 242-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 30, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

China, accusing Vietnam of 'regional hegemonism,' says Vietnam has 200,000
troops in Cambodia and demands their immediate withdrawal.  Makes demands at
11th round of talks with Vietnamese on border dispute (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 242-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 1, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 120 words

Cuba presses efforts to keep delegates of ousted Cambodian Govt of Pol Pot out
of conference as Khieu Samphan, President in Pol Pot Adm, arrives in Havana.
Samphan is taken to isolated beach resort and prevented from communicating with
press or other delegates.  Efforts seen as test case for Cuba's attempt to bring
nonaligned movement closer to Soviet orbit.  Vietnamese Foreign Min Nguyen Co
Thach defends Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia.  Urges acceptance of Heng Samrin
Adm.  Charges Sri Lanka, Singapore and Yugoslavia with attempts to promote
'American imperialism and Chinese hegemonism' in Indochina.  All 3 nations back
seating of Pol Pot regime.  Cuba and Singapore clash verbally over Cambodian
issue (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 244-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 2, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

Article on accelerated search for oil and gas beneath South China Sea and
conflicting territorial claims of Vietnam, China, Philippines and Taiwan.  Map
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 245-5

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 3, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 119 words

China turns to UN for financial help in resettling some of 251,000 refugees,
mostly ethnic Chinese, from Vietnam who have entered China during last 15
months.  Chinese officials have told refugees that they are free to emigrate to
third countries if such countries will accept them.  Beihai, China, officials
say most refugees want to remain in China permanently.  Some reportedly hope to
return eventually to Vietnam.Officials believe Vietnam will again expel ethnic
Chinese as soon as international indignation over previous expulsions subside.
Government is also seeking UN aid to help resettle about 22,000 refugees in
Guangxi Zhuang region who have been living in temporary shelters for more than
year (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 246-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY WALLACE TURNER

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 187 words

Tran Qui Than, former Saigon banker now living in Berkeley, Calif, is central
figure in effort to gain access to millions of dollars in Vietnamese assets
frozen by US Government.Than's claim is for minor part of total, but he is
plaintiff in case in which Government's right to freeze assets is being tested.
Than has lost 1st round but has appealed.  US Supreme Court will ultimately be
asked to decide issues.  If Than prevails, huge sums now blocked in accounts
could be opened to other claimants.  US Treasury froze assets of individuals,
partnerships and corporations chartered in Vietnam as well as former Government
of Vietnam on April 30, 1975, when Communists overtook country.  Individuals and
partnerships who controlled money on deposit in US were able to get it released
when they arrived in US.  About $100 million in Government and corporate funds
are still blocked.  Office of Foreign Assets Control Acting Director Stanley L
Sommerfield comments.  Than, native of Saigon, organized Dong Phuong Bank in
1968 in Saigon, which became 2d largest bank in Saigon with $25 million in
deposits.  Than por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 247-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 4, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 3

LENGTH: 48 words

China marks 10th anniversary of death of Vietnamese leader Ho Chi Minh by
recalling his warm friendship with Zhou Enlai and suggesting that he was
betrayed by present Hanoi officials.  New China News Agency notes Ho Chi Minh
always stressed close links between Vietnam and China (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 247-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 5, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

Article on plight of ethnic Chinese living in Vietnam, some for as long as 30
years, who are returning to China.  Notes Vietnamese Government told 7,000
ethnic Chinese living on Po Wan Island to leave country by April 1978 or they
would be moved to 'new economic zones' in interior of Vietnam.  Some who have
returned to China comment on change.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 248-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 6, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 91 words

US House of Representatives votes to increase American aid for Indochinese
refugees by $207 million.  Criticizes other nations for not doing more to aid
refugees.  Rejects any American funds for indirect aid to Vietnam, Cambodia or
Laos, or direct aid for Panama except for medical supplies and food.  Critics of
amendment, sponsored by Repr C W Bill Young, say it could have major impact on
international lending institutions and American participation in them.
Representatives Richard Nolan, Ronald V Dellums and Robert E Bauman comment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 249-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 7, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 136 words

HR approves foreign aid appropriations bill containing $7.7 Billion for fiscal
'80, $1.4 Billion less than Carter Administration sought.  Bill cuts funds to
IBRD to $163.1 Million from $1.025 billion Carter sought.  Bars international
financial institutions from using US funds to aid Vietnam, Cuba, Cambodia, Laos,
Angola and Central African Empire because of widespread human rights violations
in these nations.  Administration argued move would endanger US participation in
institutions.  Bill includes added $207 million Carter sought to help resettle
Indochinese refugees.  Money will be used to increase US immigration quota to
14,000 a month, for rescuing refugees at sea and to pay US share of
international refugee care efforts.  Bill bans direct aid to Panama, except for
medical supplies and food (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 250-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 7, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY ALAN RIDING

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 195 words

Daniel Ortega Saavedra, member of 5-member Junta of National Reconstruction in
Nicaragua, appeals to conference of third world nations, Havana, Cuba, for
'disinterested help' to rebuild country's devastated economy.  Details
Nicaragua's new foreign policy, notably support for liberation movements around
world.  Insists that Sandinist revolution does not seek alignments and scoffs at
press reports that Nicaragua's recent recognition of new Cambodian Government of
Heng Samrin means Nicaragua has aligned itself with Soviet bloc.  Dispute over
representation of Cambodia continues to dominate behind-the-scenes discussions,
with Cuba leading fight to seat Heng Samrin Government and moderate regimes
heatedly opposing this on ground that Heng Samrin was installed by force by
Vietnam.  Argument erupts in conference's political commission after Cuban
Foreign Min Isidoro Malmierca cuts off debate on Cambodian question.  Delegates
from India and Singapore protest Cuban ruling.  Tanzania's Pres Julius K
Nyerere, Pakistan's Pres Gen Mohammed Zia-ul-Haq and India's Foreign Min Shyam
Nandan Mishra comment.  Illus of Pres Castro and Syria's Pres Hafez al-Assad
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 250-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 9, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 6

LENGTH: 31 words

Veterans Adm Admr Max Cleland says Air Force will conduct major study on health
of 1,200 veterans who were involved in spraying of Agent Orange to defoliate
jungles in Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 252-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 9, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Page 26, Column 5

LENGTH: 117 words

Article on financial problems threatening groups aiding Vietnam veterans.  At
least 1/3 of 200 local, regional and national organizations serving Vietnam
veterans lost their financing in '78 and ceased to exist.  Many veterans feel
groups are indispensable if they are to overcome unexplained health problems,
nagging unemployment and poor adjustment to civilian life.  Major task is to
obtain answers to questions regarding Agent Orange, herbicide used in
defoliation of Vietnamese jungles that has been linked to series of serious
medical and mental problems.  Vietnam Veterans in America executive director
Bobby Mukler and Agent Orange Victims International president Frank Mccarthy
comment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 252-5

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 11, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 98 words

Article describes difficulties some ethnic Chinese, resettled in China from
Vietnam, face in adjusting to new life.  Notes majority of 27,000 peasant
farmers living in Yunnan Province are adjusting well but number of others,
mostly those from urban areas of Vietnam, are unwilling or unable to adjust.
Notes that unlike other Asian nations, China has set no conditions or limits on
number of Vietnamese refugees it will accept.  Notes that in 2 years China has
accepted 251,000 refugees, more than any other nation, and has offered permanent
homes to all who want to stay.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 254-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 11, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Article on plight of Hoang Quoc Bao, ethnic Chinese living in Vietnam, who
joined North Vietnamese Army in 1970 and recently was forced by Vietnamese
Government to return to China (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 254-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 12, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 107 words

Editorial on plight of Cambodian refugees who are fleeing to Thailand.  Notes
about 60,000 Cambodians are massed along Thai border hoping to get across.
Notes they are fleeing because of famine and outbreak of new fighting between
Pol Pot and Heng Samrin regimes.  Notes reports that population of Cambodia may
have declined from 8 million to 4 million as result of Vietnam war spreading to
Cambodia decade ago and Pol Pot's 'demonic rule'.  Urges US and other nations to
find new ways to help starving Cambodians.  Suggests US apply pressure to
persuade China and USSR to collaborate in enlisting help of rival Cambodian
factions (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 25

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 13, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 219 words

Assessment of famine conditions in Cambodia and political obstacles to
international relief effort to aid those starving.  Notes that Pol Pot regime,
no longer in control, continues to be recognized by many nations, but not USSR
or US.  Pol Pot authorities and Chinese sponsors have opposed any channeling of
aid via Vietnam and Heng Samrin regime on ground that it would constitute
implicit recognition of new government and recognition of continued Vietnamese
occupation.  Heng Samrin authorities have insisted on full control over relief
supplies.  US is willing to aid rescue operation regardless of politics while
proclaiming its view that neither regime represents Cambodian people.  UN
Secretary General Kurt Waldheim has proposed no major initiatives.  Reportedly
has pleaded sensitive nature of any issue involving USSR and China on opposite
sides and neutrality of his office.  USSR reportedly has limited activities to
shipments, aside from supplying arms to Vietnamese forces, of food and medical
supplies that are inadequate.  Vietnamese provinces have been assigned
responsibility for aiding 1 Cambodian province each, but contributions are
symbolic because of Vietnam's own food shortages.  UNICEF and International Red
Cross are only world organizations actively pursuing major relief effort (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 25

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 14, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY GEORGE D EGGERS JR

SECTION: Page 24, Column 4

LENGTH: 50 words

Brig Gen George D Eggers Jr letter disputes James Andrew Marks's Sept 3 letter
scoring attitudes of current American soldiers, whom he maintained tacitly
accept 'irresponsibility and horror' of Vietnam.  Says armed forces deserve
encouragement since they protect our rights as Americans.  Drawing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 25

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 14, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT RICHTER

SECTION: Page 24, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Robert Richter letter scores US action in aiding Vietnam boat people while
refusing to aid Indochinese starving in their own countries (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 25

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 16, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 67, Column 1

LENGTH: 106 words

Marine Pfc Robert Russell Garwood, accused by fellow prisoners of Vietnam war of
deserting and collaborating with enemy, has been working for past 4 months as
clerk at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina, Marine base.  Garwood, in interview, says
he is fighting to keep his 'mental stability' and refuses to discuss specific
allegations.  Marine Corps spokesmen say investigation of charges is continuing.
Garwood's lawyer has accused Marine Corps of failing to give Garwood special
psychiatric treatment and rehabilitation.  Garwood's rank has been frozen and
$146,000 in back pay is being withheld until case is resolved.  Garwood por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 259-4

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 16, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Article on plight of ethnic Chinese Vietnamese refugee Chen Meihua, who fled to
China from Vietnam in 1978, returned to Vietnam when Chinese officials assigned
her to work on collective farm, and fled by boat to Hong Kong from Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 259-5

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 20, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

Hong Kong officials report 4-day lull in arrival of Vietnamese boat refugees.
Daily average in 1st 10 days of September was 200.  Peak was 655 before Geneva
conference at which Vietnam pledged to stem flow (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 263-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 22, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD D NOSSITER

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 134 words

UN General Assembly votes to allow representative of ousted Pol Pot regime to
keep Cambodia seat in General Assembly.  Outcome, by surprising two-to-one
margin, is rebuff to USSR and victory for China and its allies in debate,
non-Communist nations of Southeast Asia.  USSR and Vietnam sought to give Pol
Pot seat to representative of Heng Samrin regime that, with help of Vietnamese
troops, took over much of Cambodia last winter.  USSR and Vietnam cite Pol Pot
regime's human rights abuses, while China and its allies argue UN could not
reward Government installed with foreign military aid.  US maintains low profile
in debate and says it voted for Pol Pot regime on 'technical grounds'.  Photos
of USSR delegate Oleg A Troyanovsky, Chinese delegate Chen Chu and Pol Pot
representative Ieng Sary (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 265-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 23, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MICHAEL T KAUFMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 138 words

Article on deteriorating political situation in Afghanistan and crisis facing
Soviet policy there.  Reviews events leading up to intensification of Soviet
role.  Observes that Soviets 'descent into quagmire' in Afghanistan began
shortly after army units loyal to former Pres Noor Mohammad Taraki's Khalq Party
toppled Mohammad Daud's Government in Apr '78.  Examines parallels between
USSR's interest in Afghanistan and US's role in Vietnam.  Finds some
similarities but says respective situations differ in several respects.
Concludes that USSR can either limit its response to growing turmoil in
Afghanistan in anticipation that regional wars will continue for years, or enter
battle in a massive way, knowing that ensuing violence will cause them
embarrassment but not bring counterattack.  Por of Pres Amin.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 266-4

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 23, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD D NOSSITER

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 77 words

Article on political implications of General Assembly's 71-35 vote to keep
representatives of ousted Pol Pot regime in UN.  Majority vote was produced by
strange alliance of China and 5 militantly anti-Communist Southeast Asian
nations, notably Thailand, Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore.  Some
diplomats regard alliance as indication that 5 nations are more concerned about
expansion of Vietnam than about China--their historical threat (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 266-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 25, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DONALD H SHANNON

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 26 words

Donald H Shannon letter disputes Arthur Wallis Shantz Jr's September 16 letter
on US obligation to Vietnam as result of activities during Vietnam war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 26

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 25, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 36 words

Thai diplomatic sources say Vietnam has increased military attacks in Cambodia
against ousted Pol Pot loyalists.  Heaviest fighting reported in eastern Kompong
Cham Province and northern Kompong Thom Province (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 268-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 26, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Government-sponsored study of Vietnam veterans by Center for Policy Research
finds 40% suffer major emotional difficulties, such as alcoholism and narcotics
abuse, and over 75% complain of nightmares, marital discord and job problems.
Report was made public by newly-formed Vietnam Veterans of America, which
charged that Veterans Administration has denied such problems existed and was
forced to release report under Freedom of Information Act (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 269-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 26, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 192 words

Vietnamese offensive against Pol Pot forces reportedly resumes in central
Cambodia.  Several Vietnamese divisions reportedly have begun major operation in
area north of Phnom Penh and west of Mekong River apparently aimed at destroying
guerrilla units that have limited Vietnamese control to main cities and roads.
Cambodian resistance forces are estimated to number about 40,000, while
Vietnamese troop strength is put at 180,000.  Pol Pot forces are thought to
contest actively from 80% to 85% of country.  Evidence indicates that Vietnamese
are following 'scorched earth' policy in areas they cannot permanently secure.
Vietnam's strategy reportedly may be to impose starvation on Pol Pot forces and
Cambodian bystanders not in Vietnamese-held areas while appealing to Western
countries to provide food for Cambodians under its domination.  International
Red Cross and UNICEF are angry over objections by Heng Samrin to distribution of
relief to border area civilians who are not under Vietnamese control.  Sources
report that only Ho Chi Minh City-Phnom Penh highway and southernmost coastal
road are under firm Vietnamese control.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 269-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 27, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 122 words

Anthony Lewis article on desperate plight of starving Cambodians.  Notes that
doctors and relief workers who have visited country estimate that 2 million
Cambodians--perhaps half surviving population--will die of starvation and
disease in next few months unless massive relief comes.  Notes that while Oxfam,
UNICEF, Red Cross and other relief organizations are ready to move and US and
other Governments are ready to finance relief effort, political obstacles are
preventing action.  Says signs are growing that Vietnam is using starvation as
weapon in effort to consolidate its hold on country and destroy Pol Pot forces.
Urges US, particularly President Carter and his political adversaries, to become
involved in issue (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 27

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 27, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD D NOSSITER

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 154 words

UNICEF and International Red Cross announce that Cambodia's Pol Pot loyalists
and Pres Heng Samrin have agreed to admit foreign representatives to insure that
food and medicine reaches Cambodians civilians and not soldiers.  Efforts to
mount large emergency aid effort have been stalled until September 26 by
Vietnam, which has been balking at allowing organizations' representatives to
supervise distribution of relief.  Ha Van Lau, head of Vietnam mission to UN,
reportedly has been engaged in secret talks with US diplomats.  Under agreement,
Red Cross will send delegation to Cambodia and UNICEF will open office in Phnom
Penh.  Both agencies have shipped total of 140 tons of emergency supplies to
country since July.  Major problem confronting relief planners is lack of
information about state of Cambodia's transport network, capacity of Phnom
Penh's airport, number of trucks available and condition of roads (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 270-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 28, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD D NOSSITER

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 182 words

China condemns USSR in UN General Assembly as main threat to world peace.
Deputy Foreign Min Han Niamong charges USSR is engaged in 'frenzied arms
expansion' unprecedented in scale and speed, is promoting aggression and
adventure worldwide, and employing 'proxies' and 'mercenaries' to launch
invasions and military coups in other countries.  Chief Soviet delegate Oleg A
Troyanovsky walks out during address.  Han scores Vietnam for its invasion of
Cambodia.  Says effort was backed by USSR, which has plans to dominate Southeast
Asia.  Charges Vietnam with building up forces in Cambodia in move to mount
dry-season offensive against forces of ousted Pol Pot.  Scores US for its
partiality toward Israel and for stationing of troops in South Korea.  Mexican
Pres Jose Lopez Portillo urges creation of 'world energy plan' under UN
auspices.  Urges producing, consuming and poor nations to 'rationalize'
exploitation of energy resources.  Proposes that, for short run, oil producers
and rich industrial nations guarantee supply of oil to poor and 'compensate
them' for price increases (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 271-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 29, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 25, Column 3

LENGTH: 128 words

International financial institutions of West and East are beginning to converge,
as Communist-bloc nations face growing needs for financing of oil and technology
imports.  Rumania and Vietnam, two full members of Council for Mutual Economic
Assistance (Comecon) which also belong to International Monetary Fund, have in
recent months begun making use of IMF facilities and World Bank project
assistance.  Moreover, International Investment Bank, Eastern counterpart of
World Bank, has borrowed nearly $2.8 Billion in hard Western currencies, while
Moscow-based International Bank for Economic Cooperation has shifted unit of
account for intra-Comecon transactions to basket of Western currencies similar
to IMF's Special Drawing Rights.  Map of Comecon countries (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 272-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 29, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

Pres Carter appoints Robert W Komer Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
replacing Stanley Resor.  Komer is best known for heading controversial
'pacification' program in Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 272-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 1, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 70 words

Vietnam accuses West of conducting 'smear campaign' against Cambodia and says
international aid programs for Cambodia are cover for 'intervention and
aggression'.  Communist Party newspaper Nhan Dan denies Vietnam is intercepting
any aid destined for Cambodians.  Accuses US of trying to paint dark picture of
Heng Samrin Government by calling for aid.  Says US is trying to bring back
ousted Prime Min Pol Pot (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 274-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 1, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 179 words

Former US State Secretary Henry Kissinger, in Time magazine installment of
memoirs, says North Vietnamese negotiator Le Duc Tho, in secret meeting in April
1970 during which Kissinger proposed that neutrality of Cambodia be guaranteed
bilaterally or through international framework, rejected proposal.  Says Le Duc
Tho emphasized that it was Vietnam's 'destiny not merely to take over South
Vietnam but to dominate whole of Indochina'.  Defends Nixon Administration's
policies, including controversial moves to use American troops in May 1970
Cambodian incursion, Christmas bombing of Hanoi in 1972 and wiretapping of
Kissinger aides following press leaks about 1969 secret bombing of Cambodia.
Commenting on decision to send US troops into Cambodia to bolster Lon Nol
Government, says Nixon had 3 options in April 1970: to do noting, which State
and Defense Departments favored, use only South Vietnamese forces, which he
recommended, and use American forces, which was favored by Americans in Vietnam.
Says Vice President Agnew persuaded Nixon to take 3d option (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 274-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 5, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 2

LENGTH: 7 words

Central Vietnam is ravaged by floods (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 278-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 5, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

Dick Clark, President Carter's special envoy for refugee affairs, says there
might be another major surge of refugees in Southeast Asia caused by new
Vietnamese offensive in Cambodia and by resumed ejection of ethnic Chinese and
others from Vietnam, Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearing.  Presents
Administration's appeal for $207 million in supplemental refugee funds for
fiscal 1980 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 278-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 7, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM R CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 74 words

Assoc Prof William R Campbell letter says decline of US productivity is not
primarily result of actions of labor force but is consequence of shape and
quality of industrial plant with which we are left as result of systematic
reorganization of our economy to fight Vietnam war.  Cites study, 'Pentagon
Capitalism,' by Seymour Melman, in which Melman discusses consequences of
holding economy hostage to real or imagined defense imperatives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 28

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 7, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Section 23; Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 48 words

Yale-New Haven Hospital, Connecticut, opens special health clinic for 200
Indochinese boat people who have settled in area.  Refugees are from Vietnam,
Cambodia, Laos and Thailand.  Hospital chief resident Dr David Coleman says many
refugees surprisingly are relatively healthy (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 280-4

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 7, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 6

LENGTH: 51 words

Pol Pot's Ambassador to China Pich Cheang charges that more than million
Cambodians have been killed by Vietnamese troops or have starved to death since
Vietnam invaded Cambodia in January.  Calls on international relief agencies to
make sure food is distributed to starving and not Vietnamese troops (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 280-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 7, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

Former South Vietnamese President Nguyen Van Thieu, in interview in British
magazine Now!  says US troops were more trouble than help in Vietnam war and he
will 'never associate with the Americans again'.  Says his troops could have
beaten Communists if US troops were not there.  Thieu has been living near
London since Saigon's fall in 1975.  Believes Vietnamese Communist regime will
collapse from internal dissension and pressure from China.  Says he wants
eventually to return to Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 280-5

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 8, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY JOHN J O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 3; Page 20, Column 6

LENGTH: 26 words

John J O'Connor reviews When Hell Was in Session, NBC-TV movie based on Jeremiah
A Denton Jr's book Personal Story of Survival as POW in North Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 28

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE H FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 165 words

Delegates attending meeting of donor nations to IBRD's soft-loan affiliate,
International Development Agency, Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia, schedule meeting for
end of Nov to await US Congressional effort to iron out differences between
foreign-aid bills adopted by HR and Sen.  US delegates say Congressional action
adverse to Carter Adm would mean immediate halt in lending affecting over 1
billion people.  HR provision banning aid to Angola, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam,
Central African Empire and Cuba would force IBRD to reject all US contributions,
which in turn would bar it from using funds from other donors for IDA.  Deputy
Asst Treas Sec Arnold Nachmanoff says US cannot take firm stand on any new fund
commitments until Administration consults more intensively with Congress.  Says
US will seek to drop gradually to providing no more than 25% of IDA funds,
compared with present 31%.  Other nations back off from making any firm pledges.
US representative Edward R Fried comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 282-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

Editorial urges US Senate to delete from appropriation bill for IBRD restriction
added by HR to bar use of US funds to aid Vietnam, Cuba, Cambodia, Laos, Angola
and former Central African Empire.  Notes provision would have effect of cutting
off US contribution since IBRD cannot accept restricted contributions (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 28

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 78 words

Vietnamese Communist Party newspaper Nhan Dan accuses US of working with China
against Vietnam.  Calls talks to normalize relations 'just a farce'.  Contends
US is distorting recent events in Cambodia in order to increase military aid to
Thailand and other non-Communist countries.  Says presence of US 7th Fleet in
South China Sea is 'intended not only to encourage illegal immigration but also
to join Chinese reactionaries in provocations' against Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 282-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 10, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES M COLE

SECTION: Page 26, Column 5

LENGTH: 26 words

James M Cole scores Pres Carter's selection of elder statesman to advise him on
Soviet brigade in Cuba.  Says same men aided in death of 50,000 in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 28

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 10, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 3

LENGTH: 28 words

Topics editorial on former South Vietnamese President Nguyen Van Thieu's recent
statement that US hindered, rather than helped, his efforts during Vietnam war
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 28

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 11, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Bipartisan Congressional group draws up Vietnam Veterans Act, major legislative
effort to assist Vietnam veterans.  Senator H John Heinz 3d, co-sponsor, terms
it most comprehensive assistance legislation since GI Bill.  Provisions include
extending time during which veterans may take advantage of educational benefits,
allowing unemployed and underemployed to use education benefits for training
programs, and compensating veterans and their families for problems stemming
from exposure to defoliants (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 284-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 13, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 11 words

Editorial lauds new legislation to aid Vietnam veterans (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 28

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 14, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 94 words

US Senator Henry Jackson says new conflict between Vietnam and China could lead
to war between China and USSR, speech, Senate Armed Services Committee.  Says
that after China invaded Vietnam in February, Soviet armed forces held maneuvers
with live ammunition along Chinese-Soviet border.  Says that after talks with
Chinese leaders, he is convinced they intend to act with caution and use
indirect means to prevent Vietnam from dominating Southeast Asia.  Says China
has eased restrictions on practice of religion and has granted limited freedom
of speech (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 287-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 14, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 28 words

Vietnam news agency reports fighting has reupted along China-Vietnam border with
'many' killed on both sides.  Accuses China of committing 'armed provocations'
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 287-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 14, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 25 words

Vietnam's army newspaper Quan Dol Nhan Dan accuses Pres Carter and US of
'gunboat diplomacy' for conducting military exercises in Caribbean (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 287-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 15, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 6

LENGTH: 24 words

Vietnam veteran Charles Hartz sues 5 chemical companies that manufactured
defoliant Agent Orange, which he says caused his brain cancer (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 288-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 15, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 124 words

Number of Vietnamese boat people has dwindled dramatically since July, 1979.
Arrivals of refugees from Laos have also declined significantly.  Thailand
reportedly is preparing for potentially huge influx of Cambodians fleeing from
famine and war as Vietnam steps up offensive against Pol Pot.  Officials
indicate 6,600 Vietnamese refugees fled country in September, compared with
55,000 in June.  Number is down to 1,200 in September arriving in Indonesia,
compared with nearly 23,000 in June.  2,500 arrived in Hong Kong in September,
compared with 20,000 in June.  Officials say no ethnic Chinese have reached
shores since Geneva meeting in July.  Those now reaching foreign shores are
ethnic Vietnamese and not ethnic Chinese.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 288-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 17, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

Chinese dissident Wei Jingsheng is sentenced to 15 years, Peking, for giving
unidentified foreigner military intelligence on China's war with Vietnam and for
having written 'reactionary' articles for underground magazine called
Exploration that 'agitated for the overthrow of the dictatorship of the
proletariat'.  Case reviewed.  Illus of scene outside courtroom.  Portrait of
Wei (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 290-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 19, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 35 words

Vietnam accuses US, Thailand and China of trying to bolster Cambodian guerrillas
under pretext of sending famine aid.  More than 53,000 Cambodians have fled to
Thailand in last week to escape fighting (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 292-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 19, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

China's Prime Min Hua Guofeng arrives in Brittany to inspect latest Fench
technology in industry and agriculture.  China's Foreign Min Huang Hua, on
behalf of Hua, warns that Vietnam cannot be allowed to do in Indochina what Cuba
did in Africa, news conference, Rennes, France.  Illus of Hua with French
Agriculture Min Pierre Mehalgnerie (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 292-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 20, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 136 words

Vietnamese Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach arrives, Bangkok, Thailand,
following Vietnamese denunciation of Thailand's actions in Cambodian conflict.
Meets with Thai Prime Minister Kriangsak Chamanand.  Thach delivered message
from Prime Minister Pham Van Dong expressing Vietnam's desire for good relations
with Thailand.  Vietnam accuses US and China of installing 'system of storage
and logistics bases and sanctuaries' on Thai border to help Pol Pot forces.
Kriangsak presides over meeting of foreign ambassadors and international aid
officials on problem of huge influx of Cambodian refugees into Thailand.
Announces Thailand will admit refugees from Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam for
temporary stays.  Invites all interested countries and private and official
organizations to contribute to their care (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 293-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 22, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 32 words

Illus of man identified as Vietnam veteran Harold Mann holding 27 worshipers at
Church of Christ, St Albans, W Va, hostage.  Mann surrenders after reading
antiwar, anti-Government speech (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 295-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 28, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 11, Column 2

LENGTH: 143 words

Cambodian Government rejects proposal by US Senators Jim Sasser, Max Baucus and
John C Danforth to open land supply routes from Thailand to bring food to
starving Cambodians as part of 'maneuver by imperialists and international
reactionaries' to provide assistance to ousted Pol Pot regime.  Declaration does
not mention that assistance was to have been administered by International Red
Cross and UNICEF, making it appear that proposed aid was American program.  Heng
Samrin regime calls international aid minimal compared to assistance from
Vietnam, USSR and other Communist countries.  Charges that US and others are
magnifying extent of famine and suffering in country.  Holds Phnom Penh airport
and port of Kompong Som can handle more aid that Government has been receiving
and that Government is capable of distributing food throughout country (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 301-4

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 29, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE H FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 104 words

Congressional conferees to begin efforts to reconcile differences between Sen
and HR versions of bills authorizing US contributions to IBRD and other
international financial institutions.  HR, enraged by conduct of Vietnam and $60
million IBRD loan to Vietnam 2 years ago, has approved provision to bar use of
US funds for loans to Vietnam, Cuba, Cambodia, Laos, Angola and Central African
Republic.  Success of HR version would result in sharply curtailed IBRD lending
because IBRD cannot accept restricted-use funds.  Treasury is lobbying for Sen
version, while Repr C W Young leads forces for restrictions.  Drawing (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 302-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 29, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY LEWIS M MILFORD

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 56 words

Letter from Lewis M Milford, Deputy Director for Clinical Education at National
Veterans Law Center, questions continuing delay of Government studies of health
effects on Vietnam veterans of exposure to herbicide Agent Orange, particularly
the US Air Force study cited by US Air Force Surgeon General Paul Myers in July
20 letter (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 30

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 29, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

US Assistant State Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Richard
Holbrooke says USSR should take responsibility for Vietnam's actions outside its
territory.  Says US will continue to oppose Vietnamese-backed Heng Samrin regime
in Cambodia.  Says that and refugee exodus from Vietnam are 2 obstacles to
normalization of relations between US and Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 302-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 30, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

Editorial urges Congressional conferees to drop from bill authorizing US
contributions to IBRD and other international lending agencies HR-approved
provision to ban use of US funds for loans to Vietnam, Cuba, Cambodia, Laos,
Angola and Central African Republic, provision that would force IBRD to reject
all US funds (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 30

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 30, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY TONY SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 165 words

NYC police arrest 1,045 antinuclear protesters after they attempt unsuccessfully
to shut down New York Stock Exchange by blocking entrances to exchange building
on 50th anniversary of historic stock market crash.  Demonstrators were
protesting corporate investment in nuclear industry.  Coalition of 100
antinuclear organizations sponsored 'Wall Street Action,' which began on Oct 28
with rally at World Trade Center.  Estimated $20,000 cost of 2-day demonstration
was paid largely from small donations solicited in mass mailings by sponsoring
groups.  Relationship between police and protesters is 'easygoing' despite
arrests.  Many Wall Street employees mingle with demonstrators and discuss
protest.  Stock exchange opens as usual, but trading is slowest in 5 months.
Arrest total is highest in city since July '77 blackout.  Vietnam era activists
Daniel Ellsberg and David Dellinger are among those arrested.  Wall Street
Action spokesman Grace Hedemann comments.  Illustrations (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 303-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 1, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 135 words

Pres Carter national security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski, arriving in Algiers
for celebrations of 25th anniversary of start of Algerian revolution against
French rule, says he will tell Algerian officials, on behalf of Carter, that US
favors political solution on Algerian-Moroccan struggle over Western Sahara, but
that US will not stand by and see military solution imposed by Morocco.  Says US
has no intention of mediating.  US delegation includes Maj Gen Robert L
Schweitzer, Army Deputy Chief of Staff for Plans and Operations.  Brzezinski
por.  Among delegates at Algerian festivities are Gen Vo Nguyen Giap, strategist
behind Vietnam's revolutionary victory, Libyan head Col Muammar el-Qaddafi,
Iranian Prime Min Mehdi Bazargan, PLO head Yasir Arafat and French Communist
leader Georges Marchais (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 305-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 2, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY DEBORAH RANKIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 223 words

Last in series on stock market crash of '29 examines cycle of investor
strategies which has emerged during past 50 years.  Yale University economics
professor Raymond Goldsmith notes that stocks declined as percent of American
families' portfolios to less than 30% in '33 from nearly 50% in '29, while
percentage of assets in liquid investments such as cash and savings accounts
rose dramatically.  Investors began to trickle back into stock market in late
'30's, with nearly one-third, $73.2 Billion, of investors' holdings in equities.
Stock investment fell notably during World War II, dbecause of uncertain times
and heavy purchasing of Federal securities, but began steady rise in '50's, when
giant corporations began to dominate economic scene.  '50-'68 marked stock
market's 'go-go years,' with mutual funds industry in particular experiencing
phenomenal growth.  Era of high inflation beginning with Vietnam War and Lyndon
Johnson's Great Society saw 'bubble burst,' however, as exodus of small
shareholders began.  Widespread disillusionment about stock market has become
predominant trend, according to recent survey by New York Stock Exchange, with
speculators turning to commodities and options markets and investors in general
seeking tangible assets such as real estate, art, antiques and other
collectibles.  Cartoon (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 30

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 4, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 95 words

US Senator Jim Sasser makes available reports on 23 interviews conducted in
Thailand by American officials with Laotian refugees who tell of acute suffering
and death from deadly gas attacks by Vietnam or Laotian communist forces to
crush resistance among Hmong mountain people.  Laotian authorities reject rept.
US State Department says evidence shows attacks were delivered by aircraft, that
agent is sometimes lethal.  Suggests Vietnamese involvement, noting Laos lacks
technology to conduct such operations.  Says evidence of Soviet role is
circumstantial (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 308-8

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 5, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE H FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 59 words

IBRD president Robert S McNamara signs letter stating that IBRD will not make
new loans to Vietnam.  Reprs David R Obey and Matthew F McHugh suggested move to
break deadlock in Congressional conference over US appropriation for agency.
Move apparently satisfies Repr C W Bill Young, leader of forces that sought to
restrict US contribution to bank (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 309-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 5, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM L SAFIRE

SECTION: Page 19, Column 5

LENGTH: 47 words

William Safire comment scores former Senator Dick Clark's resignation as head of
program to aid starving refugees from Vietnam and Cambodia to take political
campaign post.  Holds episode illustrates hypocracy of some people who spoke out
against Vietnam and Indochinese wars (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 30

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 6, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 25 words

Radio Hanoi reports Soviet Naval flotilla has arrived in Haiphong, Vietnam.
Arrival marks 1st anniversary of Vietnam-Soviet friendship treaty (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 310-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 6, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD D NOSSITER

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 173 words

UN members pledge more than $200 million to relieve famine and disease in
Cambodia, NYC conference.  US pledges $69 million and Singapore pledges $10,000.
Most of funds come from West and Japan, but total falls short of target $310
million.  Secretary General Kurt Waldheim expresses optimism that more pledges
are forthcoming.  Soviet delegate Oleg A Troyanovsky says country has already
delivered $85 million in aid.  Says country will not contribute to UNICEF-Red
Cross fund.  Senator John C Danforth, after meeting with Vietnamese delegate Ha
Van Lau, announces that Mekong River will be open to relief shipments.  Hanoi
statement calls aid plan 'maneuver' by US and China to aid Pol Pot and Ieng Sary
regime.  Vietnam and Cambodia continue to resist attempts to begin truck convoy
from Thailand.  UN estimates 10,000 tons of aid have reached Cambodia, mostly by
barge.  About 1,500 tons have been supplied by voluntary agencies, including
Oxfam.  Illus of demonstrators outside UN sympathetic to plight of starving
Cambodians (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 310-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 7, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 5

LENGTH: 78 words

Vietnamese Ambassador to Philippines Vu Tien says Vietnamese troops will
withdraw from Cambodia only when Heng Samrin regime is strong enough to defend
country, news conference.  Denies country has aggressive intentions against
Thailand or any other Southeast Asian country.  Says Pol Pot regime has been
overthrown and political situation is 'irreversible'.Accuses US and China of
wanting to reimpose Pol Pot and trying to alienate rest of area from Vietnam
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 311-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 7, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY STEVEN R WEISMAN

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 140 words

Rosalynn Carter plans to leave for 4-day visit to Cambodian refugee camps in
Thailand.  Will investigate difficulties in international relief effort to aid
starving Cambodians.  State Secretary Cyrus Vance meets with USSR Ambassador
Anatoly F Dobrynin to discuss Cambodian matters.  US Ambassador to UN Donald F
McHenry and USSR Ambassador Oleg A Troyanovsky also meet.  American officials
reportedly plan to raise possibility of joint airlift with USSR of supplies into
Cambodia.  Mrs Carter is to be accompanied to Thailand by US Surgeon General Dr
Julius B Richmond.  Meets with representatives of several relief agencies.
Commission on World Hunger chairman Sol M Linowitz and President Carter issue
statement calling on US to urge USSR, China, Vietnam and Cambodia to put aside
political differences to facilitate relief efforts (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 311-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 9, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY LENA WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

Article on ability of Vietnam refugees to adapt to new life in NY area.
Examples of some families.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 313-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 9, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HERBERT R O'CONOR JR

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 30 words

Herbert R O'Conor Jr letter urges USSR to prevail on Vietnam to approve delivery
of food and medicine by US planes and trucks in order to alleviate suffering in
Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 31

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 9, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 118 words

Son Sann, head of National Front for Liberation of Khmer People, which was
formed in October to oppose both of Cambodia's contending governments,
interviewed at Battambang Province, Cambodia.  Accuses Vietnam and Heng Samrin
Government of killing by obstruction by rejecting US proposal to bring
international food relief to starving by road from Thailand.  Charges Vietnam is
causing death of Cambodian elite by naming them to leading posts in new regime
and exposing them to assassination by Pol Pot loyalists.  Front's armed forces
are headed by Dien Del, who reached rank of general under President Lon Nol.
Front reportedly is seen as potential anti-Vietnamese force by Thai military
authorities (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 31

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 11, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MICHAEL NORMAN

SECTION: Section 6; Page 134

LENGTH: 44 words

Michael Norman article describes his combat experiences while serving with US
marines in Vietnam in '68, in particular the psychological trauma he sustained
as result of death of his closest friend who had taken his place on mission and
was killed.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 315-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 11, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOSEPH V CARDIA

SECTION: Section 21; Page 24, Column 3

LENGTH: 47 words

Joseph V Cardia recalls protest march on Washington, DC, Nov '69, aimed at
ending Vietnam War.  Says while demonstration failed to end war it served as
catalyst for process of continued re-evaluation by America of its position
vis-a-vis rest of world.  Demonstration illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 315-4

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 11, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 6

LENGTH: 25 words

Louis Harris & Associates survey finds 62% of Americans polled feel Vietnam
veterans were made 'suckers' by participating in an unpopular war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 315-4

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 11, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 10 words

USSR warships end 5-day visit to Haiphong, Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 315-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 14, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY STEVEN R WEISMAN

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 154 words

President Carter appeals to leaders of international relief effort to avoid
criticism or condemnation of Vietnam, Cambodia or other parties accused of
blocking aid to starving Cambodians.  Relief representatives express optimism
about recent progress in opening channels for providing supplies.  Notre Dame
University president Reverend Theodore M Hesburgh comments.  Carter orders
immediate airlift of vegetable oils and special foods for children to Thailand
and authorizes $6 million to buy rice and for care and maintenance of refugee
camps.  Action is direct response to requests from Rosalynn Carter, who formally
gave report on her visit to Thailand.  Mrs Carter warns that plight of Cambodian
refugees will worsen soon because of expected influx of several hundred thousand
more refugees fleeing Cambodia.  Relief officials say there are now about
100,000 refugees on either side of Cambodia-Thailand border (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 318-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 15, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Text of UN resolution calling on Vietnam to withdraw troops from Cambodia and
urging member nations to participate in international relief effort for those
starving in Cambodia (M)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Text 31

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 15, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD SCHUMACHER

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 109 words

UN General Assembly demands overwhelmingly that Vietnam withdraw its troops from
Cambodia.  UN officials say it is 1st time that organization has censured
Vietnam.  Vote is 91-21, with 29 abstentions.  Resolution is sponsored by
Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia and Philippines--members countries of
Southeast Asian Nations Assn.  US, which supported resolution did not play major
public role in debate.  China lobbied actively for resolution.  Joining Vietnam
in voting against resolution is its ally, USSR and other Communist countries.  T
T B Koh of Singapore, US deputy delegate William J Vanden Heuvel and Ha Van Lau
of Vietnam comment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 319-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 17, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

UN Deputy High Commissioner for Refugees Dale de Haan says newly opened office
in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, is ready to start processing refugees for
resettlement.  Vietnam has supplied list of 20,000 people wishing to leave
country (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 321-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 18, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

US Army lends Gallup (NM) Indian Medical Center surgical module that was used as
combat support hospital in Vietnam while hospital's surgical wing is being
renovated.  Unit, which has never before been used outside combat, will be set
up in hospital's parking lot.  Hospital provides most medical services for
Navajo, Zuni and Pueblos Indians within 200-mile radius of northwestern New
Mexico and northeastern Arizona (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 322-4

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 21, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DONALD G MCNEIL JR

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Federal Judge George C Pratt rules that Vietnam veterans who were allegedly
injured by defoliant Agent Orange and any of their children born deformed could
sue 5 chemical companies that manufactured the chemical.  Some litigants and 5
companies noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 325-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 23, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 12, Column 2

LENGTH: 165 words

17 Vietnamese refugees, including 4 children, reportedly have been murdered by
Thai fishermen at sea and most of 37 women aboard 4 refugee boats raped by 500
fishermen during 22 days in which survivors were held prisoner on uninhabited
island off southern Thailand.  Police are holding 7 fishermen as suspects.  UN
High Commission for Refugees liberated refugees and took 156 survivors to Pak
Phanang, Thailand.  Police official says 57 boats stopped at island to rob, rape
and beat refugees.  Case is worst to come to attention of international
authorities in more than 2 years of constant preying by fishermen on 'boat
people' fleeing from Vietnam.  Tension mounts in Pak Phanang as fishermen angry
at their friends' imprisonment mill about police station.  UN refugee official
has been threatened.  Thai Prime Minister Kriangsak Chamanand is demanding full
prosecution in order to act against piracy.  Kriangsak or Air Marshal Sitthi
Sawatsila plan to visit region on November 26 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 327-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 23, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 2

LENGTH: 61 words

Vietnam accuses China of building up 'huge concentration of troops' in
preparation for new invasion and proposes immediate cease-fire along border,
session held to ease border dispute.  Vietnamese delegate Dinh Nho Liem urges
Chinese to sign agreement, 1st proposed by Hanoi on June 28, to cease
'offensive' activity.  Chinese delegate Han Nian Long comments (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 327-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD D NOSSITER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 83 words

Article on recent series of negative votes cast by UN General Assembly and
Security Council, notably against Vietnam's attempt to legitimize regime it
installed in Cambodia and against effort by Cuban Pres Fidel Castro to seat Cuba
on Security Council.  Says organization is much less well-equipped to do
positive things.  Queries effects of any action it may undertake to win release
of American hostages held by Iranian militants at Embassy in Teheran.  Chinese
delegate Chou Nan illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 329-4

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 25, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Disabled Vietnam veteran Bob Diaz is giving up his US citizenship to protest
what he believes is US inaction in Iran (S)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 329-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 25, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Bob Diaz, disabled Vietnam veteran, is giving up his US citizenship in protest
of what he believes is US inaction in Iran (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 329-3

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 25, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 157 words

US General Accounting Office, in report requested by Senator Charles H Percy,
says thousands of US marines and Army troops were deployed in areas of South
Vietnam that had been recently sprayed with Agent Orange defoliant, contrary to
US Defense Department assertions that the affected combat zones had been cleared
of troops and that troops did not enter areas until approximately 6 weeks after
spraying. .  Report shows at least 5,900 marines were within 1/3 mile of of
sprayed areas during and shortly after defoliation missions.  Finds another
16,100 marines were within 1/3 of mile of combat zones within 4 weeks of
spraying.  Percy, in letters to Defense Secretary Harold Brown and Veterans
Administrator Max Cleland, says he is alarmed at mounting evidence of Agent
Orange toxicity and increasing number of veterans who claim to have been
exposed.  Scores Defense Department's apparent unawareness of fact troops were
exposed (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 329-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 26, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 130 words

Vietnamese Air Force pilot and 12 other refugees fly from Vietnam to Singapore
aboard military transport plane and are held in detention awaiting word whether
they will be allowed into US.  Plane is one of many left behind by US when it
withdrew from Vietnam in 1975.  Vietnamese are known to take precautions to
insure that planes on training or short transport flights do not have enough
fuel to leave country.  It is unclear how crew managed to get civilians,
including a woman and children, aboard undetected and avoid interception by
Vietnamese Air Force.  Singapore refuses to accept Vietnamese refugees unless
they have guarantee of eventual resettlement elsewhere.  Officials say refugees
will not be sent back to Vietnam against their will.  Plane will be returned
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 330-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 26, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 190 words

International relief effort to feed starving Cambodians has delivered in 1st 3
months of operation enough food to prevent starvation for 10 days.  Joint
UNICEF-Red Cross effort has delivered by air and river about 10,000 tons of
food.  Organization officials are reluctant to discuss publicly reasons for
inadequate performance for fear of heightening difficulties with Cambodian
authorities.  Heng Samrin regime reportedly is angered by organizations' role in
relief operations for Cambodians outside area of Government control and refuses
to allow operations to reach required scope.  Organizations have offered other
assistance, including trucks, port and airport unloading equipment and rolling
stock, but Government officials have been slow in responding.  Relief officials
have urged Government to allow airlifts to major provincial airports, which has
been denied.  Government authorities suggest that adequate supplies are being
received from Vietnam and other Communist countries, including USSR.  Relief
officials are skeptical over reports from Government that USSR has given
Cambodia 200,000 tons of food.  Map.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 330-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 27, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 179 words

Self-appointed leaders of more than 400,000 Cambodians camped along Thai border
are preventing them from crossing into Thailand to seek shelter in holding
centers.  Man who calls himself Prince Norodom Soryavong, chief of one camp,
says he against policy of 'mass evacuation'.  UN High Commissioner for Refugees
is conducting evacuation with collaboration of Thai authorities and
international relief organizations.  Leader of 2d camp In Sakhan accuses
Thailand of collaborating with Vietnam in forcing Cambodians to leave.  Bulk of
camp is in Thai territory.  Only about 1,000 people have arrived at Thai holding
center because of opposition by leaders.  Leaders have agreed to allow aged, ill
and orphans to leave.  International officials are concerned over growing
tension.  In Sakhan charges that because of his reluctance to let bulk of
population be moved, Thai military authorities and international organizations
have sharply reduced deliveries of rice.  International officials deny charges,
asserting that Cambodians will be fed on either side of border (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 331-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 28, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 5

LENGTH: 48 words

Stephen J Zardis, director of Massachusetts chapter of Agent Orange Victims
International, files Federal class-action suit against 5 Agent Orange
manufacturers on behalf of Massachusetts veterans suffering health problems
allegedly linked to exposure to defoliant during Vietnam war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 332-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 29, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 57 words

Marine PFC Robert Russell Garwood, who returned to US in March after 13 1/2
years in Vietnam, says he may not be well enough to defend himself against
charges that he deserted and collaborated with enemy.  Asks military court to
force dismissal of charges, 2 of which carry death penalty, and to order that he
be honorably discharged (S) .

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 333-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 29, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Federal District Judge Barrington D Parker orders Army to upgrade less than
honorable discharges given thousands of Vietnam-era servicemen who were ousted
for drug use.  Order applies chiefly to about 10,000 men who were forced to take
urinalysis tests and were released after they indicated drug use (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 333-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 30, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 195 words

Number of Western nations propose to UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim that 2
camps astride Cambodian-Thai border, where about 500,000 Cambodians have sought
refuge from famine and war, be declared 'safe havens' under international
supervision.  Under proposal Cambodian paramilitary forces opposed to both
Vietnam and Pol Pot loyalists would be told to withdraw from camps.  Vietnamese
forces and Heng Samrin military units would be asked to respect safety of people
in camps.Refugees would continue to be fed and cared for by international
community.  Thai Prime Minister Kriangsak Chamanand approves proposal.  Thai
Airmarshal Sitthi Sawatsila declines to disclose countries that made proposal.
Reiterates Thailand's readiness to continue to let all Cambodians cross border
into holding camps.  Considers situation in which leaders of paramilitary forces
prevent people from going to holding centers as worst solution.  Believes
situation might be exploited by Vietnam as pretext for carrying war into
Thailand.Says Thailand favors internationalization and demilitarization of
Cambodian camps.  Says Thailand has asked UN to station observers along border
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 334-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 2, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 165 words

Seizure of American Embassy in Teheran, Iran, seen resulting in important shift
in attitude among Americans that, many believe, will have long-term impact on
willingness of US to project its power in Third World and to develop greater
military capabilities for protecting its interests there.  Carter Adm officials,
members of Congress, foreign policy experts and others speak of political and
psychological watershed.View seizure as pivotal event marking close of post-
Vietnam era.  Many critics of Vietnam War, while fearful about impulsive
reprisals in current crisis, agree increasingly with more conservative advocates
of American power that since Vietnam, pendulum has swung too far in opposite
direction of national self-doubt and total nonintervention in Third World.  Feel
crisis has forged consensus that it is time to redress balance, in way that will
survive after crisis is resolved.Comments by Democratic National Chairman John C
White and others noted.  White portrait (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 336-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 3, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 174 words

Vietnam News Agency reports Vietnamese-backed Government in Cambodia denies it
is hindering Western aid shipments.  Cambodian Foreign Ministry reports aid from
Vietnam, USSR and other 'friendly countries' continues to arrive.  French
legislators believe large quantity of international aid is being siphoned off to
Vietnam, news conference.  Relief agency sources in Bangkok and US officials
believe much of aid sent in last 2 months still is stored in warehouses in Phnom
Penh and Kompong Som.  Note opportunities for international officials to monitor
distribution are very limited.  Oxfam relief coordinator Malcolm Harper contends
there is nothing to support assertions that Cambodian Government is refusing to
distribute aid.  Refugees along Thai border allege that Vietnamese-led Cambodian
troops are deliberately denying food to starving people and have mined
ricefields to keep people away from ripening crops.  Thai Government official
alleges that Cambodian Government is using food as weapon in fight against Pol
Pot forces (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 337-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 3, 1979, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

12 Vietnamese refugees who arrived in Singapore on military plane week ago
reportedly are given permission to settle in US.  13th person, a civilian
aircraft mechanic who said he was forced to make trip, will return to Vietnam.
American officials say it is not clear whether pilot, Vietnamese Air Force
officer, will be admitted to US as refugee or defector (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 337-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 5, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

Hearings open in Marine Corps case against PFC Robert Russell Garwood, who
disappeared in Vietnam on September 28, 1965.  Garwood is charged with desertion
and collaborating with enemies.  Returned voluntarily to US from Hanoi on March
22, 1979.  Charges could lead to court-martial and execution.  After charges are
read, hearing is recessed until December 18, when testimony will begin.  Other
charges against Garwood outlined (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 339-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 7, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 96 words

Unnamed international relief official says 80% to 90% of supplies delivered to
Heng Samrin regime in Cambodia are in warehouses in Phnom Penh and Kompong Som.
Cites lack of equipment and manpower.  Oxfam and UNICEF officials say they are
satisfied with distribution.  Few refugees say they have seen food distributed.
Hold Vietnamese soldiers are taking some food supplies.  Some say they have been
receiving rice from Vietnam and red corn from USSR.  All say hunger and related
disease are prevalent in home areas and regions they moved through to get to
border areas (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 341-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 7, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 47 words

Vietnamese Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach sends UN Secretary Kurt Waldheim and
General Assembly president message that China is preparing for war.  Message
asks that Chinese withdraw forces from Paracel Islands, which are also claimed
by Vietnam, and from border territory (S0.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 341-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 8, 1979, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 119 words

Japan and China announce broad range of new economic, technical and cultural
agreements under which Japan said it would begin to treat China as 'developing
nation', move that could substantially increase trade between both nations.
Japanese Prime Min Masayoshi Ohira announces that Japan would move to make China
eligible, beginning in April, for preferential tariff treatment offered to less
developing nations.  Also says Japan would lend China, on easy-credit,
government-to-government terms, some $200 million in fiscal '79 to begin
railway, port and power plant projectsOhira and Chinese Chmn Hua Guofeng issue
joint communique concerning foreign policy issues concerning Vietnam and Korean
Peninsula (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 342-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 9, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JEROME R METTLER

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18

LENGTH: 18 words

Jerome R Mettler letter on Michael Norman's November 11 article on US
involvement in Vietnam.  Illus (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 34

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 9, 1979, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 160 words

Article assesses Thai Government's problems it must overcome in aiding Cambodian
refugees.  Prime Minister Kriangsak Chamanand has noted that about 600,000
Cambodians are living in border camps and hope to enter Thailand, with 100,000
already in Thailand.  Friendly Western countries hope to put 2 border
encampments under UN control, to be recognized as 'safe havens'.  Proposal has
slim chance since posting of UN personnel will require consent of Cambodian
Government, which has not been recognized by UN, as well as principal allies,
Vietnam and USSR.  Thailand fears that increase in Vietnam's military pressure
along border will push most refugees into Thailand.  Notes political pressures
'liberation movements' in Cambodia are making in attempt to keep refugees in
Cambodia.  Thailand hopes that Chinese pressure on Vietnam and historic
Cambodian antagonism to Vietnam will force Hanoi to soften stance and agree to
compromise settlement.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 343-4

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 11, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY WENDELL RAWLS JR

SECTION: Page 20, Column 2

LENGTH: 63 words

Feeling of patriotism in US appears to have grown nationwide since Nov 4 assault
on US Embassy in Teheran and taking of American hostages by ardent followers of
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.  There are signs that Americans are expressing
strong feelings of nationalism that some believe had been submerged after
Vietnam.  Illus of anti-Khomeini demonstrators in Washington (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 345-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 11, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Vietnam News Agency, quoting Cambodian spokesman, denies it is halting
distribution of relief supplies.  Accuses President Carter of slander by
alleging that food and medicine are not being distributed (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 345-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 12, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 6

LENGTH: 35 words

3 class-action suits seeking $40 billion in damages filed, Federal District
Court, Chicago, on behalf of 97 Vietnam veterans exposed to defoliant Agent
Orange.  1,500 additional plaintiffs expected soon (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 346-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 12, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 132 words

US Army investigators are expected to tell House Foreign Affairs subcommittee
that they are convinced that Vietnam is using chemical warfare against Laotian
mountain tribesmen.  Laotian refugee reportedly witnessed poison-gas attacks and
is expected to testify.  Representative Jim Leach says intelligence reports
support allegation.  Initial investigation indicates nerve agent and chemical
that induced massive gastrointestinal bleeding have been used against Hmong
tribe.  State Department report says Vietnam is concentrating on Hmong refugees
because tribe sided 1st with French and then with US during Indochinese wars.
Pentagon sources say USSR chemical warfare team reportedly was in same region of
western Laos in early 1979, but there were no details on what its mission was
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 346-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 13, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 96 words

US Veterans Administration Dr Lyndon E Lee reports that for first time,
laboratory tests have detected traces of dioxin, a dangerous chemical, in
tissues of men exposed to defoliant Agent Orange when it was sprayed in Vietnam.
Says amounts detected were so small as to be insignificant.  Philip C Kearney,
Agriculture Department scientist, deplores disclosure of such raw and
unevaluated data, holding they could be misinterpreted.  Ron DeYoung, spokesman
for National Veterans Task Force on Agent Orange, says report gives substance to
numerous veterans complaints (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 347-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 13, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Prof Arthur Schlesinger Jr article calls for public debate on Pres Carter's
policy on Iran.  Contends that debate is most necessary during time of crisis.
Cites escalation of Vietnam War as example of dangers of unilateral Presidential
action.  Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 347-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 13, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 2

LENGTH: 58 words

President Carter orders Defense and Health Departments and Veterans
Administration to set up interagency working group to study possible long-term
health effects of Agent Orange and other herbicides that were used during
Vietnam war, and to coordinate compensation policies for veterans with health
problems connected with exposure to them (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 347-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 13, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

President Carter issues statement, following intelligence report about USSR's
role in Cambodia, accusing USSR of indifference toward problems of food
distribution.  Accuses Heng Samrin and Vietnam of deliberately blocking food
distribution (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 347-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 13, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 97 words

US officials report US intelligence report about USSR's role in Cambodia led
Pres Carter last week to issue strong statement accusing Moscow of indifference
toward problems of food distribution.  In statement, issued by White House, US
accused Cambodia and Vietnam of deliberately blocking distribution of food that,
only few weeks earlier, they had agreed to allow into Cambodia.  Statement also
says that USSR had 'not brought any discernable influence to bear to alleviate
the situation'.  Statement, along with intelligence report, was basis of
Reston's newspaper column (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 347-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 14, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY FRANCES FITZGERALD

SECTION: Page 31, Column 2

LENGTH: 79 words

Frances FitzGerald article on plight of starving Cambodians.  Holds Khmers are
not victims of natural disaster but are hostages in regional power struggle
involving Vietnam, Thailand, China and, indirectly, USSR.  Contends struggle is
impeding relief efforts and survival of Cambodians depends on political
solution.  Holds solution calls for international mediation.  Notes UN Secretary
General Kurt Waldheim and Pres Carter bear heavy responsibility toward Cambodia
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 34

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1979, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT D MCFADDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

US Appeals Court Judge Murray I Gurfein, who rejected Nixon Administration's
attempt to bar NY Times from publishing Pentagon Papers in '71, died on Dec 16
at age 72.  Biographical sketch.  Portrait (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 35

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 11 words

Editorial lauds late US Appeals Court Judge Murray I Gurfein

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 35

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1979, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 30 words

US Marine Corps to begin case on December 18 against PFC Robert Russell Garwood,
former prisoner of war who faces charges of desertion and collaboration with
enemy in Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 352-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 19, 1979, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY IVER PETERSON

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 106 words

PFC Robert Russell Garwood, accused of wartime desertion in Vietnam and
mistreating American prisoners of war, faces 1st witness against him in military
pretrial investigation, Camp LeJeune, NC.  Warrant Officer Francis G Anton says
he saw Garwood carry weapons and guard American prisoners, that Garwood helped
interrogate prisoners and participate in North Vietnamese propaganda sessions
aimed at inmates in jungle prison camp.  Charges against Garwood listed.  Marine
Corps is expected to call 15 witnesses against Garwood, who is being defended by
2 Marine lawyers and NYC lawyer Dermot G Foley.  Garwood and lawyer illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 353-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 20, 1979, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 96 words

Former Vietnam-war prisoner Gustav A Mehrer testifies he once encountered PFC
Robert Russell Garwood in South Vietnamese mountains wearing uniform of
Communist soldier and boasting of going into combat against American forces.
Mehrer is 2d former war prisoner to testify at Marine Corps hearing to determine
if Garwood will be tried for desertion and collaboration with enemy in 13 1/2
years he spent with Vietnamese.Testimony of Warrant Officer Francis G Anton
concludes.  Mehrer says prison camp commander said Garwood held lieutenant's
rank in North Vietnamese Army (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 354-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 20, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JAMES P STERBA

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 134 words

Journalists attend briefing at Vietnamese Embassy, Peking, China, December 19,
following 10th round of negotiations between China and Vietnam on border war
between countries that began in February.  No progress has been made in talks
other than usual agreement to meet again in Peking sometime in 1980.  China
stopped holding news conferences 3 sessions ago, citing lack of progress and
news.  Vietnamese negotiator Dinh Nho Liem charges that China provoked about
1,300 armed incidents since March.  Says China has stationed 15 infantry
divisions along border and is holding 6 Army corps in region.Although Vietnamese
continue to accuse Chinese of preparing for another strike against Vietnam,
American intelligence analysts say there is little evidence to indicate
preparations for another assault (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 354-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY LAWRENCE M MEAD

SECTION: Page 34, Column 4

LENGTH: 30 words

Letter by Professor Lawrence M Mead, former speechwriter for State Secretary
Kissinger, disputes William Pfaff's December 10 article criticizing Kissinger's
Vietnam policy (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 35

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 3

LENGTH: 60 words

US Army Sergeant Willie Watkins says Marine Corps PFC Robert Russell Garwood,
accused of deserting and collaborating with enemy in Vietnam, stood guard over
American prisoners of war at North Vietnamese camp.  Garwood contends he was
prisoner of Vietnamese for 14 years, from 1965 until he was released in 1979.
Hearing is recessed until January 8, 1980 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 355-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM BORDERS

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 97 words

Oxfam (British relief organization) director Malcolm Harper disputes charges
that USSR and Vietnam are blocking distribution of relief supplies in Cambodia.
Believes Cambodian Government is sincerely trying to cope with problems, that
efforts are hindered by logistical and technical problems and understaffing, but
not by politics.  General director Brian Walker says problems encountered are
not much different from those in other Third World countries and that situation
is improving.  Harper estimates that USSR has given 120,000 tons of food to
Cambodia in past 7 months (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 355-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 23, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 156 words

US State Department officials receive credible reports that Pol Pot, leader of
Cambodian loyalist forces fighting Vietnamese-backed Heng Samrin Government has
been replaced as Prime Minister by President and Chief of State Khieu Samphan in
effort to widen loyalists' politial support against Vietnamese.  Pol Pot is
believed to retain control of estimated 25,000 guerrillas.  Development comes as
Vietnamese forces reportedly are preparing for major offensive to wipe out
Cambodian loyalist border forces.  Action would cause concern to Thailand and
put pressure on US and China to live up to pledges to support Thailand in event
of Vietnamese aggression.  Officials say increase in military activity might
lead to huge influx of refugees, who number 700,000 in border areas, into
Thailand.  Officials believe USSR, aware of strong US and Chinese backing of
Thailand, are counseling Vietnam not to cross Thai border.  Pol Pot por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 357-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 24, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 215 words

Article on efforts of Congress and its members to exert expanded influence on
American foreign policy.  Moves have been buttressed by arsenal of legislative
weapons, forged in aftermath of Vietnam and Watergate, that gives Congress power
to curtail military actions, legislative veto over arms sales and right to be
informed of military action and Presidential decisions involving foreign aid.
Strengthened Congressional staffs, access to intelligence data and increased
Congressional travel have helped legislators exercise powers but have led to
intense debate among those who contend that new role is unwarranted and unwise
intrusion into Presidential prerogatives and those who maintain that airing of
issues and options is likely to lead to better policy.  Some instances of
Congressional use of new legislative powers discussed, notably its backing of
Carter Adm decision to provide military aid to Zaire during invasion by Katangan
forces in '78, its modification of arms sales under terms of Nelson-Bingham Act,
increased world travel by Congressional members, some of whom routinely
negotiate with world leaders, and decision to restrict aid to Afghanistan until
Govt apoligizes for killing of US ambassador in '78.  Repr Jim Sasser illus
during recent visit to Cambodia (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 358-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 24, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY ARI L GOLDMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 111 words

Rev Dr William Sloane Coffin Jr, 1 of 3 American clergymen invited to celebrate
Christmas services at US Embassy in Teheran, sharply criticizes Pres Carter's
call for economic sanctions against Iran, Riverside Church sermon, NYC.  Says it
is reminiscent of former Pres Lyndon Johnson's bombing of North Vietnam.  Bishop
Thomas J Gumbleton supports Coffin statement, news conference at Kennedy
International Airport.  William M Green, member of Riverside Church's board of
trustees, and Irene Jones and Albert Wilson, members of board of deacons,
express support for Coffin.  Illustration of Coffin, Gumbleton and Rev M William
Howard during news conference (M)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 358-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 26, 1979, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

Japanese and Soviet Communist Parties, ending 15-year rift, issue joint
statement condemning China's invasion of Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 360-7

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 27, 1979, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 23, Column 5

LENGTH: 15 words

Anthony Lewis article recalls Christmas bombing of North Vietnam 7 years ago by
US (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 36

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 28, 1979, Friday

BYLINE: BY ABRAM V MARTIN

SECTION: Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 30 words

Abram V Martin letter on danger Thailand feels of full-scale attack by Vietnam.
Notes historical record shows that US has moral obligation to aid Thailand in
case of attack (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 36

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 28, 1979, Friday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

Editorial says Soviet intervention in Afghanistan may leave USSR with something
like what the US had in Vietnam.  Says US has every reason to condemn action
without seeing it as East-West test.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 36

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 29, 1979, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Analysis of Soviet options and problems in Afghanistan now that has intervened
militarily to install a Government more to its liking.  Discusses analogy with
US involvement in Vietnam.  Guerrillas illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 36

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 30, 1979, Sunday

SECTION: Section 12; Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 20 words

Article in special section America: The '70's and Beyond discusses war American
lost in Vietnam.  Illustrations (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 36

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 245 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 31, 1979, Monday

BYLINE: BY AUGUST HECKSCHER

SECTION: Page 14, Column 6

LENGTH: 33 words

August Heckscher letter disputes Rev William Sloane Coffin Jr statement that
Pres Carter's proposal for economic sanctions against Iran is reminiscent of
Lyndon Johnson's bombing of North Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 36

              Copyright 1979 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
