
                               1 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 2, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 105 words

Benjamin Schemmer, in book on Vietnam called 'The Raid,' says US commandos
raided N Vietnamese POW camp in '70 despite repts that it was empty and killed
100-200 Soviet or Chinese soldiers in battle that broke out when many raiders
attacked wrong target.  Says US Defense Sec Melvin R Laird and other officials
ignored intelligence repts that Son Tay prison camp had been evacuated and
ordered Nov 21 '70 raid because aerial photos suggested someone might still be
there.  Says most volunteer commandos landed by helicopter at heavily guarded
antiaircraft training school 600 yds from deserted camp.  Incident described
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 183-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 3, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 5

LENGTH: 45 words

Luong Trong Tuong Rosalie, daughter of Vietnamese Hoa Hao Buddhist sec leader
Luong Trong Tuong, in lr to French newspapers, says entire leadership of sect
and tens of thousands of followers have been arrested in Vietnam.  Appeals for
release of family members (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 184-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 3, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 207 words

N and S Vietnam are officially reunited, July 2, after more than 20 yrs of war.
Hanoi is declared capital and former N Vietnamese flag, anthem and emblem are
approved as symbols of country.  Hanoi radio broadcast says leaders of new Soc
Repub of Vietnam have been elected in Natl Assembly by secret ballot.  History
of war that divided country in '54 following French defeat at Dien Bien Phu
noted.  Broadcast does not say how decision on reunification was actually made.
Former Prov Revolutionary Govt of S Vietnam pres Dr Nguyen Huu Tho named to 1 of
2 vice presidential posts.  Other is Nguyen Luong Bang, who has been N
Vietnamese Vice Pres since '69.  Former N Vietnamese head of state Ton Duc Thang
named Pres.Pham Van Dong retains title of Prime Min.  Truong Chinh named
Assembly standing com chmn.  There is no initial indication that changes will
occur in highest ranks of Vietnam's Communist Party, where all major decisions
reptdly are made.  Most observers say top 5 men in party's 11-man Politburo are
1st Sec Le Duan, Chinh, Prime Min Dong, Phan Hung and Deputy Prime Min Nguyen Vo
Giap.  Short biographies of some top officials given.  Map.  Illus of poster
showing Assembly seat distribution and listing Govt leaders (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 184-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 4, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24

LENGTH: 327 words

Anthony Lewis article on endurance of Amer system of govt as envisioned in
Const.  Recalls traumatic events of last 12 yrs, including murder of Pres
Kennedy, Vietnam war, race riots and Watergate scandal.  Claims that not many
countries could go through such yrs, with so many shocks to natl confidence, and
emerge with insts intact as US has done.  Says the system worked, the center
held, insts corrected human failings, and a govt of laws, not men, proved to be
more than myth.  Claims Amers are amazingly free to speak and write as they
wish, and this freedom of expression facilitates change without build-up of
explosive pressure.  Traces Amer independence, and the nature of its pol
society, to Philadelphia Conv of 1787, where participants framed their system on
premise that human nature would remain imperfect, and so sought 'auxiliary
precautions' against tyranny.  Sees many examples to justify optimism about Amer
in '76, particularly in area of race.  Recalls that in less than 25 yrs,
official segregation has been killed, blacks are voting and holding office
across South, and there exists feeling in South that black and white belong to
same society.  Calls this profound social change.  Discusses role played by law
and cts.  Notes that Amer judges have had moral and educ function in their
rulings.  Lists reasons for concern.  Says there still exists a divided society.
Says econ problems are more daunting because of loss of faith that they will be
solved by material growth.  Cites weakening of old personal and local
attachments to family and church and community.  Notes that Amers feel
frustrated as govt fails to meet their expectations.  Says const system has been
strained by concentration of pol power in Fed govt.  Quotes from article by
Daniel Bell that the const system remains the one gift that retains element of
Amer exceptionalism.  Illus.  Cartoon.  Graph showing numbers of immigrants who
came to Amer from 1820-1974 (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 185-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 4, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY CLAIRE STERLING

SECTION: Section 6; Page 106

LENGTH: 66 words

Claire Sterling article on attitude of Anzio, Italy, citizens toward US,
contrasting their World War II and early post-war regard for Amer Govt and
people with present dislike of Govt, though people are still well
regarded--seeing this as generally representative of world opinion.  Discusses
factors, including US role in Vietnam war and support for anti-leftist
politicians in Italy.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 185-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 4, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 97 words

Follow-up article discusses current 'maverick' ways of former US Army Capt
Howard B Levy, Bklyn dermatologist who was ct-martialed and served 26 mos in Fed
prisons during Vietnam war for refusal to train Special Forces medics for combat
duty.  Notes Levy is in civilian practice in NYC, does not believe in private
med practice, is opposed to 'drs or anyone else making exorbitant profits' from
med and currently devotes most of his time as dermatologist in clinic at Lincoln
Hosp and Nena Health Center on Manhattan's Lower East Side, which are
exclusively for poor people (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 185-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 4, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 102 words

Vietnam Natl Assembly names former Hanoi leaders to most of top ministerial
posts in newly formed Govt of reunited Vietnam.  Former foreign min of southern
Govt Nguyen Thi Binh named Educ Min.  Roster of mins was presented to assembly
by Prime Min Pham Van Dong and approved without exception.  Among southerners
who will hold power are Pham Hung, Huynh Tan Phat and Vo Chi Cong, who are 3 of
7 Deputy Premiers.  Four northerners will retain former ministerial titles:
Interior Min Tran Quoc Hoan, Foreign Affairs Min Nguyen Duy Trinh, Natl Planning
Min Le Thanh Nghi and Defense Min Gen Vo Nguyen Giap (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 185-2

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 5, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY JON NORDHEIMER

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 239 words

NY Times survey of Americans around country finds undercurrent of uncertainty
about future of Amer.  Finds that tensions of responsibility as strongest,
freest and most dynamic society have raised self-doubts and mild disorientation
about state of Amer life.  Notes lack of natl standard behind which nation can
rally, as in past periods of dissatisfaction.  Cites major natl polls, which
confirm sense of natl drift and alienation, as well as disenchantment with Amer
insts.  Notes, however, that 90% of Amers are convinced that system can be made
to work.  Recalls rapid succession of traumas, reforms and movements that
changed basic pattern of life since '63 assassination of Pres Kennedy, including
Vietnam, Watergate, civil rights movement, women's liberation, and changing
nature of family life.  Notes Prof Eric Goldman's list of assumptions that have
been shaken in last decade.  Comments from Prof William Appleman Williams and
Prof Michael T Kammen.  Notes Amer's strengths, including fact that it is first
major Western power to emerge from econ recession.  Cites gains of blacks.
Notes that despite its current ills, foreigners still look upon US with awe and
respect for its insts, and many thousands yearn to live there.  Claims there
exists common agreement that US in times of crisis can call upon resiliency that
has been part of Amer character for 200 yrs.  Illus of Amers at Valley Forge,
Pa, on July 4 (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 18

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 6, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 3

LENGTH: 20 words

GB Foreign Office says Govt has recognized unified Vietnam.  GB Amb to N Vietnam
Robert Tesh named Amb to Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 187-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 6, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 3

LENGTH: 21 words

GB Foreign Office says Govt has recognized unitied Vietnam.  GB Amb to N Vietnam
Robert Tesh named as Amb to Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 187-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 9, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 28 words

Vietnam has reptdly provided med and food supplies to Palestinians.  Prime Min
Pham Van Dong meets with PLO's Hanoi repr Ali Fayad to discuss situation in
Lebanon (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 190-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 9, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 30 words

Vietnam has reptdly handed over gift of med and food supplies to Palestinians.
Prime Min Pham Van Dong meets with PLO's Hanoi repr Ali Fayad to discuss
situation in Lebanon (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 190-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 11, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KEVIN BUCKLEY

SECTION: Section 6; Page 37

LENGTH: 20 words

John Pilger lr comments on Kevin Buckley May 16 rev of Pilger book The Last Day,
about Vietnam War.  Buckley replies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 19

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 11, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY LAURIE J TRACY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 5

LENGTH: 59 words

Laurie J Tracy lr suggests Dr Frederick Saunders (lr, July 4) never learned
lessons of Vietnam.  Claims countries pursuing natl interest while disregarding
world public opinion reap few benefits.  Claims underdevelopedd nations will
turn to countries with pol consciences as well as technology.  Condemns pol
escapades based on belief in divine right.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 19

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 11, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 125 words

Rev of Jimmy Carter's pol leanings finds he is as liberal or conservative as he
needs to be at any moment or in any given pol situation.  '70 gubernatorial
campaign in which Carter charged opponent Carl Sanders had sold out to 'ultra
liberals' recalled.  Carter himself seen as strong liberal on foreign policy
issues.  His efforts to sidestep Vietnam so as not to stir up his hawkish
constituents recalled.  His statement after release of Pentagon Papers urging
enactment of Fed legis to make news orgns criminally liable for such
publications recalled.  His statement that he phoned Vice Pres Spiro Agnew and
urged him not to resign under pressure noted.  His '74 refusal to castigate
'welfare cheaters' during Southern pol conf recalled (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 192-2

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 11, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY PAUL LEWIS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 163 words

Profile of Repr Stephen L Neal, chmn of Sen Domestic Monetary Policy Subcom.  Is
first freshman to hold HR subcom chmnship in 25 years.  Neal believes Fed
Reserve Bd's monetary policy has caused 60% of US inflation since '53 by pumping
too much money into econ.  Cites belief that Fed Chmn Arthur F Burns increased
money growth during '72 election to help Richard Nixon reelection effort.
Maintains bd duped Amers into accepting Vietnam War by printing money to
disguise true cost of war and make Amers think US could pay for war and big
social programs at same time.  Cautions that Cong control of monetary policy
might be troubled by temptation to increase money supply for short-term good
effects favorable to biennial reelection campaigns.  Supports increased Cong
supervision of monetary policy.  Supports low constant rate of increase in money
supply even if result is fluctuating interest rates.  Subcom now studying
Reserve's influence on econ.  Photos of Neal (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 192-3

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Ed on reunification of N and S Vietnam after 22 yrs.  Notes collapse of US war
effort had none of dire consequences that war's supporters predicted.  Holds
Vietnam and US would benefit from early establishment of diplomatic relations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 19

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 12, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Ed on reunification of N and S Vietnam after 22 yrs.  Notes collapse of US war
effort had none of dire consequences that war's supporters predicted.  Holds
Vietnam and US would benefit from early establishment of diplomatic relations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 19

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 13, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

Canadian-Amer couple Murray and Linda Hiebert, describing Vietnam scene after
trip from Hanoi to Quang Ngai, say vast destruction and poverty are still
evident in nothern section while poeple in southern cities of Danang and Hue
cling to life style learned from Amers.  Say there is 'fantastic amount of
reconstruction' going on (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 194-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 13, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 209 words

Vietnamese Govt, in major move to improve relations with SE Asian countries,
agrees to establish diplomatic relations with Philippines and to receive Thai
delegation in Aug to discuss normalization of relations.  Hanoi previously had
bitterly denounced Thailand, Philippines and other ASEAN nations for being part
of 'neocolonialist' orgn controlled by US.  Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min Pham
Hien, on good-will tour of Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and Philippines, signs
Philippine accord.  Analysts say Vietnam's sudden shift to more moderate policy
may be related to other factors, including step-up in verbal battle with Peking
over oil potential of Spratly and Paracel Islands, for which Vietnam may want to
obtain support.  Signs that Philippines and Thailand are acting to reduce Amer
mil presence in their countries noted.  Vietnamese leader Le Duan's reversal of
stand taken on changes to be made in southern section of country recalled.
Indications that leaders have begun tough policy in south described.Difficulty
reporters face in attempting to determine conditions in south noted.  Handful of
reporters still in Saigon were ousted in May and Vietnamese working for Western
news agencies have been ordered to stop filing dispatches (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 194-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 14, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 179 words

Vietnamese mission to Philippines ends July 13 after pledging, in joint
communique with Philippines Govt, that neither country will use mil bases for
aggressive purposes in region.  Pledge is significant because of long-standing
mutual security arrangements between Philippines and US.  New treaty redefining
Amer-Filipino ties currently is under negotiation.  Foreign Under Sec Jose
Ingles, in July 13 int, says guarantee given Vietnamese that bars intervention
from mil bases is merely reiteration of UN principles.  Hanoi had initially
wanted guarantee specifying US as foreign power to be denied bases for
aggressive purposes but Philippine negotiators reptdly persuaded Vietnamese to
generalize clause so as to apply to any foreign country.  Vietnamese Deputy
Foreign Affairs Min Phan Hien, in news conf before Singapore departure, says
Vietnam is ready to pursue talks with US on question of rehabilitation aid and
Amers missing in action.  Adds Paris agreement remains valid in eyes of
Vietnamese and talks with US should be based on provs regarding both issues (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 195-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 14, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 179 words

Vietnamese mission to Philippines ends July 13 after pledging, in joint
communique with Philippines Govt, that neither country will use mil bases for
aggressive purposes in region.  Pledge is significant because of long-standing
mutual security arrangements between Philippines and US.  New treaty redefining
Amer-Filipino ties currently is under negotiation.  Foreign Under Sec Jose
Ingles, in July 13 int, says guarantee given Vietnamese that bars intervention
from mil bases is merely reiteration of UN principles.  Hanoi had initially
wanted guarantee specifying US as foreign power to be denied bases for
aggressive purposes but Philippine negotiators reptdly persuaded Vietnamese to
generalize clause so as to apply to any foreign country.  Vietnamese Deputy
Foreign Affairs Min Phan Hien, in news conf before Singapore departure, says
Vietnam is ready to pursue talks with US on question of rehabilitation aid and
Amers missing in action.  Adds Paris agreement remains valid in eyes of
Vietnamese and talks with US should be based on provs regarding both issues (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 195-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 4

LENGTH: 36 words

20 people demonstrate outside Madison Sq Garden (NYC) in attempt to keep memory
of Vietnam war alive during Dem Natl Conv.  Group spokesman Tasi Kohlenberg
notes there has been no mention of war during conv (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 196-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 16, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY R W APPLE JR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 191 words

Jimmy Carter selects Sen Walter F Mondale as his running mate on July 15 and
delegates to Dem Natl Conv jubilantly endorse choice.  Sen Hubert Humphrey
delivers Mondale nominating address.  Ark Gov David Pryor and Repr Yvonne B
Burke second nomination.  Others nominated are Repr Ronald V Dellums, Gary
Benoit, opponent of busing, and draft resister Fritz Efaw.  1 of conv's more
moving moments comes with seconding speech delivered for Efaw by Vietnam veteran
Ron Kovik, who is now a paraplegic.  Mondale is cheered as he scores Pres Ford
for pardoning Richard Nixon, acceptance speech.  Carter, in his acceptance
speech, promises that '76 will 'not be yr of politics as usual' but yr of 'quiet
and sober reassessment of our nation's character and purpose,' of 'inspiration
and hope'.  Meets earlier in day with Gov Edmund Brown Jr.  Brown comments.
Repr Morris Udall, Sen Edward M Kennedy, Repr Thomas P O'Neill, La Repr Louis
Jenkins, Fla Gov Reubin Askew, HR Speaker Don Tucker and George Wallace
supporter Norman Bie comment.  Rev Martin Luther King Sr delivers benediction.
Conv's gavel falls for final time at 11:43 PM.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 197-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 18, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

Pol, soc and econ changes in Indochinese countries, as result of Vietnam war's
end, assessed.  Vietnam has recently established diplomatic relations with
Philippines and Thailand.  Strained relations with Cambodia continues.  Country
has mil forces in northern and southern areas of Laos.  Vietnamese attitude
toward ASEAN, which is comprised of Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and
Philippines, described.  Relations with US, People's Repub of China and USSR,
discussed.  Waning involvement of US in area noted.  Map.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 199-2

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 22, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 161 words

US Sens Edward M Kennedy and George McGovern make public similar telegrams from
Vietnamese Amb in Paris Vo Van Sung announcing that Vietnamese Govt has
authorized departure of all Amers, wives and children who had been stranded in
country since end of Vietnam war.  Announcement comes as US State Dept and Cong
officials accuse Vietnamese Govt officials of not having fulfilled promises that
stranded Ames would be allowed to leave.  There is no exact figure on number of
Amers and dependents remaining in country.  HR Select Com on Missing Persons in
SE Asian chmn Repr G V Montgomery estimates number is at least 40.  Kennedy and
McGovern have conducted personal negotiations with Vietnamese in effort to get
Amers out.  Kennedy calls action 'another gesture of good will to Amer people.
Montgomery says he will attempt to find out if 'wives and children' ref in
telegram from Vietnamese Amb in Paris includes all Vietnamese dependents of
Amers, news conf (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 203-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 23, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Eighth biennial convention of Lutheran Church in Amer adopts resolution calling
for unconditional amnesty for Vietnam War resisters and pardon for those
convicted of related offenses.  Endorses busing as means of integration when
integration cannot be better achieved otherwise (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 203-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 24, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HELEN PARKMAN

SECTION: Page 22, Column 4

LENGTH: 36 words

Helen Parkman lr on July 12 ed urging US to establish diplomatic relations with
Vietnam says US should have 'good grace' to congratulate Vietnamese leadership
for extraordinary competence in reunifying country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 20

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 24, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HELEN PARKMAN

SECTION: Page 22, Column 4

LENGTH: 36 words

Helen Parkman lr on July 12 ed urging US to establish diplomatic relations with
reunified Vietnam says US should have 'good grace' to congratulate Vietnamese
leadership for extraordinary competence in reunification.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 20

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 25, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Follow-up on Lt Col Anthony B Herbert's $44-million libel suit filed in Fed Dist
Ct (Manhattan), Jan '74, against CBS, newscaster Mike Wallace and a CBS news
producer for '73 program 'The Selling of Colonel Herbert' finds suit is nowhere
near trial.  CBS Corp information dir Robert Hummerstone quotes CBS legal dept
as saying trial will probably be in '77.  Herbert formally accused gen and lt
col of covering up war crimes he said he witnessed in Vietnam.  Army dismissed
charges against officers and Herbert retired in '72 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 206-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 26, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 26 words

E Ger press agency photo shows bridge over Thu Bon River in Vietnam being
rebuilt so that 'Unity' rr line can be constructed between Hanoi and Saigon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 207-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 27, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

Major aspect of US Justice Dept's investigation of CIA activities is '73 Sen
testimony of former CIA Dir Richard Helms that agency was not, among other
things, involved in tracking domestic opponents of Vietnam war.  Subsequent
investigations have established that agency's Operation Chaos led to compilation
of 10,000 files relating to antiwar protesters in US.  Dept is also
investigating agency's involvement in scattered instances of electronic
eavesdropping in '71 antiwar demonstrations (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 208-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 27, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY JOHN M CREWDSON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 235 words

Justice Dept attys investigating CIA's 20-yr program of mail surveillance
reptdly have recommended against criminal prosecution of agency officials
involved in project, on grounds that 'continuum of Presidential authority'
rendered mail openings legal, despite Fed statutes prohibiting such tampering.
Have found evidence of Pres knowledge of operation, which between '53-73
resulted in opening of nearly 250,000 lrs between US and Communist countries
which passed through postal facilities in NYC, San Francisco, and elsewhere.
Sen Select Com on Intelligence claims it has found no documentary evidence of
Pres knowledge of project.  Ex-Pres Nixon, in written response to questions of
com, claimed he did not recall ever hearing of project.  Com staff has rebuked
some Nixon aides for advising him in '70 that mail coverage had been
discontinued.  Justice attys' recommendation not to prosecute seen increasing
likelihood that no CIA employees will face criminal charges as result of various
investigations of agency's activities.  Govt official notes Justice Dept attys
have been unable to establish that former CIA Dir Richard Helms knowingly
perjured himself before Sen Foreign Relations Com, despite contradictions in his
testimony about whether CIA secretly passed money to opponents of Salvador
Allende Gossens, late Chilean Pres, or been involved in tracking domestic
opponents of Vietnam War (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 208-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 29, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Ed holds Amer mil withdrawal from Thailand reflects necessary adjustment by both
countries to realities of Asia in wake of Vietnam war.  Notes Thailand, in
effect, is now on path of de facto neutralism and is seeking to assure security
through accommodation with Communist neighbors.  Holds Ford Adm was well advised
to accept inevitable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 21

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 29, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 64 words

Dr John Moore, Amer authority on dioxin, says most significant substance that
escaped from chem plant in Sevaso, Italy, was dioxin, one of deadliest chems
known and contaminant used in defoliants used by US in Vietnam war.  Amt of chem
believed to have excaped from Hoffman-LaRoche is about 4 1/2 lbs.  Moore says
decontamination specialist from Agr Dept is being sent to Italy (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 210-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 30, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 241 words

Sr US officials cite 3 specific instances of what they characterize as harm to
nation's security in '71 caused by publication of Pentagon papers, according to
previously confirmed ct documents.  Assert they had lost contact in Hanoi, that
Canadian Govt had expressed concern and that Prime Min of Australia William
MacMahon had found disclosures 'appalling'.Ct documents, made public by Justice
Dept in response to demands submitted under Freedom of Information Act, indicate
that balance of Govt's plea to halt further publication of papers is based on
speculation over potential, rather than actual, damage.  Brief written by Erwin
N Griswold, who was Solicitor Gen in '71, contends that continued publication of
papers could have effect of causing immediate and irreparable harm to US
security.  Documents just released pertain to secret meeting before Judge
Gerhard Gesell on whether Washington Post injunction should be permanent.  Then
Deputy Asst Sec of Defense Dennis J Doolin, in private hearing, testified that
publication of papers had hurt his efforts on prisoners' behalf.  Says because
of papers' publication he lost 1 contact he had in Hanoi.  Deputy Under Sec of
State for Adm William B Macomber testifies in affidavit that Canadian officials
had called in Amer Amb.  Says officials expressed concern over impressions
created in Canada that Ottawa Govt was either rogue or fool for helping US to
search for peace in Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 211-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 1, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY R R BAXTER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8

LENGTH: 27 words

Book, The My Lai massacre And Its Cover-Up.  Beyond the Reach of Law?  edited by
Joseph Goldstein, Burke Marshall and Jack Schwartz, revd by R R Baxter.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 21

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 1, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 116 words

Cambodian Prime Min Pol Pot, in int released by Vietnam News Agency, says that
15 mos after Communist rule Cambodia still has barely enough food and serious
problems.  Is 1st known int since election late in '75.  Pol Pot says country
has no means to build new factories to spur econ growth and few cultural
achievements.  Says country has modest goals of exporting rice and rubber in
near future in exchange for simple machinery.  Says security is stable.  Charges
'US imperialists and their henchmen' with planning to overthrow Communists 6 mos
after victory.  Makes no mention of any death or famine caused by city
evacuations or of reptd tens of thousands of executions by Communists (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 213-2

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 1, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Thai Foreign Min Pichai Rattakul arrives, July 31, Vientiane, Laos, at start of
weeklong trip aimed at improving diplomatic relations with Laos and Vietnam.
Thai-Laotian talks will center on reopening common border and settling disputes
and trade.  Hanoi talks are expected to include possible re-establishment of
diplomatic relations and status of 40,000 Vietnamese refugees who have lived in
Thailand since '50s (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 213-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 2, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 6

LENGTH: 47 words

Bklyn (NY) postal worker Gerald Posner, in quotation of day after having been
trapped in Saigon (Vietnam) since it fell to Communists 15 mos ago, says, 'I
thought I was the last Amer in Saigon.  I decided, well, if they kill me, okay.
But meanwhile, I would look for my wife'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 214-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 2, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

List of Amers and others bound for US who arrived in Bangkok, Thailand, Aug 1,
from Saigon (Vietnam).  List was compiled from official sources, AP files and
travelers (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 214-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 2, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 8

LENGTH: 45 words

Sol and Nettie Posner, parents of Gerald Posner, 1 of Amers who had been
detained by Vietnamese Govt in Saigon for past 15 mos, comment on his recent
release.  Posner returned to Vietnam 2 days before Apr '75 Communist victory in
order to find his Vietnamese wife (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 214-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 2, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 182 words

Vietnamese Govt allows 49 US citizens and dependents to board flight from Saigon
to Bangkok, Thailand, ending more than 1 yr of uncertainty about their fate, Aug
1. Journey was arranged by UN.  Evacuees were stranded in Saigon when Communists
took Vietnamese capital over on Apr 30 '75.  While 4 Amers are known to be still
in Vietnam and at least 3 are expected to leave within 1 wk, UN refugee
officials suspect that others could be scattered in remote regions of country.
Variety of stories of life in Vietnam in last yr noted.  While some told of
country in chaos other praised 'revolution'.  3 people were taken directly from
Chi Hua prison in Saigon to Tan Son Nhut airport for flight.  Some evacuees
describe their experiences during past yr.  Amers still listed as being in
Vietnam, and who are expected to leave aboard regular French-operated Saigon
Bangkok shuttle during wk of Aug 1, are: well-known Saigon shoeshine stand
operator Richard Hughes, Theresa Reed and Harlow Gay.  4th Amer, not mentioned
officially by Vietnamese, is believed to be Tucker Gugelman.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 214-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 2, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 92 words

Gerald Posner, 1 of Amers who were recently released by Vietnamese Govt after
having been detained in Saigon for past 15 mos, describes Saigon scene.  Tells
of how he scratched for living on small allowance from internatl relief orgns.
Posner arrived in Saigon Apr 28 '75, 2 days before Communist victory, in order
to find his Vietnamese wife and return with her to US.  Describes sadness at
having to leave Vietnamese friends behind.  Expresses feelings that he and all
Amers in Saigon were being used like 'chessboard' by both govts.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 214-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 5, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY LAURIE JOHNSTON

SECTION: Page 37, Column 3

LENGTH: 28 words

Brig Gen J Robinson Risner retires as Technical Fighter Weapons Center
vice-commander after 33-yr Air Force career that included 88 months as POW in
North Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 217-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 7, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 7

LENGTH: 37 words

US Dist Ct Judge Myron L Gordon sentences David S Fine, confessed participant in
'70 Wis Univ classroom bombing, to 7 yrs' imprisonment.  Bombing incident, at
height of anti-Vietnam war protest movement, recalled (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 219-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 7, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 278 words

Shah of Iran denies Iran is having difficulties handling vast number of modern
weapons from US, news conf for journalists traveling with Sec Kissinger.  Says
US must continue to sell arms to Iran or risk instability and war in area.  Says
number of Amers cited in Sen Foreign Relations subcom staff study as working in
Iran is too high but that US really has no alternative to its current policy.
Says staff rept, which said that $10-billion in arms sold to Iran in recent yrs
was excessive, had not been used well and required hiring of too many Amers to
operate arms systems, was 'not as bad' as some consider it.  Says that if Iran
becomes weakened militarily, US and West would be faced with 'all-out nuclear
holocaust or other Vietnams' every now and then.  Scores criticism of Iranian
defense needs.  Says he can get arms from other sources if US supplies are
restricted.  Says Iran will not make any price concessions as part of bartering
some of its oil for weapons systems.  On sale of 8 Amer nuclear-power reactors
to Iran, Shah insists that he will not accept limits on Iranian sovereignty, but
says that multinatl processing plant would be acceptable.  Says Iran will do
what it can to prevent spread of nuclear weapons.  Denies Iran has any pol
prisoners or that torture is used.  Says there are 3,500 Marxists and terrorists
who are prisoners but that they are not political.  Kissinger says US attaches
'great importance to relations with Iran' as well as to role Iran plays in
security and balance of area.  Attends dinner given in his honor by Finance Min.
Earlier, Kissinger, his wife and son David visit Govt's main caviar-processing
plant (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 219-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 7, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 204 words

Vietnam and Thailand, in action completing Vietnam's diplomatic reconciliation
with non-Communist SE Asia, agree to establish diplomatic relations, Aug 6. Move
marks what Vietnamese leaders hope will be beginning of closer relationship with
West, partiuclarly US.  US has said it would not provide Vietnam with econ
reconstruction aid unless it establishes amicable relations with neighbors.
Marks what Thai leaders hope will be at least temporary guarantee that Vietnam
will not support Thailand's Communist insurgency.  Powerful Thai mil
establishment is unhappy with events leading to accord.  Specific commitments
include permission for Thai passenger aircraft to fly across Indochina enroute
to Hong Kong and Philippines, establishment of joint com to consider
repartiation of Vietnamese refugees in Thailand, release of Thai fishermen and
trawlers being detained by Vietnam, visit by Vietnamese trade delegation to
Bangkok to discuss commercial links and consideration of question of Thailand's
return of nearly 2 dozen Amer planes flown by escaping refugees during '75
Saigon collapse.  Vietnamese, in gesture of good will on eve of recent visit of
Thai delegation to Hanoi, released most captured fishermen (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 219-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 8, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 76 words

Departure of 49 Amers who had been stranded in Saigon since collapse of
Vietnamese Govt in May '75 summarized.  Dispute between US and Vietnam on issue
discussed.  While Hanoi's main complaint against US was Amer unwillingness to
provide reconstruction aid that Vietnam claims was agreed to in Paris agreement
that led to Amer troops withdrawal, US says Hanoi failed to provide information
about Amer servicemen still listed as missing in action (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 220-2

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 8, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Richard Hughes, 1 of last 4 Amers known to be in Vietnam, arrives, Bagkok,
Thailand, Aug 7. Hughes spent many yrs in Vietnam as head of orgn that helped
Saigon's orphaned or abandoned shoeshine boys.  Is not immediately available for
comment.  UN officials say 2 other Amers, Teresa Ann Reed and John H Gay, remain
in Vietnam.  Gay is believed to be in Hanoi jail.  Tucker Gugelman, reptdly
accused of having worked for CIA also is in Hanoi jail (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 220-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 9, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 101 words

US State Dept, responding to recent release of 49 Amers by Vietnamese Govt,
approves licenses for Mennonite Central Com, Bach Mai Hosp Fund and Church World
Services to provide total of $850,000 in food and medical aid to Vietnam.  Dept
coordinator Frank A Sieverts says since fall of Saigon licenses have been
approved for humanitarian aid totaling $3-million.  Says several approvals were
timed to Vietnamese gestures.  Declines to term latest action 'reciprocal
agreement'.  Dept refuses to confirm repts that Tucker Gugelman, 1 of 3 Amers
still known to be in Vietnam, is former CIA employee (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 221-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 9, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 62 words

Richard Hughes, in Thailand after 8 yrs in S Vietnam as social worker, repts
scores of boys are reunited with their families, others sent back to school or
to work.  Says Shoeshine Boy Foundation, network of houses in Saigon and Da Nang
he set up to house homeless children, has been dissolved.  Repts good S
Vietnamese relationship with these children.  Hughes por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 221-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 10, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 5

LENGTH: 22 words

Frank Mariano, who was a Vietnam war correspondent for ABC News, dies Aug 9 at
age 45 from complications following heart surgery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 22

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 12, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 66, Column 8

LENGTH: 112 words

Friendshipment US coordinator Cora Weiss says orgn, composed of Amer ch and
civic orgns, plans to help build hosp at My Lai (Vietnam), where almost 350
civilians were killed by US soldiers in '68, Aug 11 NYC news conf.  Says
$140-million 100-bed hisp will be built with funds and materials collected
through contributions in US.  Says orgn has accumulated $175-million thus far
for relief and reconstruction aid to Vietnam.  Construction work is to be
carried out by Vietnamese Govt.  Weiss and lawyer-husband Peter returned Aug 9
from 3-wk visit to Vietnam.  Says they are 1st Amers to visit country since
reunification.  Says 'reconstruction is rapid everywhere' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 224-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 12, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY WILLARD STUART GOURSE

SECTION: Page 30, Column 5

LENGTH: 45 words

Willard Stuart Gourse lr, noting US experts believe Iran is now so dependent on
US personnel in training Iranians to use Amer mil systems that by '80 at least
50,000 Amer could be tied up in Iran, says situation could drive US into another
Vietnam tragedy.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 22

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 12, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

Amer Veterans of World War II, Korea and Vietnam (AMVETS) open 5-day national
convention in Philadelphia.  Leon Sanchez, national executive director, says
orgn officers discussed potential dangers to members from mysterious disease
that felled 27 who attended Amer Legion convention in city in July '76, and
decided to go on with convention in Philadelphia.  Acknowledges many members
have been reptd staying away from convention (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 224-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 14, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY EDITH EVANS ASBURY

SECTION: Page 44, Column 5

LENGTH: 51 words

Members of Veterans of Foreign Wars arrive in NYC for 77th natl conv.  Discuss
mysterious illness that attacked Amer Legion conv in Philadelphia.  Concerned
about need for more govt benefits for veterans and stronger natl defense.
Oppose amnesty for Vietnam draft resisters.  Photo of VFW member (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 226-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 15, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY C B D BRYAN

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Book, Born on the Fourth of July, by paralyzed US veteran of Vietnam war Ron
Kovic, about his life and eventual opposition to war, revd by C B D Bryan.
Kovic illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 22

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 15, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 59, Column 5

LENGTH: 46 words

US Pres Ford signs legis increasing to $150 from $60 monthly payments to
civilians interned in SE Asia during Vietnam war.  Measure applies to any Amer
held as prisoner, internee or hostage or anyone who went into hiding after
beginning of Vietnam conflict on Feb 27 '61 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 227-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 15, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Vietnamese Prime Min Pham Van Dong arrives, Colombo, Sri Lanka, Aug 14, for conf
of nonaligned countries scheduled to begin Aug 16.  Says he will use conf to
step up Vietnam's struggle against 'imperialism, colonialism and neocolonialism
and to safeguard Vietnam's independence and freedom', prepared statement.  Cuban
Prime Min Fidel Castro and N Korean Pres Kim il-Sung unexpectedly have dropped
plans to attend meeting of 85 nonaligned nations (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 227-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 132 words

Anthony Lewis on Pres Ford's failure to inspire confidence of his country or
party.  Says Ford did not understand Amer hunger for reassurance about itself,
after traumas of Vietnam and Watergate.  Claims his pardon of Pres Nixon did
lasting damage because it prevented reaffirmation of country's commitment to
law.  Says Ford has been even more damagingly insensitive on foreign side.
Scores him for endorsing 'preposterous' argument of State Sec Kissinger that
Amer would have no credibility in world unless it got more deeply involved in
losing causes such as Vietnam and Angola.  Holds that Ford's fearful talk of
Amer's world position opened way for Ronald Reagan and emergence of strident
right-wing force.  Says Ford is in trouble because voters do not feel him to be
a Pres (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 22

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 16, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

Intergovtl Com for Eur Migration chief repr in Thailand Albert Corcos says about
3,000 Indochinese refugees are to be flown from Thailand to US in Aug, 512 of
them in next 3 days.  Refugees from Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia will enter US
under recent adm ruling allowing 10,000 refugees to be added to ranks of 130,000
already in US.  Corcos says group expects to send more than 3,000 refugees
monthly to US until target is met.  More than 70,000 Indochinese refugees now
live in Thailand.  Thailand has repeatedly said that it will not assimilate the
refugees (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 228-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 17, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 7

LENGTH: 54 words

Correction of Aug 12 article on Friendshipment Orgn project aimed at raising
funds to build hosp at My Lai, Vietnam, says correct figure needed to build
structure is $140,000.  Typographical error in same article said $175-million
had been raised to aid Vietnam reconstruction.  Figure should have been
$1.75-million (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 229-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 17, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD R LINGEMAN

SECTION: Page 29

LENGTH: 26 words

Book, Born on the Fourth of July, by paralyzed US veteran of Vietnam war Ron
Kovic, about his life and eventual opposition to war, revd by R R Lingeman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 229-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 17, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 29

LENGTH: 22 words

Ron Rovic autobiog Born on the Fourth of July revd.  Kovic is crippled Vietnam
veteran who has become activist anti-war figure.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 22

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 19, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 8

LENGTH: 32 words

Former Vietnam POW Leo Thrsness, who lost '74 Sen campaign against George
McGovern, leads Repub Natl Conv in Pledge of Allegiance, Aug 18.  Thorsness is
chmn of S Dakota Repub State Com (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 231-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 21, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Vietnamese permanent observer to UN Dinh Ba Thi submits lr to Sec Gen Waldheim
applying for UN membership for Vietnam, Aug 20.  Security Council reptdly will
meet soon to consider application.  Aug '75 requests by N and S Vietnamese govts
were vetoed by US (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 233-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 22, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY AL MARLENS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

Article on Repub strategy for Pres campaign against Jimmy Carter that emerged at
Repub Natl Conv.  Sees Repubs planning attacks on Carter and on Dem Cong and
trying to equate Dem scandals in Cong with Watergate.  Sees Repubs blaming Dems
for Vietnam War and trying to neutralize pol effect of high unemployment by
pointing to lowered inflation.  Cartoons (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 234-2

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 22, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

Vietnam to issue stamps marking reunification north and south (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 234-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 22, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS P RONAN

SECTION: Page 34, Column 4

LENGTH: 271 words

Former Atty Gen Ramsey Clark calls on Cong to provide 'sweeping' reforms in FBI
to make orgn 'lawful and effective,' position paper in his campaign for Dem Sen
nomination in NYS.Holds that as Atty Gen, he had rejected requests for
'unwarranted and unjustified' wiretaps on individuals, including late Martin
Luther King Jr, former Israeli Foreign Min Abba Eban, Black Panther leaders
Eldridge Cleaver and Fred Hampton, Puerto Rican Socialist Juan Marie Bras, and
Yippie leader Jerry Rubin.  Says he also refused permission to tap groups such
as Natl Mobilization Com, Student Mobilization Com, 5th Ave Vietnam Peace Parade
Com, Liberation magazine, African Amer Heritage Assn, and Black Panther Party.
Says his FBI reform program includes 'disclosure of past misconduct,' as well as
continued public disclosure of investigations.  Clark's opponents for Dem Sen
nomination campaign around state.  Daniel P Moynihan calls news conf to advocate
approval of welfare-reform bill before Cong.  Says it would federalize adm and
costs of welfare and save states and localities $4.5-billion a yr.  Criticizes
another Dem Sen aspirant, Bella Abzug, for voting against his Family Assistance
Plan.  Abzug says plan would have created 'bureaucratic nightmare'.  She
campaigns on LI, attending Polish St Fair.  Paul O'Dwyer tours shopping centers
and beach clubs in Queens.  Calls on Landmarks Preservation Comm to designate
bldg at 334 E 79 St in Manhattan as landmark.  Repub Sen aspirant James L
Buckley campaigns in Buffalo, Biagara Falls and Hamburg, while his opponent,
Peter A Peyser, tours Westchester and Rockland Counties (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 234-2

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 22, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 83 words

Vietnamese Culture Min declares former US Embassy in Saigon and old Presidential
Palace historical monuments.  Bldgs and grounds are to be preserved as reminders
of 'criminal US aggression in Vietnam' and of 'total collapse of their
Vietnamese valet,' meaning old S Vietnamese Govt.  Former Amer consulate in
Hanoi, which functioned until Oct '54, is being repaired for new tenants.  It
had housed reprs of Prov Revolutionary Govt of S Vietnam, whose mission was
terminated by unification (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 234-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 23, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY JEAN LACOUTURE

SECTION: Page 23, Column 2

LENGTH: 27 words

French journalist Jean Lacouture, on 11th visit to Vietnam since Oct '45,
discusses changes during last 30 yrs, particularly since end of civil war.
Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 235-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 25, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 156 words

Vietnam's diplomatic gains during last 2 mos discussed.  Has re-established
diplomatic relations with Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Philippines and
Thailand.  Vietnamese Prime Min Pham Van Dong won overwhelming vote of 85
participants at nonaligned nations conf urging US to honor Vietnam peace accords
by aiding in Vietnam's reconstruction.  UN has embarked on number of assistance
programs for Vietnam.  Officials believe Vietnam's principal objective is
improving prospects of some sort of rapprochement with US.  Malaysia has agreed
to dispatch technicians to assist Vietnam in re-establishing rubber indus.
Asian Development officials express suprise at Vietnam's 'hinted' willingess to
discuss assumption of old regime's liabilities.  Thai Foreign Min officals says
that talks soon will begin to reopen Vietnam's airspace to foreign airliners.
Other areas in which Vietnam hopes to benefit from improved relations noted (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 237-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 25, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES WOOTEN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 51 words

Jimmy Carter is loudly booed at Amer Legion convention, Seattle (Wash), for
saying he would issue pardon to Vietnam War draft resisters if he becomes Pres.
Setback is 1st in 3-day campaign on West Coast.  Carter adds that he does not
favor blanket amnesty.  Photo of Carter addressing convention (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 237-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Ed lauds as courageous Dem nominee Carter's speech before Amer Legion calling
for amnesty for Vietnam war draft resistors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 23

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

Ed praises Pres candidate Jimmy Carter's display of forthrightness before Amer
Legion audience in pledging blanket pardon for Vietnam draft evaders.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 23

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 5

LENGTH: 30 words

Vietnamese civil airline announces 3 regular weekly flights will serve
Hanoi-Saigon route.  So far flights have been reserved for persons with valid
reason for making trip (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 238-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DOUGLAS E KNEELAND

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

Repub Vice Pres candidate Robert J Dole speech before Amer Legion conv
criticizes Jimmy Carter promise day-earlier of blanket pardon for all Vietnam
draft evaders.  Denies Carter's differentiation between amnesty and pardon.
Claims Gerald Ford already offered evaders and deserters chance to earn
clemency.  At news conf, defends Ford's pardon of Richard Nixon.  Denies
declaring advertisements run by anti-abortion group as '74 Sen campaign
expenditures (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 238-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Chinese in Saigon, Vietnam, face heavy taxes.  Vietnam Govt issues decree that
all business concerns which made profit over 10% since Saigon's fall will be
subject to tax rate of 80% retroactively and rate has been increased to 100%
starting July '76.  Decision is aimed at all small business in general but more
particularly at million Chinese in Cho Lon (Chinatown), Saigon (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 238-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JAMES WOOTEN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 147 words

Dem Pres nominee Carter attacks agr policies of Ford and Nixon, charging them
and Agr Sec Butz with forcing small farmers into bankruptcy, s, Iowa State Fair,
Des Moines.  Persistently links Ford and Nixon, mentioning Nixon by name for
first time in negative sense in present campaign.  Makes specific proposals to
help farmers.  Pledges to reduce tax burdens on farmers by basing land appraisal
on agr rather than potential indus use.  Promises to be sure crop support prices
at least equal production costs.  Promises no embargoes on agr exports.  His vow
before Amer Legion to offer 'blanket pardon,' not 'blanket amnesty,' to Vietnam
draft resisters revd.  Carter enunciates populist beliefs in comments throughout
current swing.  Has asked that limousines not be provided for his motorcades.
Tells Iowa crowd he would cut some 'frills' of Presidency.  Illus at fair (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 238-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 27, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY PAUL DELANEY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17, Column 5

LENGTH: 101 words

Armed Vietnam War veteran Ashby Leach surrenders to Cleveland police and free 9
hostages unharmed after holding them for 9 hrs in offices of Chessie RR System
in Terminal Tower Bldg.  Hostages released after Chessie official meet Leach's
demands that co adopt policy of granting all benefits due Vietnam veterans under
GI Bill, reimbursement to Vietnam veterans he said were cheated out of benefits
and return by co vice pres Hayes T Watkins of US flag Watkins had been given by
Baltimore veterans orgn.  Leach had been employed by Chessie but was laid off 3
yrs ago.  Incident described.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 239-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 28, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

Dem Pres candidate Jimmy Carter's promise of blanket pardon for Vietnam War
draft evaders would affect only 12,000 of 106,000 considered to be war evaders
since deserters number more than 93,000.  Pres Ford has already granted outright
pardons to 1,510 of 13,222 draft evaders while 8,700 have already been convicted
and paid penalty.  Carter's pardon would thus extend only to men who fled US
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 240-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 29, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ARI L GOLDMAN

SECTION: Section 21; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Ron Kovic int and profile details Vietnam war experiences, return to US as
paraplegic, membership in Veterans Against the War, travels, return home to
Massapequa (NY) and publication of book Born on the Fourth of July.  2 photos of
Kovic and photo of soldier's helmet with peace insignia (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 24

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 29, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY NICHOLAS M HORROCK

SECTION: Page 22, Column 2

LENGTH: 110 words

Sen Dole's role in Watergate and ITT affairs recalled as grounds for possible
Pres campaign issue.  Dole was Repub Natl Chmn at time ITT-Sheraton Corp offered
Repubs $400,000 'guarantee' as part of effort to attract '72 Natl Conv to San
Diego, where corp was bldg a hotel.  '73 Watergate hearings disclosed that Dole
was paid $3,000 from same secret fund that later financed Watergate burglary.
He used funds to finance trip to S Vietnam to enhance his credibility when he
campaigned for Nixon on war issue.  Dole was never called as witness in either
investigation, persumably because of his peripheral involvement.  Dole, wife
illus in Vail, Colo (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 241-3

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 29, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

N Vietnamese Gen Van Tien Dung repts that captured US-made fighter-bombers were
used in 'trick' strike on Saigon's Tan Son Nhut Airport in last days of Vietnam
War, Vietnam Courier Monthly (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 241-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 1, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 150 words

Vietnamese refugees who recently were rescued from sinking fishing vessel by
Australian oil-rig supply ship after crossing S China Sea rept severe shortages
of food and consumer and indus products in southern area of Vietnam.  Say that
500,000 people have been forced out of Saigon in order to work in fields and
many are believed to have died in jungles.  Give account of conditions after
escape that reptdly had been planned for 1 yr.  Are remaining aboard Australian
ship while waiting for action on applications for entry into Australia.
Australian authorities reptdly have approved entry.  Co Kom Chau, 41-yr-old
indus chemist, says food is strictly rationed in Saigon and that prices are now
10 times higher than at time of Communist takeover.  Adds that there are repts
circulating in city suggesting that troops of deposed Govt of Pres Nguyen Van
Thieu are still fighting in jungles (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 244-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 2, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Prime Min Pham Van Dong of Vietnam receives new Vietnam cardinal, Joseph Marie
Trinh Nhu Khue, who recently returned from his consecration trip to Vatican (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 245-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 2, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY PAUL HOFMANN

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 86 words

N Vietnam permanent UN observer Dinh Ba Thi calls on US not to veto Vietnam's
application for membership in UN.  Says US acquiescence to its admission will
improve atmosphere for talks between 2 countries to 'normalize' relations.  Says
direct contacts between Vietnam and US will help solve unsettled questions of
Amers missing in action and of US assistance in his country's postwar
reconstruction.  US officials refuse to comment on US position in next wk's
Security Council debate on Vietnam's application (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 245-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 3, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY VINCENT F MCGEE JR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 64 words

Vincent F McGee Jr lr supports Pres candidate Jimmy Carter's position favoring
blanket pardon for Vietnam draft evaders.  Sees Carter's stance as attempt to
'begin healing America's wound of Vietnam'.  Also urges granting honorable
discharges to those who saw dishonorable discharge as only way to avoid
participating in unjust war.  Thinks this will enable them to obtain jobs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 24

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 3, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY PAUL HOFMANN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 187 words

UN Sec Gen Waldheim warns that problems of southern Africa 'create serious
potential threat to internatl peace and security,' annual rept to Gen Assembly.
Discusses Rhodesian, SW African and S African problems with Sec Kissinger at UN.
Kissinger, asked about US attitude toward Angola, says Ford Adm is not concerned
about present Angolan Govt but about presence of Cuban forces, news conf.  Says,
in reply to question as to whether US would veto Vietnam's application for UN
membership, that US request for information on Amers still missing in action is
key issue.  Meets with Law of Sea Conf delegates in effort to break impasses in
negotiations for global maritime treaty.  Says that in addition to southern
African problems, he also revd sea-law negotiations and questions of Cyprus and
Middle East with Waldheim.  Waldheim, discussing situation in Middle East and
Cyprus in rept, affirms that UN involvement is 'indispensable factor in
containing deep-seated and very complex problems within reasonable bounds while
solution is sought'.  Says UN peacekeeping forces were 'major element in
restoring quiet' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 246-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 3, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 22 words

Vietnamese broadcast monitored in Bangkok on 1st Natl Day quotes, in English,
excerpt from US Declaration of Independence (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 246-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 3, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 82 words

Vietnam cenebrates 1st Natl Day with parade featuring farm and indus equipment
rather than missiles and mil vehicles, Sept 2. Occasion also marks 31st anniv of
late Pres Ho Chi Minh's declaration of Vietnam's independence from France.
Official estimates say 300,000 people, mostly under 30 yrs of age, attended
festivities.  Scene in Hanoi described.  Abp Trinh Nhu Khue, recently returned
from Rome after being made Cardinal, attends.  Statements by Prime Min Pham Van
Dong noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 246-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 4, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Ed says US should not veto Vietnam's application for UN membership to show that
US adheres to rules of UN Charter and supports principle of universal membership
by all legitimate govts.  Cites Vietnam's independent, moderately pro-US posture
at recent nonaligned nations conf in Colombo, Sri Lanka.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 24

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 5, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

About 1,000 villagers in northeast Thailand stage demonstration demanding
release of more than 60 Thais arrested for ransacking homes of Vietnamese
refugees in area (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 248-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 7, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY LAURIE JOHNSTON

SECTION: Page 66, Column 1

LENGTH: 32 words

Pres Ford nominates Maj Gen John P Flynn, sr US prisoner of war in North Vietnam
for more than 5 yrs, for promotion to lieutenant gen.  Flynn expected to become
Air Force's inspector gen (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 250-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 7, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 149 words

Vietnamese Embassy, Paris, makes public names of 12 missing Amer pilots who they
say were killed during war.  List is handed to Amer Embassy and published by
Vietnamese with statement expressing hope that US will show 'good will' and take
concrete action to settle postwar problems between both countries.  Action is
believed to be linked to forthcoming UN Security Council debate on Vietnam
membership application.  '75 US veto of Vietnam membership application recalled.
US Sec of State Kissinger recently said Vietnamese admission in UN during '76
will depend on Vietnamese willingness to help in effort to determine fate of
missing Amers.  US has been pressing Vietnam Govt for information on about 2,500
Amers still unaccounted for in war.  US has taken position that pledge of
reconstruction aid was nullified by Hanoi's resumption of warfare that led to
fall of Saigon in '75 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 250-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 8, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY GERALD E ROWE

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

Gerald E Rowe lr praises Repr Bella S Abzug's 'forthright' announcement that she
would not support Daniel P Moynihan if he wins Dem Sen primary.  Holds Moynihan
has been Nixon apologist and Vietnam hawk.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 25

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 8, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES M NAUGHTON

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 187 words

Pres Ford campaigns from White House by signing 2 bills in Rose Garden on Sept 7
and making TV statement that relations with Vietnam cannot be normalized until
all Amers still missing there are accounted for.  1 bill provides full
compensation for victims of June 5 collapse of Reclamation Bur dam on Teton
River in Idaho, and other delays until late '77 enforcement of controversial Fed
standards for day care centers staffing.  Ford reads statement on each for TV.
Says compromise day care measure is 'better version' than 1 he vetoed last Apr
and is evidence that his 55 vetoes in 2 yrs has 'balancing influence on Cong'.
Day's events seen illustrating Ford's campaign strategy of spending most of his
time on highly visible 'Presidential' activities.  Sen Mondale, principal
advocate of day care bill, is absent from ceremony because he is campaigning in
Calif.  Ford's statement on missing Amers seen as repeat of what Adm spokesmen
have said since Hanoi gave US Embassy in Paris list of 12 airmen killed in
Vietnam war.  Hanoi gesture seen as bid for UN membership, which US could veto.
Ford, wife illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 251-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 10, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY T G WICKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 5

LENGTH: 45 words

T G Wicker lr points to Pres Ford's inconsistency in pardoning Richard Nixon to
end 'tragedy' of Watergate but refusing to pardon draft evaders to end 'tragedy'
of Vietnam.  Concludes that 'pardoning draft dodgers and deserters will not make
Gerald Ford President'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 25

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 11, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Security Council defers to Sept 14 consideration of Vietnam's application for UN
membership.  US Amb W Tapley Bennett gives no hint of how US will vote (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 254-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 11, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY LAURIE JOHNSTON

SECTION: Page 17, Column 4

LENGTH: 33 words

Judge Gerhard A Gesell refuses in Fed Ct in Washington to set aside his decision
ordering former White House aide John D Ehrlichman to start serving his
Watergate sentence in Safford, Ariz (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 254-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 12, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KEVIN BUCKLEY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 6

LENGTH: 22 words

Benjamin F Schemmer book, The Raid, about US troops Nov '70 raid on Son Tay
prison camp in Vietnam war, revd by Kevin Buckley.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 25

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 12, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS BUTSON and BRYANT ROLLINS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

Summary of Vietnam Govt's listing as dead 12 more of 2,500 Amer servicemen US
Govt considers missing in action and little impact action will have on US-
Vietnam relations (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 255-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 12, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY SHIRLEY ELDER

SECTION: Section 21; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Repr Norman F Lent scores Pres candidate Jimmy Carter's support of granting
pardons to Vietnam War draft evaders in lr sent to veterans' groups in his
district.  Recommends that 'bad' laws be changed and opposes 'canonizing'
lawbreakers (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 255-5

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 12, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 6

LENGTH: 52 words

Memphis, Tenn, Mayor Wyeth Chandler disbands Police Dept intelligence unit and
orders records burned, before ACLU attys can get ct restraining order.
Existence of files became known when newspaper reptd Police Chief W O Crumby
burned 1 file to avoid showing it to former Vietnam war protester Eric Carter
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 255-6

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 14, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

Ed on Ford's decision to have Amb Scranton veto Vietnam's application for UN
membership suggests abstention instead.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 25

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 14, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Texts of Vietnamese Foreign Min statement on negotiations with US and of 6
confidential notes exchd.  Ford illus with Amb Scranton while discussing
Vietnam's UN membership application.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Text 25

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 14, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES M NAUGHTON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 143 words

Amb William W Scranton, after White House conf, repts Pres Ford has directed him
to veto unified Vietnam's application for UN membership because Hanoi's
continued failure to make full acctg of Amers still listed as missing in Vietnam
war shows Govt lacks necessary commitments to peace and humanitarianism.
Vietnamese officials at UN angrily charge Ford's real concern is not for missing
Amers but for votes in Pres election.  Make public confidential notes exchd
between Washington and Hanoi on normalizing ties.  White House press aide John
Carlson criticizes release of confidential exchs and says US will have nothing
to do with payments or reconstruction aid until Vietnam gives full acctg of
missing.  State Dept aide Frederick Brown says recent disclosure of identities
of 12 Amers killed does not constitute reason to move on normalizing ties (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 257-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 15, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Ed sees Security Council decision to postpone consideration of Vietnam's
application for UN membership giving Ford Adm time to think again about wisdom
of tying admission to question of Amers missing in action.  Says it will also
provide time for US reply to Vietnam's Aug 27 note relating to bilateral
negotiations on missing and other issues.  Sees both Ford and Jimmy Carter
realizing after Nov election that negotiation is most practical route to data on
missing and that this cannot be hindered by Vietnam's presence in UN.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 25

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 15, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 117 words

ACLU files class-action suit in Fed ct, Memphis (Tenn), in effort to unravel
series of events that led last wk to destruction of about 180 secret domestic
files gathered by Memphis police.  Files came to light when The Commercial
Appeal newspaper reptd that Police Chief W O Crumby had burned one secret file
rather than show it to Eric Carter.  Carter, former regional dir of Vietnam
Veterans Against the War, told newspaper that he learned from friend on Police
Dept that file existed and he had requested in writing to see it Aug 15 under
Freedom of Information Act.  Mayor Wyeth Chandler, after meeting with public
officials, ordered files burned and police intelligence unit div disbanded (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 258-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 15, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 41 words

Red Cross makes last airlift from Vietnam Sept 14, bringing out 215 foreigners
who remained behind when Communist conquered South in Apr '75.  Final planeload
arrives in Bangkok.Red Cross closes Saigon office, but keeps open Hanoi office
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 258-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 15, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 97 words

Security Council, after private consultations, defers consideration of Vietnam's
application for UN membership until after US Pres election in Nov.  Move comes
day after Ford Adm announced it would veto bid because of Vietnam's failure to
account fully for Amers missing in action.  Libyan Amb Mansur Rashid Kikhia,
Council pres, says move was made on French initiative and with consent of
Vietnam.  State Dept denies rept by diplomatic sources at UN and French Foreign
Min official in Paris that move was agreed upon earlier by Sec Kissinger and
Pres Valery Giscard d'Estaing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 258-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 16, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 68, Column 6

LENGTH: 19 words

IMF announces it is allowing present Govt of Vietnam to assume membership
formerly held by South Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 259-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 16, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HELEN C SHINE

SECTION: Page 38, Column 5

LENGTH: 30 words

Lr by Helen C Shine, mother of USAF Pilot still listed as missing in action in
Vietnam war, holds US should veto Vietnamese application to UN until all missing
are accounted for.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 25

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 16, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

US Ct of Appeals, dissolving surrender order by Dist Judge Gerhard A Gesell,
decrees that former White House aide John D Ehrlichman may remain free on his
own recognizance pending outcome of Sup Ct appeal (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 259-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 16, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY NICHOLAS M HORROCK

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 253 words

Justice Dept is investigating loss of notebook containing natl security
information gathered by key Ford intelligence adviser during Mar '75 foreign
trip.  Notebook, used by Navy Cmdr Lionel H Olmer to keep notes on conversations
of Pres's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Bd member Leo Cherne, subsequently came
into possession of ex-convict and self-styled journalist Michael Casey, who
claims he recd it from unidentified man aboard Air Vietnam flight in Apr '75.
Cherne says purpose of trip was to study growing internatl energy crisis, heavy
unemployment in Western nations, and shift of econ power to oil producing
nations.  Claims that 'corollary matter' was to determine effect, if any, on
ability of US to gather foreign intelligence after NY Times disclosures about
CIA domestic activities.  Olmer tells of reptg loss of notebook to CIA, which
determined that contents were 'classified' and that their publication 'would be
injurious to the natl security of the US'.  Olmer and Cherne concede that
contents might also be 'embarrassing,' since they included candid assessmenets
by Amer officials of their superiors and foreign officials.  Cherne tells of
being contacted by Casey, who returned notebook to Cherne after making copies
and distributing one to San Diego Evening Trubune newsman Robert Dietrich.
Casey claims he was int by FBI agents who want names of all journalists who have
seen contents.  Claims he and Dietrich set out to investigate contents, but
series of threatening incidents ensued (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 259-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 17, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY THEODORE JACQUENEY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

AID ex-aide Theodore Jacqueney article on re-educ centers set up by Vietnamese
Govt after Apr '75 Communist victory.  Lists several former 3d-force leaders who
are in 'detention camps'.  Contends US should insist that information about
detainees be given and release be made when US Cong resumes deliberation on
lifting present trade embargo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 26

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 17, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 17 words

Excerpts from lr logging sea escape aboard 20-ft fishing boat of 26 Vietnamese
refugees to Thailand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Text 26

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 17, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 157 words

Over last few mos ship captains on high seas have been passing up boatloads of
Indochinese refugees as nations in area become more reluctant to grant refugees
haven.  Panamanian freighter that picked up 31 Vietnamese refugees more than 2
mos ago is reptd on way to Japan after refugees were refused admittance to
Singapore and Yemen.  Recent incident involving 33 Cambodians now in Thai waters
recalled.  Refugee sources say some cases of ignoring refugee appeals on high
seas has led to violations of internatl seafaring traditions and laws that
require aid to foundering vessels.  Other incidents described.  Some Western
refugee officials say captains may be under pressure from cos to avoid delays.
Indications are that some escapees may try to exaggerate distress to get safe
passage to distant ports.  Stands taken by Nationalist China, Malaysia,
Singapore, Japan, Thailand and UN on Indochinese refugee problem discussed.
Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 260-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 18, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 2

LENGTH: 129 words

2-part ed on study by Public Agenda Foundation finding natl consensus on foreign
policy may be taking form again as '76 Pres campaign gets under way.  Repts
study found basic support among foreign policy professionals and community
leaders for strong defense, commitment to core allies, pursuit of detentee,
establishment of diplomatic ties with China, but without abandoning Taiwan,
commitment to Israel along with Middle East settlement, coherent energy policy,
and active Amer leadership in world affairs.  Repts some gaps found beween
experts and public, including public favoring greater Cong involvement in policy
conduct.  Others discussed.  These involve arms sales abroad, nuclear weapons
proliferation, aiding developing countries, and avoiding 'another Vietnam'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 26

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 18, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 43 words

Japanese Govt allows 31 Vietnamese refugees confined for 64 days on Panamanian
freighter that rescued them from S China Sea to disembark, Sept 17.  Authorities
at earlier ports refused permission to land.  Will be permitted to stay in Japan
for 30 days (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 261-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 18, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 44 words

Japanese Govt allows 31 Vietnamese refugees confined for 64 days on Panamanian
freighter that rescued them from S China Sea to disembarke, Sept 17.
Authorities at earlier ports refused permission to land.  Will be permitted to
stay in Japan for 30 days (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 261-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 19, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY NAYAN CHANDA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 98 words

Far East Econ Rev correspondent Nayan Chanda article describes current Vietnam
scene as Govt and people continue reconstruction efforts.  Vietnamese are
looking forward to US monetary and technical aid to develop energy resources and
agr.Econ and soc difficulties discussed, including joblessness that has reached
3.5-million workers.  Govt's 1st objective is aimed at achieving
self-sufficiency in food and reduction of jobless rate.  Hopes to resettle
8-million people from overcrowded cities into new 'econ zones'.  Relations with
US, People's Repub of China and USSR discussed (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 262-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 19, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Comment on Ford Adm announcement it would veto Vietnam's UN membership
application, on Security Council postponement of its consideration, and on
relation of move to question of Amers missing in action and to Pres election
campaign (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 262-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 19, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

John Estocin, wife and sister begin 250-mi walk from Turtle Creek (Penna) to
Washington (DC) to call attention to fact that Estocin's brother Michael, Navy
pilot, is 1 of 36 men still listed as POW in Vietnam war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 262-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 20, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 2

LENGTH: 47 words

Ed scores Communist Party's totalitarian rule and disastrous econ policies in
Laos.  Holds as many as 200,000 have fled nation, including most skilled
technocrats, agronomists, economists and businessmen.  Holds even security is
poor.  Notes Russian and N Vietnamese presence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 26

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 21, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 99 words

Jimmy Carter, in Nov issue of Playboy, makes unusally candid remarks about lust,
sin, adultery, sex and morals.  Remarks are made in context of extended
discussion of his religious beliefs in which he asserts that his own moral
standards would not lend him to try to impose stricter laws on private behavior.
Remarks appear to be in answer to repeated questions about public concern that
his religious beliefs might impinge on private lives of others.  Also discusses
human rights, Vietnam War, Watergate affair and Pres Johnson's civil rights
record.  Press sec Jody Powell comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 264-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 22, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 54, Column 2

LENGTH: 21 words

Maj Gen Leroy J Manor, who was in overall command of US raid on Son Tay prison
camp in N Vietnam, promoted to Lt Gen (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 265-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 22, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 26 words

World Bank exec dirs vote to admit Vietnam to bank despite US opposition.  US
official repts that no other nation voted against Vietnam's membership (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 265-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 23, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 41, Column 1

LENGTH: 171 words

Anthony Lewis contends that Pres Ford is not 'decent,' as so many believe he is.
Recalls Ford's responses on issues of human rights, law, secrecy, war, arms
sales abroad, amnesty and abortion in attempt to prove his point.  Notes Ford's
failure to take interest in growing world problem of official brutality, and his
snubbing of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn.  Recalls Ford never criticized violations of
law disclosed in investigations of CIA and FBI.  Says that while Ford praised
new 'sunshine law' for Fed agencies, he also vetoed improvement of Freedom of
Information Act.  Says Ford tried to keep Vietnam war going in '75 with urgent
appeal for $1-billion in Amer arms.  Holds his mil action over Cambodian seizure
of Mayaguez was blundering.  Says he secretly aided 1 side in Angolan civil war.
Notes his escalation of Amer arms sales to Iran and Saudi Arabia.  Scores his
amnesty program for Vietnam draft evaders and deserters.  Notes his change of
attitude about abortion, seemingly in effort to get Catholic votes (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 26

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 23, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 111 words

FBI Dir Clarence M Kelley repts 97% drop in last 3 yrs in number of Amer
citizens and orgns under investigation because of their pol ideologies,
testimony before Sen Select Com on Intelligence.  Attributes decline to end of
Vietnam war, and to Justice Dept's Mar '76 guidelines governing investigations
of groups and individuals.  Expects further reductions in number of
investigations after all current cases are revd.  Claims rank and file members
of orgns are no longer being investigated.  Concedes that remaining 626 cases
are being investigated under special criteria and not, as he previously
promised, like ordinary criminal matters.  Kelley illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 266-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 24, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY DAVID ELLIOTT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 3

LENGTH: 38 words

David Elliott lr disputing Amb William W Scranton contention Ford Adm decided to
veto Vietnam's application for UN membership because of failure to account fully
on Amers missing in action and not because of election campaign.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 26

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 24, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 6

LENGTH: 17 words

Asian Development Bank announces that Vietnam has been accepted as member in
place of S Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 267-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 25, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 147 words

Jimmy Carter, seeking 26 Electoral Coll votes of Tex, expresses regret about
remarks in Playboy int that former Pres Johnson engaged in 'lying, cheating and
distorting the truth'.  Also discusses for 1st time at length use of vulgarism
in Playboy int and stronger language with Norman Mailer to be published Sept 26
in NY Times Magazine.  Stronger lanugage does not appear in Times article.  Says
frankness might very well not be good safe move in pol campaign, but it has
alleviated concerns that people might have felt because of his Southern Baptist
religion.  Lauds Johnson.  Says negative remarks about Johnson were equated with
remarks about Pres Nixon.  Adds reference to Johnson was 'about misleading Amer
people' during Vietnam War and 'lying and cheating' part referred to Nixon.
Carter's press sec Jody Powell comments.  Illus of Carter with Tex Gov Dolph
Briscoe (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 268-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 25, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 28 words

Vietnam news agency repts that regular air service between Hanoi and Cambodian
capital of Phnom Penh has resumed.  1 round-trip flight is offered every 2 weeks
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 268-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 26, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY R R BAXTER and LEON WYSZEWIANSKI

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40

LENGTH: 19 words

Leon Wyszewianski lr comments on R R Baxter Aug 1 rev of book My Lai Massacre
and Its Cover-Up.  Baxter replies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 26

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 26, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY LEON WYSZEWIANSKI

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40

LENGTH: 18 words

Leon Wyszewianski lr on R R Baxter's Aug 1 rev of bk The My Lai Massacre and Its
Cover-up.  Baxter replies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 26

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 26, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY PRISCILLA WOOLLEY

SECTION: Section 6; Page 38

LENGTH: 56 words

Priscilla Woolley lr comments on Sept 5 NY Times Magazine cover and accompanying
article Kill, hate--mutilate!  by Grace Lichtenstein.  Objects to indoctrination
of 'elite' armed forces officers in killing, hating and mutilating.  Suggests My
Lai incident in Vietnam was not surprising in view of such indoctrination.
Cover photo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 26

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 26, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ADOLPHE FURTH, ROBERT MORRIS and SANFORD G THATCHER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 5

LENGTH: 27 words

Lrs by Sanford G Thatcher and Adolphe Furth criticizing Ford for saying US will
veto Vietnam's UN membership application.  Lr by Robert Morris backing Ford.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 26

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 26, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MICHAEL KNIGHT

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 159 words

Custody battles continue between adoptive parents of Vietnamese children flown
to US during '75 Operation Babylift and parents who have turned up in Vietnam
and US to claim children they say they gave to agencies for safekeeping.
Lawyers and child-welfare agency officials involved estimate 2,500 children were
airlifted.  At least a dozen children already have been returned.  Calif, Mich
and Iowa cts have ordered children returned to Vietnamese parents.  Vietnamese
traditionally view adoption as something that can occur only within extended
families and thus look on adoption agencies as only temporary sponsors.  Say
agencies saw process in Amer terms of permanent and irrevocable abandonment.
Agencies and adoptive parents see efforts to recover children as cynical
attempts to renege on agreements made in good faith.  Case involving children of
former Flying Tiger Airlines pilot William Popp and Vietnamese wife Hai Thi Popp
discussed (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 269-5

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 26, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Some 12-million children and adults in Vietnam reptdly are receiving some form
of educ (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 269-5

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 29, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY ROY REED

SECTION: Page 45, Column 4

LENGTH: 53 words

Scene in Grannis (Ark) described as Vietnamese and Laotian refugees, who make up
nearly 50% of town population, settle into Amer way of life.  Most refugees work
at Clift Lane's poultry processing plant.  While older refugees are finding it
more difficult to adjust, youngsters are adapting more easily.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 272-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                         September 29, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 197 words

Amer and European publishing sources who have seen secret topic outline of
ex-Pres Nixon's memoirs say he calls Watergate a partisan scandal used by his
enemies to bring him down, maintains his innocence and admits only to error of
judgment.  Say he disputes former aides and friends, and previously published
books, on events leading to his resignation.  Claim memoirs also discuss his
choice of Ford as Vice Pres, his version of conversation and prayer session with
State Sec Kissinger following his farewell to nation, positions of Gen Alexander
M Haig Jr and Ronald Ziegler on his resignation, how he learned of Watergate
break-in, why he had tape-recording system installed in White House, why he did
not destroy tapes, pardon granted him by Pres Ford, and reaction of his family
to whole situation.  Say outline also promises Nixon's views on Vietnam war, and
on his 'long and close relationship' with Asian and European heads of state.
Warner Books has purchased Nixon memoirs.  Warner chmn William Sarnoff refuses
to divulge amt Nixon will be paid.  NY Times Co has purchased from Warner
worldwide newspaper and mag serialization rights.  Nixon illus at San Clemente
(L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 272-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

A Lewis article refuting Ford's pol claim of experience in foreign policy,
holding his record has been characterized by support of mil, unquestioning
acceptance of secrecy and insensitivity to demands of constitutionalism in Govt
conduct.Cites his acquiescence, along with 5 other Congressmen, in '69 Nixon Adm
Operation MENU, in which areas in Cambodia were secretly bombed as anti-Hanoi
move in Vietnam war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 27

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 5, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Page 54, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

Rev by V Canby of Marcel Ophuls documentary film The Memory of Justice about
'47-47 Nuremburg war crimes trials and a consideration of French tactics in
fight to keep Algeria and Amer in action in Vietnam.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 27

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 5, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 17 words

Vietnam abolishes art, law and gen science at Can Tho Univ, and converts univ
into agr school (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 278-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 6, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY EDWIN L DALE JR

SECTION: Page 61, Column 2

LENGTH: 119 words

Eur officials attending IMF-IBRD conference in Manila comment on problems
resulting from floating exchange rates.  Bank of Fr gov Bernard Clappier
attributes behavior on exchange markets to erroneous belief that differences in
inflation rates between countries can be erased by contrary movements of
exchange rates.  Claims that fall in exchange rate results in increased costs of
imports which, in turn, aggravates inflation and results in further decline of
currency.  Ital Treas Min Gaetano Stammati attributes lira's depreciation to
high inflation, noting high degree of indexation of Ital econ has rendered
depreciation useless since it leads to higher prices.  Photo of Vietnam
delegates at IMF meeting (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 279-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 6, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

Expected issues in Ford-Carter foreign policy debate discussed.  Are USSR, arms
control, China, Middle East, southern Africa, Panama Canal, defense,
intelligence and Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 279-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 55, Column 3

LENGTH: 41 words

Retired US Gen William C Westmoreland charges late Pres Lyndon B Johnson treated
Vietnam war as 'sideshow'.  Says he should have told Amers that war would be
long, was matter of principal and that nation would have to close ranks to win
it (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 280-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 55, Column 3

LENGTH: 41 words

Retired US Gen William C Westmoreland charges late Pres Lyndon B Johnson treated
Vietnam war as 'sideshow'.  Says he should have told Amers that war would be
long, was matter of principal and that nation would have to close ranks to win
it (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 280-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY LINDA CHARLTON

SECTION: Page 39, Column 2

LENGTH: 151 words

Sen Mondale says during past wk campaign has turned around in favor of Jimmy
Carter, remarks on arriving in Omaha on last stop of campaign swing through Ill,
Iowa and Neb.  Compares Earl L Butz's resignation as Agr Sec to firing of
Defense Sec James R Schlesinger and CIA Dir William E Colby yr ago, noting that
they were summarily dismissed while Butz was allowed to resign.  Says that when
praising Colby and Schlesinger for high standards of public service he had not
meant to imply that he approved of Operation Phoenix, pacification program
directed by Colby in which 20,587 S Vietnamese civilians were killed.  Plans to
watch Ford-Carter debate on TV with his foreign policy adviser David Aaron and
Iowa Sens Dick Clark and John Culver, who campaigned with him during day.Mondale
illus holding copy of Butz racist remarks while campaigning with Repr Michael
Blouin, who is seeking re-election (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 280-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 16, Column 5

LENGTH: 128 words

Vietnam's demand for large fees for right to enter its airspace is stymied by
Thailand's refusal to agree to fees ranging up to $950 for 65-mile flight.
Refusal blocks Vietnam's tentative agreement with 16 internatl carriers to begin
flights on lucrative Bangkok-Hong Kong route.  Thailand can block other airlines
from flying over Vietnam since it controls adjacent airspace.  Airline officials
fear charges might set precedent for other countries short of foreign exchange.
Detour around Indochinese peninsula adds average of 75 minutes flying time
between Bangkok and Hong Kong and over $3,000 in fuel and other costs per
flight.  Airlines officials note Hanoi has offered preferential rates to
airlines of countries with which it has friendly relations (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 280-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY R W APPLE JR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 524 words

Ford and Jimmy Carter, in TV debate from Palace of Fine Arts in San Francisco,
clash sharply over Ford's stewardship of foreign policy, with Carter holding US
neither strong nor respected and Ford holding it is strong, respected and at
'peace'.  Carter seizes initiative and puts Ford on defensive.Among major
charges are excessive secrecy and immorality.  Carter holds that any oil embargo
by Arab country will be met with total embargo on Amer trade with that country.
He charges Kissinger, not Ford, is in charge of policy.  Says both attempted to
run Angola crisis into 'another Vietnam'.  Ford defends his record and charges
Carter would weaken US by proposed defense cuts.  Discloses for 1st time Adm
will announce on Oct 7 names of cos that have participated in Arab boycott
against Israel.  Says USSR has signaled willingness to compromise on arms
limitation agreement.  Commits apparent pol gaffe by holding USSR does not
dominate E Eur, stand challenged immediately by Carter.  Tone of debate,
differing from earlier one on domestic issues, is of real conflict, with Carter
appearing to have upper hand, though Ron Nessen and other Ford aides hold Ford
victor.  Carter camp jubilant.  Carter campaign manager Hamilton Jordan says
Ford's comment on E Eur will become major campaign issue.  Ford and Carter in
exch over possible Communist member of NATO.  Ford, on secrecy issue, lauds
aftermath of Middle East Sinai accord between Israel and Egypt and extent to
which he made data available.  Defends Vladivistok arms limitation agreement and
US grain sales to USSR.  Carter criticizes latter.  Ford defends arms sales to
Iran.  Carter challenges Ford Adm's Middle East policy, charging Israel was
almost brought to its knees after '73 Middle East war.  Says US has made Israel
scapegoat for its own problems in area.  Ford says US will continue process of
normalizing relations with China, and will insist China's dispute with Taiwan be
settled by peaceful means.  Denies he would favor shipping arms to China.
Denies Carter charge he has only lately come to moves against nuclear weapons
proliferation.  Carter charges Ford has confused Panama Canal Zone issue after
attacks from Ronald Reagan during Repub primaries.  Says he would not give up
'practical control' of canal but would favor continued negotiations.  Ford,
angry over release of GAO rept on Mayaguez incident, holds his Adm handled
problem responsibly and utilized all diplomatic means to get ship released
before taking mil action against Cambodia.  Carter holds Adm did not fully
inform Amers.  Holds US acquiesence in Arab boycott of Israel 'absolute
disgrace'.  Ford says his Adm has been 1st to take action against boycott,
noting tax bill he recently signed contains provision preventing participating
cos from receiving certain tax breaks.  Adm, in fact, opposed that provision and
fought to keep it out of bill.  Ford bars admitting Vietnam to UN pending full
acctg of Amers missing in action.  Carter charges Ford Adm failure in not apptg
Pres comm to seek information on missing.  Ford and Carter illus during debate.
Illus afterwards with Mrs Carter (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 280-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 8, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21, Column 2

LENGTH: 94 words

CIA declines comment on Gen Aircraft Corp charge, contained in $25-million suit,
that agency wrongfully used co's name for 'cover' operations in 60's.  Co's
22-page claim recounts incident in which co was expelled from Congo because CIA
agents there claimed to be reprs of co's subsidiary, Helio Aircraft, at time
they were carrying on 'illegal and immoral activities'.  Says Helio name also
was used as CIA cover for agents in Thailand, Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia.  Gen
Aircraft claims to be near bankruptcy because of agency's expropriation of its
name (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 281-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 8, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19, Column 4

LENGTH: 43 words

Vietnam observer at UN, in statement on Ford's campaign debate with Carter, says
only obstacle to solution of issue of Amers missing in action is Ford Adm's
'hostile' policy toward Vietnam.  Holds UN membership for Vietnam is not matter
for negotiation (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 281-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 9, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 56 words

Vietnam charges US with responsibility for mil coup in Thailand.  Commentary by
Vietnam press says coup leaders were 'pro-US militarists'.  Contends leaders are
known to be working for CIA and are under instructions from US State Dept.
Rejects assertions by new Thai rulers that they assumed power to prevent
Communist takeover (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 282-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 9, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 19 words

US State Dept spokesman rejects as 'ridiculous' Vietnamese charges that US was
behind mil coup in Thailand (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 282-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 10, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY SHAWN G KENNEDY

SECTION: Section 21; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Article on S Vietnamese refugees living on LI.  Refugee Duc Lich Ho int on
plans.  Ho family illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 283-4

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 12, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Vietnamese Workers Party cong to be held Dec 11-20, Hanoi.Is 1st session since
'61 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 285-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 14, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 2

LENGTH: 35 words

NYC HRA official Jeffrey Grayson arrested on extortion charges growing out of
alleged scheme to force Vietnam veteran to split welfare assistance check with
him.  Investigation Comr Scoppetta comments (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 287-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 15, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 340 words

Pres Ford scores Jimmy Carter's econ policy and seeks to stress what he calls
'distinct differences' between himself and Carter on Govt spending and tax
policy, televised press conf, White House, Oct 14.  Portrays himself as champion
of middle- and upper-income taxpayers.  Says Carter 'wants to spend more' while
he seeks to 'hold the lid' on Fed spending.  Press conf, Ford's 39th, is 1st
full-dress nationally televised conf since Feb.  Ford acknowledges he 'made a
slip' in 2d Pres debate in saying Eastern Europe is not under domination of
Soviet Union.  Accuses Carter of 'slandering the good name of the US' by
asserting US is not strong, that it has lost internatl respect and had tried to
initiate Vietnam-like conflict in Angola.  Refuses to discuss John W Dean 3d's
allegation that as HR minority leader he sought to block Watergate investigation
at behest of Nixon White House.  Says his personal finances when in Cong could
best be explained by householder's normal struggle with balance stubs of his
checkbook.  Denies any pol motivation in his approval of arms sale to Israel,
and his raising of price support loans to farmers.  Claims any massive plan to
arrest urban deterioration would be too costly to Amer taxpayer.  Claims present
programs are adequate.  Explains recent downward trend in some statistical econ
indicators by saying Amer is 'coming out of the dip'.  Calls Pres debates 'very
wholesome'.  Says he would like Carter to 'answer the questions'.  Dismisses as
improper for news conf question of whether he would assist Eastern European
nation attempting to throw off Soviet domination.  Claims his recent campaign
appearances refute Carter's charge that he is 'hiding' in White House.
Indicates he may have bypassed regular Pentagon and State Dept channels in his
decision to approve new arms sales to Israel.  Says FPC's action to increase
natural gas prices is necessary to stimulate gas exploration.  Carter, in
response to Ford's news conf, claims Ford failed to answer many questions.  Ford
illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 288-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 16, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 6

LENGTH: 109 words

Sen Dole, in Ouotation of Day, in his debate with Sen Mondale, says 'It (the
Nixon pardon) is an appropriate topic, I guess, but it's not a very good issue
any more than the war in Vietnam would be or World War II or World War I or the
war in Korea, all Democrat wars, all in this century. ' Sen Mondale says 'I
think Sen Dole has richly earned his reputation as hatchet man tonight by
implying and stating that World War II and the Korea War were Democratic wars.
Does he really mean to suggest to the Amer people that there was a partisan
difference over involvement in the war despite Nazi Ger?I don't think any
reasonable Amer would accept that'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 289-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 16, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ARTHUR LEHMAN GOODHART

SECTION: Page 22, Column 5

LENGTH: 44 words

Arthur L Goodhart lr on A Lewis Oct 4 article questioning Ford's qualifications
as experienced leader in foreign policy and citing his acquiescence in '69 Nixon
Adm Operation Menu, in which areas in Cambodia were secretly bombed as
anti-Hanoi move in Vietnam war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 28

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 17, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ARTHUR J DOMMEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 42 words

Arthur J Dommen reply to David Elliott Sept 24 lr on US policy in Vietnam holds
Ford Adm seeks to blame downfall of S Vietnam on S Vietnamese despite pact that
Nixon and Kissinger pledged massive US intervention in event of N Vietnamese
invasion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 290-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 17, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 17 words

Vietnam Natl Assembly hons 97 armed forces units and 20 people for exploits
during recent war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 290-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6

LENGTH: 45 words

Doan Thi Hoang Ahn, Vietnamese mother who resettled in US after war, plans to
claim 4-yr-old son Doan Van Binh from Forest City (Iowa) couple John and Bonnie
Nelson, Oct 18.  Nelsons adopted boy in May '75 and cts decreed he should be
returned to natural mother (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 291-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6

LENGTH: 45 words

Doan Thi Hoang Ahn, Vietnamese mother who resettled in US after war, plans to
claim 4-yr-old son Doan Van Binh from Forest City (Iowa) couple John and Bonnie
Nelson, Oct 18.  Nelsons adopted boy in May '75 and cts decreed he should be
returned to natural mother (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 291-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 66 words

Thai Govt embarks on re-examination of its realtions with other nations in light
of recent mil junta coup.  Dr Thanat Kohman, former Foreign Min and current
chief foreign policy adviser to mil leaders, says country hopes to patch
relations with US.  Many diplomats question whether Thanat's theory of benign
cooperation is realistic.  Worsening relations with Laos and Vietnam described
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 291-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 19, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY GRACE LICHTENSTEIN

SECTION: Page 24, Column 4

LENGTH: 101 words

Rev of US Sen race in Utah between incumbent Dem Frank E Moss and Repub
challenger Orrin G Hatch.  Moss rated underdog at this point because state is
seen almost certain to go to Pres Ford and state Dem Party is in shambles over
status of Repr Allan T Howe.  Polls show race is dead even.  Moss asserts race
is close because there has been continued drift to right in state, accentuated
by Watergate, Vietnam and Howe case.  Howe has refused to bow out of race.  Dem
Party recently gave write-in candidate its official backing against Howe.  Repub
Dan Marriott is expected to defeat both of them (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 292-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 19, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 6

LENGTH: 30 words

Doan Van Binh, 4-yr-old Vietnamese refugee living with adoptive parents John and
Bonnie Nelson in Forest City, Iowa, is returned to natural mother, Doan Tri
Hoang Anh, Oct 18 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 292-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 20, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Page 28, Column 5

LENGTH: 93 words

Gerald Ford claims persons who urge defense cuts and withdrawal of US mil forces
world-wide fail to understand importance of US commitment to allies and role of
US forces as 'bulwark of freedom'.  Comments seen as attack on Jimmy Carter, who
was not named.  Amer Veterans of World War II orgn presents Ford with Golden
Helmet award and orgn chief Thomas J McDonough gives oblique pol endorsement to
Ford.  Upcoming Ford campaign engagements detailed.  Press sec Ron Nessen
reports Ford believes election race is now 'dead heat' but Ford will pull ahead
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 293-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 20, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY R W APPLE JR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 98 words

Analysis of Pres campaign.  Says Sen George McGovern's contention that he doubts
he has 'ever seen an emptier campaign, a pettier campaign' exemplifies mood of
campaign.  Sees campaign lacking dialogue on issues and focusing on candidates'
personalities and oral mishaps.  Sees revival of partisanship and decline of
ideology resulting from disappearance of Vietnam and race issues during era
beginning with assassination of Pres Kennedy and ending with ex-Pres Nixon's
resignation.  Cites Carter's Playboy int and Ford's comments on E Eur as
examples of confusion throughout campaign.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 29

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 24, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 101 words

Sr US officials and specialists in SE Asian affairs say that newly unified
Vietnam, after summer of conciliatory moves toward neighbors, appears to have
returned to tough posture to exert influence in area.  Arthur W Hummel Jr, Asst
Sec of State for E Asian and Pacific Affairs, says Vietnam is seeking to
'influence foreign and domestic pol' of neighbors and can be expected to
continue to do so, Cong testimony.  While Vietnam was especially critical, until
July '76, of ASEAN and its members, it then sent out good-will missions and
established diplomatic relations with Philippines and Thailand (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 297-6

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 25, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

US Sec of State Kissinger says Vietnam has accepted proposal aimed at opening
talks on normalizing relations with US, int, CBS-TV program Face the Nation.
Vietnamese officials in Paris say they agreed to meet for 'exchange of views' on
mutual problems.  State Dept spokesman Robert L Funseth repeats 'absolute
precondition' that Vietnamese must account for all Amers still missing in action
before relations can be resumed (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 29

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 26, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

US State Dept officials say they expect that 1st meeting between US and Vietnam
will take palce soon after US Pres election.  Say talks will be at embassy level
in Paris.  Stress that Vietnamese must 1st make full accounting of all
information about 2,505 Amers whose fate in Vietnam is unknown.  Vietnamese
emphasize that US is violating '73 Paris peace talks by not aiding Vietnam.  US
contends accord was voided by '75 invasion of S Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 299-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 27, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DOUGLAS E KNEELAND

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 133 words

Sen Dole, in speech to Repub rally in Troy, Ohio, modifies his stand on 'Dem
wars of 20th century' that he took during TV debate with Sen Mondale, saying
World War II and Vietnam war were not 'partisan' but that Amer weakness
contributed to former and indecision to latter.  Holds strength will keep Amer
at peace and Ford has given Amers that.  Says Carter-Mondale ticket represents
weakness and indecision.  In speech in Erie, Pa, criticizes Carter for having
'tipped his hand to enemies' in saying he would not go to war in Yugoslavia even
if Soviet troops were there.  Earlier in day, however, says he, Dole, would not
send Amer troops either, but that he 'wouldn't tell them in advance what I had
in mind'.  Visits Polish Falcons Club in Erie, getting scant reception.  Illus
in Troy (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 300-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 28, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Vietnamese Foreign Min statement warns Thailand to stop 'persecution' of
Vietnamese citizens and demands release of 800 people reptdly interned in
concentration camps.  Hanoi radio broadcast says Vietnamese people are 'furious'
at Oct 25 repts that 55 people were arrested (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 301-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 28, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Illus of Vietnamese refugees disembarking in Yokohama, Japan, from Panamanian
vessel that picked them up near Vietnam on Oct 9.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 301-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 28, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 80 words

Donald L Ranard, former dir of State Dept Korean Affairs Office, says dept
pleaded unsuccessfully with South Korean Govt to end activities involving
members of Cong, int.  Claims dept officials were told to avoid contact with
Park Tong Sun, Washington-based Korean businessman with possible ties to South
Korean Central Intelligence Agency (KCIA).  Suggests South Korean's mil
involvement in South Vietnam may have precluded Nixon Adm from taking stronger
action in matter (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 301-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 28, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Amer Legion says US Sec of State Kissinger will ask Vietnam to account for Amers
missing in action before discussing diplomatic recognition at opening of formal
talks (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 301-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 31, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2

LENGTH: 38 words

Plans by US and Vietnam to meet for discussions aimed at normalizing relations
summarized.  US holds reconciliation cannot come until Vietnam provides full
accounting of 2,505 Amers 'officially' unaccounted for after war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 304-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 2, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min Nguyen Co Thach and Eur dept chief Mai Van Bo
arrive, Paris, Nov 1 for 1st official visit by reprs of unified Vietnam since
'46.  Will confer with French Foreign Min Louis de Guiringaud and other
officials to discuss increased econ and tech cooperation (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 306-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 3, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Page 54, Column 1

LENGTH: 99 words

Article describes work of Richard Hughes, Amer who went to Saigon (Vietnam) in
'68 and established S Vietnamese Shoeshine Boys Foundation.  Orgn, which Hughes
recently closed before returning to US, was aimed at aiding Saigon's street
urchins.  Hughes is last known Amer to return to US from Saigon.  State Dept
says another civilian Arlo H Gay left Saigon Sept 21 and was seen in Bangkok.
Tucker Gugelman may be in custody in Hanoi.  Another Amer, identified as Teresa
N Reed, may still be in Vietnam though there is no confirmed information.
Hughes reflects on experiences.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 307-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 4, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 2

LENGTH: 22 words

Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min Nguyen Co Thach hopes Jimmy Carter will have wiser
policy toward Vietnam than his predecessors (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 308-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 4, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

Soviet newspaper Izvestia says Amer voters heeded Jimmy Carter's call for change
because of what it calls moral and pol consequences of Repub rule, 'marked in
1st four yrs by continuation of Vietnam war and in 2d four yrs by Watergate
scandal and econ decline (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 308-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 4, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 5

LENGTH: 86 words

French Foreign Min Louis de Guiringaud, after talks with Vietnamese Foreign Min
Nguyen Co Thach, Paris, says France will assist Vietnam in natl reconstruction
and econ development.  Thach, starting tour of EEC countries, says he and
Guiringaud also discussed French participation in several agr and indus
development projects.  Guiringaud says problems still remain over compensation
for nationalization of French cos in southern part of Vietnam and property
belonging to French citizens of Eurasian origin (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 308-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 5, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY PETER GROSE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

Foreign govts are looking to US moves in UN for indications of attitude of
Carter Adm on world econ and other issues.  Diplomats there consider resuming
present Gen Assembly session in Feb.  Seek hint of US attitude toward Angola and
Vietnam in upcoming vote on UN membership of these 2 states, blocked up to now
by US vetoes.  Look for any shifts in US attitude toward S Africa and Rhodesia.
Look for any contact between Amb William W Scranton and PLO as indication of
shift in Middle East policy (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 309-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 5, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 226 words

Jimmy Carter, in 1st news conf as Pres-elect, pledges to maintain continuity in
foreign policy.  Sets conf with Vice Pres-elect Mondale, Adm officials and Cong
leaders.  Sec Kissinger orders State Dept officials to cooperate.  Appts
Lawrence S Eagleburger to head com on transition.  Sends message to missions
abroad on policy continuity.  Will stay in office until Jan 20.  Defense Sec
Donald H Rumsfeld, in news conf, comments on transition plans.  Says Ford Adm
will submit its own defense budget for fiscal '78.  Says Pentagon will not
postpone such decisions as to whether to order B-1 bomber into production.
Carter, on Middle East, expresses hope his Adm can help bring about 'gen
agreement,' but is not precise whether this means support for new Geneva conf as
proposed Nov 4 by USSR and Egypt.  Altering his stand on US response to any
Soviet invasion of Yugoslavia, says it is 'conjectural' whether troops would be
sent in.  Ford Adm to remain active in Rhodesian negotiations, with Kissinger
aide William E Schaufele Jr returning from Geneva for consultations on black
majority rule.  Adm also to remain active in Vietnam negotiations and in
relations with Portugal, possibly extending emergency loan to latter.  USIA Dir
James Keogh, Amb to Iran Richard Helms and Amb to India William B Saxbe have
asked Ford to accept their resignations (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 309-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 7, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

Vietnam News Agency repts, noting country has entered 2d 5-yr plan, says Vietnam
faces food and raw-material shortages and trade deficit (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 311-6

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 9, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 294 words

Koreans with access to Korean Central Intelligence Agency (KCIA) logs have
reptdly told Justice Dept that Pres Park Chung Hee and other sr Korean officials
conceived, organized and directed illegal effort to influence Cong policy.  Say
former Reprs Richard T Hanna and Cornelius E Gallagher advised KCIA in drawing
up list in '70 of 90 Congressmen it hoped to persuade or bribe into favoring
Korean interests.  Note Hanna's and Gallagher's friendship with Park Tong Sun,
Korean businessman thought to be secret lobbyist for S Korea.  Recall how list
was discovered in Park's possession by customs officials, who sent copy to FBI.
Say S Korea spent up to $1-million a yr for bribes, travel, gifts and
entertainment of Congressmen from '71-75.  Say in addition to Park, others who
worked at influencing Cong were former mil intelligence officer Pak Bo Hi,
Korean Cultural and Freedom Foundation, and Rev Sun Myung Moon of Unification
Ch.  Say US decision in '70 to withdraw 1/3 of Amer soldiers stationed in Korea
was catalyst for Korean lobbying effort.  Claim Korea feared that anti-Vietnam
feelings in Amer would affect Amer willingness to defend Korea.  Note Pres Park
Chung Hee was at same time tightening his grip on power.  Say Park Tong Sun
became involved in lobbying effort when he offered to use his influence with
friends in Cong to obtain more mil aid for Korea in return for being named sole
agent to handle sales of Amer rice to Korea.  Note Park's visits to Korea,
accompanied by then-Reprs Hanna and Gallagher.  Say Park was ordered to stop
dispensing money to Congressmen in '75 after James W Howe, husband of Betty
Frd's personal sec, committed suicide after publicity about his taking vacation
paid for by Park.  Pres Park Chung Hee por (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 313-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 10, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 69 words

US and Vietnam to open preliminary talks on possibility of establishing normal
relations,Nov 12.  Talks will be 1st since sighing of Paris accords 4 yrs ago.
Vietnamese officials says application for admission to UN will come up in
Security Council on Nov 12 and vote is expected on Nov 15.  US Pres Ford and
Pres-elect Carter support veto of application unless full accounting of 800
missing Amers is made (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 314-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Security Council sets timetable for action on Vietnam's UN membership
application that would allow for accord in Paris negotiations between US and
Vietnam on issue of data on Amers missing in action.  Lack of data has
previously caused US to veto application (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 315-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 26 words

50 Vietnamese refugees in fishing junk arrive in Australia Nov 10 after
2,000-mi, 2-mo voyage.  Australian Govt says hundreds more could be enroute (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 315-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 129 words

Repts provided in ints by escaped or released Laotian prisoners and from lrs
from internment camps say thousands of former rightist and neutral Laotians are
confined to harsh and repressive camps scattered throughout country.  Some camps
apparently are short-term 're-educ' facilities to provide former 'undesirables'
with Communist indoctrination.  40,000 to 50,000 former anti-Communist Army
units reptdly are confined to what amounts to forced labor camps, living on
minimal food and med rations.  Camp conditions described.  're-educ' camps in
Vietnam, which are said to hold 100,000 to 300,000 Vietnamese, described.
Current conditions in Cambodia noted.  As far as is known, all former members of
anti-Communist Govt who remained in Cambodia have been killed (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 315-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 13, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 98 words

US ports open to East German ships for first time.  US permission granted in
connection with understanding reached by 2 countries on purchase of between 1.5
Million and 2 million tons of grain annually from US up to '80.  Arrangements
mark significant improvement in US-East German relations.  Ships of all
countries that have diplomatic relations with US are allowed to call at US
ports, although there are certain security restriction on ships from USSR bloc
countries.  Current action leaves only ships from North Korea, Cambodia,
Vietnam, Albania and Cuba barred from US ports (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 317-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 13, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 35 words

Vietnamese Embassy, Paris, in statement after meeting with US officials, says it
is ready to discuss Amer demand for information about Amers missing in action.
Insists US must help pay for reconstruction (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 317-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 13, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 118 words

US and Vietnamese diplomats meet, Paris, Nov 12, in 1st formal talks since fall
of S Vietnam.  Contacts are considered preliminary ones, aimed at testing
whether conditions are favorable for full-scale negotiations.  US Embassy deputy
chief Samuel Rhee Gammon raises question of fate of 800 Amers still listed as
missing in war.  Vietnamese delegation is headed by Tan Hoan.  No substantive
change in Amer-Vietnamese relationship is seen before start of Carter Adm.  Sec
Kissinger issued instructions before meeting that all comment must come from
Washington.  Reason for secrecy not known.  US and Vietnamese positions revd.
Illus of Vietnamese Embassy 1st Sec Do Thanh, Gammon and other officials (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 317-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 14, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 195 words

Article discusses common practice all over world of govts and their agents
trying to influence each other's official actions, either for policy purposes or
for making money.  Says none have relied so heavily on its intelligence service,
on sub rosa methods, or spent as much money as have S Koreans.  Notes US is no
stranger to charges of subversive action.  Holds CIA has been trying for yrs to
manipulate other govts.  Notes its reptd successes, including election of
Philippine Pres Ramon Maysaysay and toppling of Pres Ngo Dinh Diem in South
Vietnam and Pres Salvador Allende Gossens in Chile.  Says Amer business also
tries to influence govt decisions with underhanded means.  Notes ongoing
revelations of alleged Lockheed Aircraft Corp bribery which has rocked govts in
Japan, Netherlands, Italy and Turkey.  Notes growing number of cos which have
acknowledged making questionable payments to foreign officials.  Notes that
legislators are seldom targets of bribery in any country but US.  Says US Cong
attracts that activity because doctrine of separation of powers gives it more
authority than others, and because Cong has power of purse in US.  Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 318-2

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 14, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM M DWYER

SECTION: Section 11; Page 22, Column 5

LENGTH: 35 words

William M Dwyer article on Lucy Caldwell's voluntary work in aiding wounded US
Marines in Vietnam, '66-70.  Caldwell has written and published book SIN: One
Way Economy Class about her experiences.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 318-4

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 14, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 186 words

Former State Dept official Donald K Ranard claims sr officials of Nixon Adm did
not act on improper S Korean lobbying for fear of jeopardizing Korean commitment
of troops to Vietnam war, int.  Tells of Nixon Adm preoccupation with war in
early 70's.  Recalls lr from Pres Nixon to S Korean Pres Park Chung Hee, asking
that Korean forces remain in Vietnam longer than planned.  Claims he repeatedly
brought Korean lobby to attention of his superiors, including then-State Sec
William P Rogers, Henry A Kissinger, and then-Atty Gen William B Saxbe.  Former
Defense Sec Melvin R Laird's warning about lobby recalled.  Others with
knowledge include Under Sec of State for Pol Affairs U Alexis Johnson, William J
Porter and Philip C Habib, both of whom served as Amb to Korea.  State Dept
spokesman Robert L Funseth denies charge that dept failed to curb improper acts
by S Koreans in effort to preserve Korean troop commitment in Vietnam.  Saxbe,
now Amb to India, claims he was never told that Park Tong Sun, with whom he had
soc relationship, was key S Korean operative.  Previous information on lobby
recalled (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 318-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 14, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 119 words

French diplomatic sources say Vietnamese communique is encouraging sign that
serious negotiations between Vietnamese and US Govt can begin once there is new
adm in Washington.  Defense Dept reptdly has been considering announcement that
800 Amers listed as missing in action must be presumed dead.  Pol and econ
implications of change of status discussed.  Declaration would remove major
obstacle on US side to proceeding with substantive negotiations.  Communique's
conciliatory tone reptdly reflects hope that new US adm will be 'more
farsighted' than its predecessor and realization that US can at any time
withdraw issue of missing servicemen.  Change in tone of Vietnamese
reconstruction demands noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 318-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 15, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY GREGORY B CRAIG and KENNETH GARRETT JR

SECTION: Page 30, Column 2

LENGTH: 23 words

Kenneth Garrett Jr and Gregory B Craig lrs offer solutions to problems of
Vietnam war era draft resisters during start of Carter Adm.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 31

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 16, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 3

LENGTH: 81 words

Reprs of dozen religious groups start natl drive to petition 1 million
signatures urging Jimmy Carter to issue blanket amnesty for all Vietnam era
draft resisters and mil deserters.  Clergy and Laity Concerned dir Ron Freund
calls Carter's plan for blanket pardon inadequate because pardon would not
include 790,000 veterans with less than honorable discharges, 500,000 men who
failed to register for draft, 8,000 at-large deserters and thousands of
nonviolent civilian resisters (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 320-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 16, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 86 words

US, using its 18th veto, blocks Vietnam's admission to UN because it has so far
failed to give information on 800 Amer servicemen missing in action.  Amb
William W Scranton, in Security Council speech, charges Vietnamese hold back in
order to exact econ and pol concessions from US.  Vietnamese observer Dinh Ba
Thi, after vote, holds Vietnam tries its best to cooperate and expects US, under
'73 Paris cease-fire agreement, to help with postwar reconstruction.  Council
vote is 14-1.  Scranton illus voting (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 320-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 17, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Ed criticizes US for vetoing UN membership application of Vietnam on grounds
Vietnam has failed to account fully for missing Amers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 32

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 17, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

Vietnamese Foreign Min protests US veto of Vietnam's UN admission, holding US
has no right to link it with issue of missing Amers (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 321-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 19, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY GUY FLATLEY

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 33 words

French dir Louis Malle comments on films made in Hollywood by Eur dirs and his
latest film project entitled Pretty Baby.  Malle por.  Other film notes include
upcoming films on Vietnam war (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 323-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 21, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THI DINH BA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 2

LENGTH: 31 words

Excerpts from remarks by Vietnamese permanent observer to UN Dinh Ba Thi during
recent Security Council meeting replying to US veto of Vietnam's UN membership
application.  Drawing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 32

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 21, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS BUTSON and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 17 words

US veto in UN of Vietnam membership, based on Amers that remain listed as
missing in war, revd (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 325-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 21, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

US State Dept official Frank A Sieverts says US will continue to insist on
obtaining full acctg of Amers still officially listed as missing in Vietnam
before discussing establishment of diplomatic relations with Vietnam, int.  Says
he believes position has approval of entire Ford Adm, Cong and Pres-elect
Carter.  Takes issue with Vietnamese statement that it is impossible to meet US
demands.  Says Natl League of Families of Missing in SE Asia is principal group
asking for accounting (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 325-6

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 21, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 106 words

Thai mil junta appoints 340-member Natl Assembly with broad variety of members
from business, mil and pol.  Most are from far right, with more than 50% being
mil or former mil officers.  Junta to assume 'purely advisory capacity' to Prime
Min.  Releases on bail students and pol prisoners seized in 1st days after Oct 6
coup and resuffles some more blatantly corrupt officials in some mins and in
police in effort to improve image abroad.  Bangkok curfew remains in force with
hundreds arrested nightly for violating it.  Continued propaganda campaign
against Vietnam, accusing it of helping Thai insurgents in northeast, noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 325-6

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 23, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

Reconstruction of Vietnam's 10,000-mile ry system is nearing completion and
service is expected by end of Nov.  Possibility of traveling from Saigon to
Paris by rail noted.  Map depicts Trans-Siberian Ry System (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 327-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 6

LENGTH: 78 words

CAB law judge recommends Flying Tiger Lines for operation of new all-cargo
routes between US and Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia.  Full CAB and White
House must approve recommendation.  Recommendation authorizes new routes for 5
years and proposes indefinite extension of authorization for airline's current
routes to Japan, South Korea, Philippines, Taiwan and Okinawa.  Airline also has
authority for routes to Thailand and Vietnam, but has suspended flights (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 329-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 27, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 5, Column 5

LENGTH: 43 words

UN Gen Assembly votes for favorable reconsideration of Vietnam's request for
membership.  US dissents.  US says plans to again veto Vietnam admission request
before Security Council on ground that country has not accounted for missing
Amer servicemen (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 331-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 28, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 132 words

Vietnam Govt has been holding countrywide meetings for past several weeks in
preparation for 1st Communist party cong meeting since '60, which is to be held
in 2d wk of Dec.  Cong reptdly will center around econ themes of reconstruction
and consolidation.  Is expected to produce 5-yr development plan and discuss
process of taking small-scale production to large-scale socialist production
over next 20 yrs.  Central com to be elected and new party const approved.
Party 1st Sec Le Duan, Pres Ton Duc Thang, 49 Saigon delegates and 45 Hanoi
delegates have been chosen to attend.  Econ problems expected to be discussed
noted.  Foreign policy section of central com rept reflects relative mildness,
with desire for foreign investment, particularly high-technology industries from
West (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 332-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 30, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

Sen George McGovern, in lr to State Sec Kissinger and Defense Sec Donald
Rumsfeld, urges US withdraw its veto of Vietnam's application for admission to
UN.  Charging issue of more information on missing Amers is 'contrived,'
suggests Defense Dept intelligence data indicate those missing in aerial combat
were killed in action (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 334-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 2, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 86 words

Laotian Prime Min Kaysone Phomvihane, in presence of US charge d'affaires Thomas
Corcoran, demands that US end what he terms sabotage maneuvers and fulfill
pledge toward reconstruction under Vietnamese peace agreement section covering
Indochina, special Community Party meeting convened on eve of 1st anniv of
Communist takeover.  US position is that accord is null and void because N
Vietnam invaded and took over S Vietnam after agreement was signed.  Kaysone
summarizes pol and econ developments of past yr (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 336-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 3, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY CHRISTINE JANKOWSKI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 5

LENGTH: 23 words

Christine Jankowski lr commenting on value of universal membership in UN and
questioning wisdom of US veto of Vietnam's application.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 33

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 4, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HUGHES

SECTION: Page 25, Column 2

LENGTH: 37 words

Former Vietnamese Shoeshine Boys Project head Richard Hughes article, recalling
closeness to humanity he felt during his 8 yrs aiding Saigon street urchins,
urges US Govt to aid Vietnam in reconstruction efforts.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 33

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 6, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 60 words

Pres-elect Carter says in Plains (Ga) that he has not decided whether to broaden
pardon he has promised to grant draft evaders of Vietnam war.  Says wording of
pardon is being studied.  Later, Carter's chief talent scout Hamilton Jordan
confirms that John M Doar and Minn Repr Bob Bergland are on list of 70 persons
under consideration for Cabinet posts (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 340-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 8, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID E ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 171 words

David E Rosenbaum analysis of Repr Jim Wright's election as HR majority leader.
Says results illustrate fact that leadership races turn more on personalities
than ideology, and are inherently unpredictable because they are decided by
secret ballot.  Notes that while Wright has voted more conservatively than
majority of his fellow Dems in HR, he got their votes, possibly because of their
dislike of other contenders, Reprs Phillip Burton and Richard Bolling.  Recalls
Wright's position on Vietnam, civil rights and Fed spending.  Notes that neither
Wright nor new Speaker, Repr Thomas P O'Neill, are known as vigorous advocate of
positions on which there is strong disagreement within party.  Claims this
illustrates fact that HR Dems want leader who can find consensus, not 1 who will
try to shape it.  Expects Wright to follow O'Neill's lead, and for
O'Neill-Wright team to press hard for Pres-elect Carter's legis program.  Says
sleeper in elections may have been Repr Thomas S Foley, who was elected caucus
chmn (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 34

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 9, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 37 words

Thai Interior Min Samak Sundaravej accuses Vietnam of planning to invade
Thailand on 3 fronts in Feb '77, news conf.  Says Vietnam intended to use
trouble among Vietnamese refugees in Thailand as pretext for invasion (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 343-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 11, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 86 words

Navy forms study group to examine why it suffered highest desertion rate on
record in fiscal '76.  Pentagon figures show Navy desertion rate climbed to 24.8
Per 1,000 enlisted men, up 2% from '75, and more than double highest rate during
Vietnam war.  Army's rate is 17.7 Per 1,000 in '76, compared with 73.5 Per 1,000
in '71.  Marine rate of 69.2 Per 1,000 is worse than other services, but shows
improvement from 105 per 1,000 in '75.  Air Force rate is 1.2 Per 1,000, and has
never been above 2.8 Per 1,000 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 34

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 12, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM CHILDS WESTMORELAND

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 2

LENGTH: 102 words

Gen William C Westmoreland, former head of US forces in Vietnam, urges
Pres-elect Carter to reconsider campaign promise to pardon all who evaded
Vietnam draft.  Objects that pardon is unprecedented in US history, would
degrade natl moral fiber and mil posture, impede rational conduct of any future
draft and undercut tradition of men rallying to support of their country.
Scores destruction of standby draft machinery.  Claims that all-volunteer force
is inordinately expensive, that reserves are too small to be useful in emergency
and that present mil forces are not representative of US society.  Photo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 34

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 12, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Vietnam Workers Party to convene more than 1,000 delegates in Hanoi for 4th
party cong Dec 14.  Cong will be 1st since country was reunited.  Pres Ton Duc
Thang expected to attend (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 346-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 12, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 144 words

Growing animosity of Thais towards Vietnamese who have been emigrating to
northeastern section of Thailand for past 30 yrs discussed.  Charge by Thai
Interior Min Samak Sundaravel that Vietnamese refugees plan to incite rioting in
area and provide Vietnam for excuse to invade Thailand on Feb 15 noted.
Allegation is only latest in series of actions directed against Vietnamese
community in Sakon Nakhon.  There are about 60,000 ethnic Vietnamese in
northeast, some 5,000 in Sakon Nakhon, who arrived after World War II.  About
70% of small shops that are backbone of commerce and trade in town are owned by
Vietnamese, 20% are owned by Chinese and only 10% are owned by Thais.  Vietnam's
refusal to accept any of Vietnamese refugees back into country seen as reason
for unrest.  Examples of psychological warfare against area Vietnamese noted.
Illus.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 346-3

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 13, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Vietnamese army reptdly has removed 70,000 unexploded mines and bombs from
Saigon's Tan Son Nhut Airport, Bien Hoa Airport and Di An rr station since Apr
'75 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 347-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 13, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Sen Mike Mansfield says US should establish diplomatic relations with Vietnam
and Cambodia, NBC Meet The Press int.  Cites need to learn fate of missing Amer
servicemen (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 347-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 13, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 166 words

USSR delegation, headed by Soviet Communist Party member Mikhail A Suslov,
arrives, Hanoi, Dec 12, for Dec 14 opening of Vietnam Workers Party cong.  Le
Duan, Truong Chinh, Pham Van Dong and Vo Nguyen Giap greet various delegations.
Arrival of Chinese delegation, which has not yet been announced, is expected to
provide significant indication of state of Vietnam's relations with China.  USSR
delegation level apparently indicates that relations with China have not
improved at expense of traditionally close ties with USSR.  Repts indicate
Vietnamese party plans extensive efforts to unified development of country and
expansion of Communist Party to include largely excluded elements of young and
southern area urban populations.  Vietnam news agency says about 20% of 1,008
delegates are party members from pre-45 group and fewer than 20% are Army
members.  3d cong, held 16 yrs ago, which approved principle of forcible
liberation of south and overthrow of Ngo Dinh Diem, recalled (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 347-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 14, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 58 words

Retiring Sen Dem leader Mike Mansfield, in rept concerning SE Asia, says US
position in Asia and Pacific is more favorable than since end of WW II because
there is no war.  Urges US withdraw nuclear weapons from S Korea as well as
reduce its forces there.  Also urges US to move toward diplomatic relations with
Vietnam, Cambodia and China (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 348-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 14, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY KENNETH A BRIGGS

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 185 words

Natl Catholic Reporter reporter Richard Rashke, in Dec 17 issue, renews charges
that US mil entered into widespread collusion with Catholic Relief Services
during Vietnam war and concludes that agency went beyond humanitarian mandate as
foreign relief arm of US Cath Conf by aiding mil.  Rev Robert L Charlebois, who
directed Vietnamese efforts for orgn, assails rept as 'full of half-truths' and
defends his policy of cooperating with Amer war effort.  Concedes that agency
accepted material help from US Govt and worked in close cooperation with mil.
Argues arrangements were solely for purpose of assisting poor and were expedient
choices under severe wartime conditions.  Controversy began with disclosure by
Sen Mark O Hatfield that then-CIA Dir William E Colby and White House counsel
Philip W Buchen acknowledged in lrs that enlistment of missionaries was
considered standard procedure.  Agency and Protestant evangelical agency, World
Vision Internatl, were mentioned widely as recipients of large Govt grants.
Cath Conf officials say they will study charges and decide whether to take
action (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 348-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 15, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 194 words

Vietnamese Workers Party sec Le Duan, in address to 1,008 delegates to party
cong broadcast over Hanoi radio, outlines plans for extensive expansion of indus
and agr, encouragement of foreign trade and investment and substantial
strengthening of Govt structure.  Cong is attended by reprs of nearly 30
Communist parties worldwide, including USSR.  China delegation is absent,
although party sends message extending warm fraternal greetings.  Diplomats
express doubt that Chinese absence indicates strained relations, noting that
China generally regards party congs as internal matters.  Cong opening
conincides with arrival in Hanoi of 1st train from Saigon in more than 20 yrs.
Pres Ton Duc Thang welcomes delegates with speech noting cong will made
decisions on modifications to party const and elect new Central Com and
Politburo.  Historian Dr Nguyen Khac Vien's recent rept on future econ plans
recalled.  Leaders emphasize progress made in expanding irrigation capacity in
rice lands to allow 2 or 3 crops annually and resumption of more than 7,000
small and medium-sized indus enterprises and more than 11,000 handicraft groups
in Saigon.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 349-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 16, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 50, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

Canadian Jesuit priest, Rev Andre Gelinas, recently expelled from Saigon after
19 yrs of missionary work, says 15,000 to 20,000 Vietnamese have committed
suicide rather than live under Communism.  Says estimate is based on
conversations with hosp officials and some of would-be suicides.  Shoeshine Boy
foundation head Richard Hughes, who was in Vietnam until Aug '76, disputes rept
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 350-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 16, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 125 words

Vietnamese leaders describe series of vast population resettlements, involving
1-million people, and conversion of wide areas of south, including Saigon
suburbs, into vast rice growing region, Vietnam Workers Party cong.  Ho Chi Minh
City (Saigon) party orgn sec Nguyen Van Linh describes plans to move people into
new econ zones.  Vietnamese Army and Hanoi City party com reprs deliver brief
statements.  Linh says party membership in south will be expanded.  Northern
sector apparently is to be reserved for development of heavy indus, with
substantial assistance from USSR.  USSR delegate Mikhail A Suslov pledges to
continue to supply Vietnamese at rate at which Moscow supplied North Vietnam
during war.  Hanoi scene during cong noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 350-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 16, 1976, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 242 words

HR Select Com on Missing Persons in SE Asia concludes that no Amers are still
being held prisoner as result of Indochina war.  Pentagon lists 728 men as
missing in action and 33 as prisoners com chmn Repr G V Montgomery contends
there is evidence that Indochinese nations, including Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia, can account for many of those missing.  Com recommends Defense Dept
resume case revs, suspended in deference to panel's investigation.  All past
revs have reclassified missing men as killed in action.  Differences in monetary
allowances given to families of missing and killed in action noted.  Rept notes
that while servicemen originally listed as missing accounted for 22% of those
killed in action in World War II and Korean War, effective search and rescue
effort during Indochina war resulted in 4% total.  Repr Benjamin A Gilman
opposes recommendation lifting dept moratorium on case revs.  Says action would
reduce significance of missing-in-action issue.  Panel recommends that dept ease
security restrictions on some evidence used in revs, that memorial for missing
be erected in Arlington Natl Cemetery and that trained rescue forces be
available in future combat zones.  Natl League of Families of Amer Prisoners and
Missing in SE Asia member Ann Griffiths denounces com recommendation, contending
that com is denying incoming Carter Adm opportunity to conduct successful talks
without proof that all POWs and MIAs are dead (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 350-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 17, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 108 words

Transcript of Pres-elect Carter's Dec 16 news conf, Plains, Ga, in which he
announces apptmts of Repr Andrew Young to be chief US delegate to UN, Charles L
Schultze as Council of Econ Advisers Chmn and Zbigniew Brzezinski as special
asst to Pres for natl security affairs.  Schultze comments on econ.  Brzezinski
comments on detente with USSR, SALT agreement and Kissinger's image.  Carter's
comments include status of Dr Harold Brown, who is believed being considered for
Defense Sec post, Cabinet post refusals, role of women and blacks in Cabinet and
US relations with N Vietnam.  Young comments on black rule in Africa among other
issues.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Text 35

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 17, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY CORA WEISS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 48 words

Friendshipment coordinator Cora Weiss lr, recalling work of Shoeshine Boys head
Richard Hughes, urges US to offer aid to Vietnam to help heal war wounds.  Notes
orgn plans hosp on site of My Lai massacre.  Contends Pres-elect Carter will
find many Amers eager to support aid effort.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 35

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 17, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 119 words

Vietnamese Prime Min Pham Van Dong, addressing Vietnam Workers Party delegates,
says projected large-scale population redistribution will begin early in '77
with shifting of surplus labor from densely settled areas.  Gives summary of
5-yr econ development plan.  Party's Saigon com head says about 1-million people
can be expected to be moved from Saigon into countryside.  Pham Van Dong expects
13% to 14% increase in natl income, '76-80.  Decreased role southern area
apparently will play in country assessed.  Army and Interior Min repts during
party cong noted.  Gen Van Tieng Dung, indicating that Army will not be
demobilized, reiterates that it will be used in econ reconstruction.  Illus.
Pham por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 351-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 17, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 99 words

Pres-elect Carter's advisers reach 'substantial agreement' on plan to extend
promise of clemency for draft violators to Vietnam-era servicemen with tarnished
mil records.  Carter aide David L Berg notes that verification of number of
persons affected by plan is necessary due to confusion about accuracy of Govt
figures on number of persons involved.  Possibility is raised that as many as
250,000 servicemen could benefit from such clemency action.  Carter has been
urged by some groups to extend clemency program to include mil deserters and
veterans with less than honorable discharges (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 351-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 17, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY NICHOLAS M HORROCK

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 197 words

Fed Dist Ct Judge John Lewis Smith Jr rules that ex-Pres Nixon and his Atty Gen
John N Mitchell and chief of staff H R Haldeman deprived Morton Halperin and his
family of their const rights by approving 21-month tap on Halperin's home
telephone.  Orders 3 to pay damages to Halperin family in amt to be set after
further information is supplied by parties to case.  Ruling marks 1st time
former Pres has been liable in ct for official actions taken while he was in
office, and 1st time judge has ordered money damages be paid for invasion of
privacy in wiretapping case.  Judge Smith clears of legal liability other Nixon
Adm officials Henry A Kissinger, Gen Alexander M Haig Jr, Robert Mardian,
William Sullivan and John D Ehrlichman, as well as FBI agents who managed tap
and Chesapeake & Potomac Telephone Co.  Halperin and ACLU atty John Shattuck
comment.  Justice Dept reptdly feels ruling is 'victory' in that Judge Smith
specifically ruled that wiretap was not violation of law.  Taps were placed on
phones of Halperin and 12 other Govt officials and 4 newsmen for varying periods
in '69-71 as Nixon Adm sought to halt leaks of information about SALT and
Vietnam war (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 351-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 17, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY JAMES WOOTEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 314 words

Pres-elect Jimmy Carter on Dec 16 announces apptmt of Repr Andrew Young as chief
US delegate to UN, Charles L Schultze as Council of Econ Advisers Chmn and
Zbigniew Brzezinski as special asst to Pres for natl security affairs, news
conf, Plains, Ga.  Young is 1st black apptd to Cabinet.  Appointees attend conf
as well as Vice Pres-elect Walter Mondale and members of Cong Black Caucus.
Young tells reporters he supports aggressive pursuit of black majority rule in
Africe.  Brzezinski says he is not entirely pleased with current relations
between US and USSR, including present strategic disarmament agreements.  Sees
econ recovery 'most urgent' item on new adm's agenda.  Carter meets 6 Black
Caucus members, several reprs from environmental orgns and Sen John Glenn, who
says he came to see Carter about 'personnel and Govt reorgn'.Repr Parren J
Mitchell emerges from meeting saying Carter reiterated his pledge to place
blacks and members of other minorities in significant Govt roles.  Adds that
neither he nor any of his colleagues raised with Carter possible selection of
John T Dunlop as Labor Sec, apptmt opposed by many black orgns and women's
groups.  Carter denies any difficulty in finding blacks, members of other
minority groups or women willing to take Cabinet level or similarly significant
posts in adm, but discloses that he was turned down in early stages of selection
process by US Dist Ct Judge Reynaldo G Garza, Jane Cahill Pfeiffer, Vernon
Jordan, Mayors Coleman Young and Thomas Bradley and Franklin A Thomas.  Denies
repts that Dr Harold Brown is gradually being edged out of consideration for
Defense Sec.  Withholds comment pending study on rept by Cong com recommending
that mil personnel listed as missing in action in Indochina be declared dead.
Illus of Carter with Schultze and Brzezinski and Repr Young arriving in Plains
with wife and son (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 351-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 18, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 51, Column 3

LENGTH: 114 words

Battleship New Jersey Comm tours Liberty Park at suggestion of Jersey City (NJ)
officials in search of berth for battleship destined to become museum.  Navy has
said it will donate ship to NJ if state can raise $500,000 to move vessel from
Washington (DC) to NJ.  Battleship NJ Historical Museum Society has only raised
$50,000 and society officials claim lack of pub awareness is responsible for
lag.  Officials cite potential revenues from tourism, as well as providing jobs
for 75 adm and maintenance personnel.  Also cite potential as mil training
center.  Illus, battleship in action in Vietnam '69, photos of touring comrs and
map of Liberty State Park in northern NJ (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 352-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 18, 1976, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 63 words

Southern Vietnamese Communist leaders support north's views on econ development.
Deputy Min Phan Hung concedes that south has been relegated to secondary role in
5-yr econ plan.Says Mekong Delta zone will produce rice and other foodstuffs,
Central Highlands will concentrate on forest cultivation and coast will produce
more sea food.  Educ Min Nguyen Thi Binh comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 352-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 18, 1976, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 67 words

Repr Andrew Young, in PBS TV int, reveals Amb William W Scranton wrote him mo
ago on worth of UN post and expressing hope Young might be apptd.  Says State
Sec-designate Cyrus R Vance sounds 'even more militant about S Africa than I
do'.  Says both Vance and Pres-elect Carter assured him on African policy and on
normalization of relations with Vietnam.  Scranton illus with Sec Gen Waldheim
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 352-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 19, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY PAUL A BATISTA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 46 words

Paul A Batista lr comments on Gen Westmoreland's opposition to proposal to
pardon Vietnam-era draft evaders (Op-Ed Dec 12).  Questions Westmoreland's
ability to speak on behalf of draftees and suggests he is trying to justify war
of which he was 1 of primary architects.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 35

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 19, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 67 words

Article on how Thailand, Laos and Cambodia are accommodating themselves to a
reunified Vietnam.  Internal conflicts within each country noted.  Full
diplomatic relations between Thailand and Vietnam developed in '76.  Laos is
close ally of Vietnam and supported Vietnam during nonaligned conf in '76.
Cambodia and Vietnam share traditional racial hatred.  Relations between
countries discussed (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 353-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 19, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY NAYAN CHANDA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2

LENGTH: 107 words

Nayan Chanda article on Vietnam Workers Party econ and soc plans announced
during recent party cong.  Unified country has joined IMF, Asian Development
Bank and is observer at Comecon.  Sec Le Duan, in pol rept submitted during
cong, stressed technical progress as keystone of plan to build socialism in
country.  Aid country hopes to gain from US noted.  Lifting of US trade embargo
seen as necessary step.  Vietnamese leaders are giving priority to consumer and
export goods.  Foreign Min Nguyen Duy Trinh comments.  Socialist re-educ in
south and econ growth nationwide seen as needed to reduce disparities between
north and south (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 353-3

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 19, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY SHAWN G KENNEDY

SECTION: Section 21; Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 74 words

Some Long Islanders discuss their Christmas plans.  They are OpSail planner
Frank O Braynard, basketball player Julius Erving, Justice Beatrice S Burstein,
Rev Robert F Capon, Nassau County Exec Ralph Caso, Vietnam activist Ron Kovic,
illustrator William Hogarth, Suffolk County Exec John Klein, singer Harry
Chapin, Suffolk County Dist Atty Henry F O'Brien, Nassau County Dist Atty Denis
E Dillon and novelist Pietro di Donato.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 353-3

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 19, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HAITCH

SECTION: Page 45, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Many US cos who were once confident that they could resume oil exploration off
Vietnamese coast have reptdly pulled out of talks with Hanoi.  US embargo on
trade with Vietnam is seen as major roadblock.  Vietnam will reptdly attempt to
develop own resources (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 353-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 19, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 42 words

Vietnamese Defense Min Gen Vo Nguyen Giap says Govt intends to emphasize human
needs despite vast econ and pol development plans, statement to Vietnam Workers
Party cong.  Composition of new Politburo and Central Com reptdly is being voted
on (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 353-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 19, 1976, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 29 words

56 Vietnamese refugees aboard motor launch arrive, Darwin, Australia, after 2
mos at sea.  Arrival brings to 106 number of refugees to reach Darwin by sea in
last 6 wks (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 353-4

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 20, 1976, Monday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

A Lewis article recalls Christmas '72 bombing of N Vietnam.  Warns against
forgetting tragedy.  Recalls former Pres Nixon and Sec of State Kissinger's
roles in continuing war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 35

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY JOHN E CHAPPELL JR

SECTION: Page 32, Column 4

LENGTH: 53 words

John E Chappell Jr lr is distressed that Pres-elect Carter has chosen 'worn-out
servants of Lyndon Johnson' to hold foreign policy posts.  Claims Zbigniew
Brzezinski is most menacing, with his cold and hostile attitude toward Communism
and Russia.  Says Cyrus Vance's silence during Vietnam War does not merit
praise.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 35

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 5

LENGTH: 84 words

Group of veterans calls for extension of Pres-elect Carter's proposal to pardon
all Vietnam-era draft resisters to include more than 700,000 men who received
less than honorable discharges.  Group favors blanket amnesty for deserters and
upgrading all less than honorable discharges, excluding only those who committed
violent crimes.  Group will meet with Carter transition aides to appeal for
broader amnesty.  2 members of group are Repr John Conyers and Tom Wynn of Natl
Assn of Black Veterans (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 355-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 110 words

Daniel Ellsberg, Joan Baez, Daniel and Philip Berrigan and other antiwar
activists of '60s and '70s send protest lr to Vietnamese leaders about repts of
repressive acts carried out since capture of Saigon.  Lr cites repts that as
many as 300,000 people may be in Communist detention centers.  Calls for end of
oppressive acts and on-the-spot inspection by UN, Amnesty Internatl and other
agencies to assure that those in Govt's charge are treated according to
internatl human rights covenants.  Appeal, sponsored by Fellowship editor James
H Forrest, is 2d such document sent to UN observer Dinh Ba Thi.  Oct '76 lr from
SANE did not receive response (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 355-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 235 words

Vietnam Workers Party cong renames itself Communist Party, reconfirms Le Duan as
natl leader, chooses expanded Politburo and Central Com dominated by northerners
and adjourns, Dec 20.  Party chmnship is left vacant in apparent deference to
late Ho Chi Minh.  Politburo is expanded from 11 to 17 members to include
several southern Vietnamese with traditional ties to north.  71-yr-old Hoang Van
Hoan, who joined Communist movement at age of 19, is dropped.  Inspection com
headed by Gen Song Hao is named in apparent move to undertake purge of party
ranks nationwide.  Foreign Affairs Min Nguyen Duy Trinh comments.  Central Com
is expanded from former 47 seats and 25 alternates to 101 full members and 32
alternates.Roles specific members will play in new orgn noted.  Cong ratifies
new 5-yr plan presented by Prime Min Pham Van Dong and pol rept presented by Le
Duan.  Approves new series of 'rules and regulations' believed to be new Const.
No details of documents are disclosed.  Trinh, in presenting cong results,
discloses series of production targets for plan.  Targets include 21-million
tons of food, million tons of seafood, 2.5-million acres of new cultivated land,
3-million acres of new forest land, generation of 5-billion kilowatt-hrs of elec
and production of 450-million yds of cloth.  Plans to resettle million Saigonese
into countryside and other population shifts noted.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 355-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Members and alternate members of Vietnam's new Communist Party Politburo listed
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 355-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 22, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

UNICEF is sending shipment of over 1,300 tons of rice from Bangkok (Thailand) to
Haiphong (Vietnam) as gift from US to help relieve temporary food shortage.
Rice was bought by UNICEF for Friendshipment, Church World Service and Lutheran
World Relief.  Church World Service exec dir Paul F McCleary comments (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 356-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 22, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

Bank of Amer says US has approved sale to Cambodia of DDT for malaria control at
cost of $450,000.  Says move does not mean that US embargo on trade with Vietnam
and Cambodia will be lifted (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 356-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              260 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 22, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Group of 177 Chinese living in Hong Kong and who had lived in Vietnam until
recently tell of severe shortages, rampant inflation, confiscation of personal
property and forced pol re-educ by Communists (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 356-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              261 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 22, 1976, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES WOOTEN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 272 words

Pres-elect Carter names Harold Brown Defense Sec, Patricia Roberts Harris Sec of
HUD Dept and F Ray Marshall Labor Sec, news conf, Plains, Ga.  Will reptdly also
name Joseph A Califano Jr Sec of HEW Dept and bring James R Schlesinger into his
Adm in interim post, and then as head of new Cabinet dept of energy Carter will
propose to Cong.  Has reptdly decided to appt Theodore C Sorensen CIA Dir,
postponing any separation of that post from its traditional pairing with
advisory job of Dir of Central Intelligence.  Carter meets with State
Sec-designate Cyrus R Vance.  Will attend funeral of Chicago Mayor Richard J
Daley, whom Carter courted during Pres campaign.  Vigorously defends his
nomination of Griffin B Bell as Atty Gen.  Says he will be 'great' and considers
him 'superlative choice' for job.  Reiterates his campaign pledge to reduce
defense expenditures by $5-to7-billion.  Claims his Cabinet now holds 'wide
diversity of background and opinion'.  Marshall, Brown and Harris comment on
their new posts.  Brown, who has been criticized as being too flexible on
subject of detente, and as ardent advocate of increased bombing of N Vietnam as
Air Force Sec in Johnson Adm, claims strong defense is most important obligation
of Govt and concedes Vietnam war was 'catastrophic time in Amer history'.
Harris, 1st black and 2d woman named to Cabinet, says Fed Govt should attempt to
eliminate 'notion of the ghetto' and commit itself to 'concept of the
community'.  Marshall says he will urge Carter to repeal Sec 14b of Taft Hartly
Act, so-called 'right-to-work' law.  Carter illus with Brown, Marshall and
Harris (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 356-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              262 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

Anthony Lewis deplores Pres-elect Carter's Cabinet apptmts as too conformist and
tied to established interests.  Cites absence of any Vietnam war critics on Natl
Security com.  Criticizes Atty Gen-designate Griffin B Bell as insensitive in
rights areas.  Fears new Cabinet is 'bad dream' that could belong to any Repub
adm.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 35

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              263 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 24, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD EDER

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 11 words

Michael Cimino to film The Deerhunter, movie about Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 358-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              264 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 24, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT J COLE

SECTION: Section 2; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 96 words

Profile of Igor I Sikorsky and Sikorsky Aircraft, div of United Technologies
Corp.  Recent $83 million contract awarded by Army reptdly biggest contract for
Sikorsky in about 25 years.  New models will carry 11 troops, 2 pilots and
gunner.  New models will be produced at Stratford, Conn, plant, where hiring
will begin immediately and rise gradually by about 2,000 employees until full
production is reached in early '80s.  Contract is possibly largest order since
Bell Helicopter Co built thousands of Huey models during Vietnam War.  Photo of
Stratford assembly line (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 358-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              265 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 24, 1976, Friday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19, Column 6

LENGTH: 29 words

Correction of Anthony Lewis column on Nixon-Kissinger policy on Vietnam notes
Defense Dept has corrected total of Amers killed in war, '69-72, from 15,387 to
20,492 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 358-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              266 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 24, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY MICHAEL KNIGHT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 148 words

Army chooses Sikorsky Aircraft as contractor for new generation of combat
assault helicopters.  Production of new helicopters in Stratford, Conn, plant
may add $3 billion and 17,000 jobs to Conn econ over next 10 yrs.  Contract
provides $83.4 Million for production of 15 helicopters by Aug '78.  Total of
1107 are to be built at cost of $1.5 Million each, $3.4 Billion for entire
package including development and other costs.  New helicopters will replace
gen-purpose Huey helicopters of Vietnam War.  Stratford plant currently has no
Govt contracts and operates at only 23% of capacity.  Contract marks blow for
Boeing Co.  Boeing still holds contracts for modifying existing helicopters, but
will lay off 600 workers in Pennsylvania because of decision.  New helicopter
contract may complicate any re-examination of helicopter program by Carter Adm.
Photo of helicopter model (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 358-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              267 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 26, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT M TRENT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 84 words

Robert M Trent lr comments on Paul A Batista lr (Dec 19) refuting Gen
Westmoreland's arguments against pardoning draft evaders (Op-Ed, Dec 12).
Disagrees with Batista that Westmoreland needs amnesty for his role in Vietnam
War.  Claims that Westmoreland conducted himself as dedicated US Army officer in
war which pol leaders 'stumbled into'.  Claims that majority of draft evaders
were not conscientious objectors but self-serving cowards.  Claims individuals
must obey law or anarchy will result.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 36

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              268 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 26, 1976, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JULIEN CORNELL and DALTON DELAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 75 words

Dalton Delan and Julien Cornell lrs comment on Gen Westmoreland's arguments
against pardoning of Vietnam draft evaders (Op-Ed, Dec 12).  Delan claims
democracy is predicated on individuals struggling to do what is right, not on
tradition of citizen-soldier as Westmoreland contends.  Cornell supports
Westmoreland's objection to pardoning deserters but notes that Westmoreland
failed to mention those who refused to be drafted on moral grounds.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 36

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              269 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1976, Monday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Thousands of Roman Caths celebrate Christmas in Ho Chi Minh City (formerly
Saigon) (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 361-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              270 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 28, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY TOM WICKER

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 153 words

Tom Wicker suggests Pres-elect Carter should extend pardon of Vietnam War draft
resisters to include poor who lacked knowledge and funds to dodge draft or flee
country.  Suggests that 800,000 or so veterans with less-than-honorable
discharges and Armed service deserters are group whom Carter has expressed more
sympathy for than for roughly 4,000 indicted draft resisters.  Urges Carter to
consider expunging criminal records of civilian protestors and reforming legis
to permit excluded aliens who took citizenship abroad as way of escaping draft
to return to US.  Notes that Dem platform contains pledge of clemency to anyone
in legal or financial jeopardy because of peaceful opposition to Vietnam War and
urges Carter to stand by platform on which he ran.  Claims generous clemency
program will restore impression that Carter Adm will be more humane than
conservative and conventional Cabinet choices suggest.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 36

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              271 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 28, 1976, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

US UN-Amb-designate Andrew Young says US needs 'strong Vietnam' and question of
Amer-Vietnamese relations could be 1st test of Pres-elect Carter's foreign
policy, int (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 362-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              272 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 28, 1976, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY PHILIP SHABECOFF

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 157 words

Pres Ford promises widow of Sen Philip A Hart to consider possibility of
granting general amnesty to Vietnam War-era draft resisters and deserters during
course of telephone condolence call.  Ford previously offered draft resisters,
but not deserters, form of amnesty by permitting them to 'work their way back
into society' through various kinds of public service.  Only 21,723 of total of
106,472 draft resisters took advantage of program.  Whether Ford will give issue
serious consideration or was making courteous reply to Mrs Hart's request
remains to be seen.  In related matter, United Ch of Christ pres Rev Dr Joseph H
Evans urges Pres-elect Carter to grant unconditional amnesty to veterans with
less-than-honorable discharges as well as draft resisters.  Contends that many
of those with less-than-honorable discharges are poor or poorly educated blacks
and minorities who lacked resources to learn their legal rights.  Photo (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 362-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              273 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 29, 1976, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 28 words

Pres Ford reiterates intention to examine possibility of gen amnesty for all
Vietnam war deserters and draft resisters, as promised to widow of Sen Philip A
Hart (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 363-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              274 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 30, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ERNEST HOLSENDOLPH

SECTION: Page 29, Column 5

LENGTH: 95 words

CAB charges Flying Tiger Line Inc gave $28,604 in corp cash and gifts and free
use of airplane to US politicians and foreign dignitaries between May '69 and
Mar '75.  Also charges co with improperly listing $16,500 in payments to
employees as operating expenses, resulting in concealment of $46,000 in
payments.  Among beneficiaries were Sen John V Tunney, Repr Charles H Wilson,
Mayor Thomas C Bradley, wife of South Korean Pres Chung Hee Park, and
unspecified Prime Min of South Korea and unspecified wife of South Vietnamese
Prime Min.Airline denies charges (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 364-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              275 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 30, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Anthony Lewis comment on Griffin Bell's apptmt as Atty Gen.  Scores his record
as Appeals Ct judge for 5th Circuit.  Cites his upholding of Ga House's refusal
to seat black member Julian Bond in '66 because of his support of Student
Non-violent Coordinating Com statement criticizing Vietnam war and sympathizing
with draft resisters, and Bell's decisions in segregation cases.  Calls Bell 2d
rate and scores Pres-elect Carter's praise of his record.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 36

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              276 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 30, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY PHILIP SHABECOFF

SECTION: Page 9, Column 4

LENGTH: 86 words

Pres Ford expects to submit to Cong plan for elimination of Fed controls on
gasoline when he returns to Washington, Dec 29 news conf, Vail, Colo.  Approves
State Dept memorandum recommending that US resume paying contributions to
UNESCO, which were stopped after orgn began excluding Israel from meeting and
programs.  Will decide within 2 wks whether to declare amnesty for deserters and
draft evaders of Vietnam War.Has not decided whether to recommend substantial
pay increase for about 2,000 Fed officials (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 364-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              277 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 30, 1976, Thursday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 162 words

US antiwar activist group says members have been rebuffed by Vietnamese
authorities after mos of efforts to persuade officials to release pol prisoners
and accept impartial inquiry into charges of violations of human rights.
Approaches included appeal lr from 110 leaders of '60s and '70s peace movement.
Speaker Rev Richard John Neuhaus says members felt US involvement in war had
been unjust.  Maintains members felt 'special responsibility' to speak out after
receiving repts about conditions in Vietnam, news conf.  Cath Peace Fellowship
chmn James H Forest says that while he was assured that grateful Vietnamese
would keep 'door open' to Amer peace movement, opposite has proven true.  Repr
Edward Koch says US should use pol and econ pressure to force govts to end
repression of human rights.  Internatl League for Human Rights joins in appeal
directed to Dinh Ba Thi, Vietnamese observer at UN.  Repr of Vietnamese
observer's office denies allegations (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 364-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              278 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 31, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY LUCIA T KELLY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 91 words

Lucia T Kelly lr comments on Melvin Shaw lr (Dec 17) which claims that it is
immoral to give pardon or amnesty to Vietnam-era draft evaders and deserters
since there is no way to help 50,000 casualties.  Claims Shaw lr ignores
question of whether US made mil orders so clear that none of draftees could
doubt propriety of following orders.  Notes that Nuremberg tribunals rejected
war criminals' defense that they were simply following orders.  Claims that
consistency demands that we grant amnesty to Vietnam draft evaders and many
deserters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 36

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              279 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 31, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY GEORGE TROSK

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 78 words

George Trosk lr comments on possibility that Pres-elect Carter may extend
blanket pardon or amnesty to all Vietnam-era war resisters and deserters.
Questions if there is any single formula for granting amnesty with justice and
fairness.  Notes that draft resisters were individually motivated by beliefs
ranging from cowardice to moral conviction.  Questions how blanket formula will
affect families of those who died filling vacancy for draft evaders.  Cartoon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 36

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              280 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 31, 1976, Friday

BYLINE: BY ERNEST HOLSENDOLPH and KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 186 words

Vietnam observer to UN Dinh Ba Thi, replying to allegations by Amer antiwar
activists who say they have failed in attempts to persuade Vietnamese to allow
impartial inquiry into reptd violations of human rights in country, protests
that Vietnamese Govt has been falsely accused of detaining 200,000 to 300,000
people because of religious or pol convictions.  Group, in lr to Thi, cited what
they said were Vietnamese official statements that 200,000 people were
imprisoned or sent to 're-educ' camps.  Thi says only small number of people
have been detained.  Says 95% of 1-million soldiers and officials captured by
Communists have been restored to full civic rights after brief re-educ.  Says
those still held either have committed crimes against people or engaged in
sabotage.  Denies allegations that individuals are persecuted because of
religious convictions.  Number of 110 signers of lr to Thi have since
disassociated themselves from it, saying they have received new information from
Vietnam leading them to believe Vietnamese Govt is working to guarantee civil
rights.  Daniel Berrigan comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 365-7

              Copyright 1976 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
