
                               1 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 289 words

Sen Fulbright, criticizing what he terms 'total breakdown' of communications
between Cong and Nixon Adm on Vietnam, says he will submit bill to compel Sec of
State and other officials to appear before Cong to explain Adm policies, TV int;
says bill has become necessary because top Adm officials, such as Sec of State
Rogers and Henry Kissinger, have repeatedly refused requests that they testify
before Cong coms, including Sen Foreign Relations Com; says officials refuse to
testify because they know there are 'a number of people' who do not agree with
them; scores US policy; accuses Adm of carrying out 'well-developed program of
undermining the credibility and position' of war critics; statement is in
reference to lr sent out by White House containing Alsop column; Natl Security
Council officer J Lehman Jr's recent remark that Fulbright could not be trusted
with classified material noted; McGovern scores Adm policy, Washington radio
program; deplores massive US bombing; says Vietnamization program fails to
provide any provision for release of Amer POWs; Humphrey scores Nixon for
proceeding too slowly with withdrawal of Amer troops and for extending fighting
into Laos and Cambodia, TV int; says he would have removed all troops from
Indochina by now if he had been elected Pres; Fulbright, discussing bill, says
its purpose will be to limit Adm's use of 'exec privilege' as excuse for not
testifying before Cong coms; accuses Rogers of being less than candid with Sen
Foreign Relations Com on invasions of Laos and Cambodia; Fulbright and Humphrey
take issue with Nixon Adm decision not to accept Soviet proposal for mutual
limitation of defensive missile systems; hold even accord ltd to ABMs would be
worth pursuing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 228 words

US tanks and other armored units move to S Vietnamese-Laotian border to prevent
possible eastward movement of N Vietnamese tank force that supported enemy
assault on Hill 31; fighting at hill said to have tapered off; S Vietnamese
troops have pulled back to positions S of hill; some enemy tanks reptdly have
begun assault on Hill 30; Hoang Xuan Lam repts tank battle at hill; S Vietnamese
mil sources disclose additional 10,000 Govt soldiers have been assembled at
Quangtri to reinforce drive into Laos; reinforcements said to bring to total of
30,000 number of Govt troops assigned to Laotian operation; US command announces
3 more helicopters downed in Laos; S Vietnamese pilots say no one is on Hill 31,
but fighting still goes on around it; S Vietnamese command repts 700 enemy have
been killed in Laos in last few days; says 400 of its men have been killed,
1,000 wounded since beginning of Laotian operation; S Vietnamese units in
Cambodia shelled 5 times; number of Amer helicopter missions in Laos continues
to be high; Amer mil spokesman at Quangtri base offers to make US pilots
available for ints, but says their remarks that tend to make S Vietnamese Army
look bad will have to be off the record; some S Vietnamese comdrs have
complained that recent rescue effort by Amer pilots diminished air support for S
Vietnamese troops in battle for Hill 31; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 121 words

M Frankel comments on reptd subtle but intensive debate in upper ranks of US
Govt about whether Pres Nixon should now commit himself to definite termination
of Amer involvement in Indochina war; says Nixon and his aides are unanimous in
wishing to disengage, but there is difference of opinion over whether US should
move toward disengagement with some ambiguity about its future participation in
war, or with firm notice that Nixon intends to let S Vietnamese fend for
themselves by certain and relatively early date; repts officials say Defense Sec
Laird presses case for scheduling end of US participation; says Sec of State
Rogers supports Laird; says Nixon remains flexible; discusses Nixon's views and
aspects of debate

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 13 words

Illus of S Vietnamese tanks supporting ground troops on the Ho Chi Minh Trail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 100 words

Analysis of S Vietnamese thrust against enemy supply lines; comment on Laotian
operation; Amer mil sources hold thrust enters its crucial stage; hill battles
underscore enemy's intense determination to defend trail; mil sources in Saigon
emphasize it is too early to judge whether operation will fall short of its
original objectives; high-ranking mil sources acknowledge thrust has moved
slower than expected; operation and plans discussed; mil sources say Tchepone
does not have to be taken, but it would be 'important psychological victory' for
S Vietnamese if they could move that far into Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 41 words

Article on Sen Kennedy's appearance in Charleston, SC, and s to SC Jaycees;
calls for end to Vietnam war; his extensive praise of Calhoun, SC's favorite
son, noted; Sen Thurmond made pub joke about Chappaquiddick accident shortly
before he arrived

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 33 words

A W Rudzinski cites recent false alert to point up danger of need for real alert
stemming from US involvement in Far East, lr; says invasion of N Vietnam would
trigger Chinese armed intervention

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 4

LENGTH: 126 words

O E Clubb discusses and criticizes US policy in SE Asia; charges policy of
supporting autocractic regimes, a counter-revolutionary policy, and mil effort
aimed at winning decisive victory for 'anti-Communist' parties of its choice can
lead to disaster; calls for a complete turnabout of strategy based on an
understanding of prime motivations of Asian peoples, demilitarization of US
Asian policy, full abandonment of mil intervention in Indochina, conversion of
large part of mil investments and activities into expansive undertaking for
global econ cooperation and other measures; comments on Nixon State of the World
Message and US policy; holds Washington's thinking neglects essence of
Indochinese situation; urges turnabout in US strategy; cartoon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 143 words

S Vietnamese reinforcements 10,000 men, assembled in NE corner of S Vietnam,
move toward Laotian border; fighting is decreasing along trail; S Vietnamese mil
spokesman says that for 24 hrs, there have been no new repts of action around
Hills 31 and 30; says US jets recently destroyed 8 enemy tanks in Laos; mil
sources confirm S Vietnamese troops have abandoned post S of Route 9 in Laos;
rept truck traffic along trail has dropped 50% in last 4 days; foresee continued
heavy fighting; US spokesman repts additional Amer 'air assets' have been flown
to Khesanh base; reduction in US helicopter sorties into Laos reptd; details on
action in Laos and S Vietnam; map; US command announces 15-fighter-bombers
recently carried out extended attacks on AA batteries in N Vietnam; raids said
to have been carried out in response to missle firings at Amer aircraft

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

Helicopter Romero's mother says she was unaware he was keeping diary of
activities in Vietnam, but is not surprised

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 144 words

S Vietnamese officers directing S Vietnamese drive in Cambodia appear to be in
state of confusion and uncertainty without leadership of Do Cao Tri who directed
23,000-man operation against N Vietnamese troops and supplies;; Saigon command
repts S Vietnamese troops have killed 2,100 enemy in Cambodia since Feb 4; says
250 S Vietnamese have been killed, 1,400 wounded; S Vietnamese momentum has
dissipated in recent days; some Amer advisers hold Do Cao Tri's fondness for
publicity led him and Sully to their deaths in helicopter crash; staff officers
at command post, Tayninh, S Vietnam, are not aware of policies and tactics of
his successor Lt Gen Nguyen Van Minh; detachment of 1,500 S Vietnamese rangers
rushed into landing zones and then withdrawn; no one has been able to determine
much about S Vietnamese operations in Cambodia since Do Cao Tri's death

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 29 words

Vietcong strikes Cambodia's only oil refinery at port of Kompong Som, 1st time
in war; burns 4 gas storage tanks; Cambodian spokesman says attack will not
hinder war effort

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 35 words

US Deputy Comdr Gen Weyand says N Vietnamese, using human-wave tactics in Laos,
have forced S Vietnamese troops into heaviest fighting of war; says he doubts S
Vietnamese can completely cut Ho Chi Minh Trail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 83 words

Sen subcom hearings; USAF spokesmen say all slot machines will be removed from
USAF bases overseas by July '72; Army recently announced it was destroying all
slot machines in Vietnam; 2 former Army officers testify that Cole interceded on
behalf of Sarl Electronics Co which was suspected of seeking to avoid Vietnamese
customs duties on slot machines shipped in from US; some of machines were
reptdly leased, not sold to exchs in deal in which Sarl was to get 1/3 of each
machine's monthly profits

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 35 words

Lr scores Pres Nixon's enlargement of war and Vietnamization policy; says
Laotian invasion brings to light once more question of how far US is involved in
Indochina; says US troops have been in Laos for yrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

Lr derides S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu's statement that Laotian incursion
has protected 5 northern provs of S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 5

LENGTH: 44 words

R A Walker lr deploring NY Times criticism of extension of Vietnam war into Laos
while allegedly failing to subject Communist activities to similar scrutiny;
notes Feb 21 ed and T Wicker comment on incursion into Laos, queries
inconsistencies in US foreign policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 5

LENGTH: 8 words

Reply to Feb 17 lr urges end to Vietnam war now

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 4

LENGTH: 69 words

Adm A A Burke (ret) says withdrawal of US troops from Vietnam will not reduce
need for US to have strong maritime strategy; says it is possible S Vietnamese
troops, even after they take full combat responsibility, may someday need quick
support from USN and USMC; holds US must have adequate marine forces afloat to
deter potential re-emergence of war or to assist S Vietnamese in dealing with
aggression; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 237 words

Bomb explodes in Sen wing of Capitol, causing extensive damage but no injuries;
was apparently planted by group or person protesting Vietnam war; explosion
occurs in unmarked out-of-way men's lavatory on ground floor; damages 7 rooms;
Acting Architect Campioli says explosion might have caused some structural
damage as it lifted some of original brick supporting arches; explosion takes
place at 1:32 AM; 1/2 hr earlier, phone caller warned Capitol switchboard
operator that bomb would go off in protest against Laos incursion; explosion,
1st serious act of sabotage against Fed bldg in Washington in recent history,
provokes cries of outrage from Pres Nixon and Cong members and demands for
tighter protection of Capitol; relative obscurity of lavatory leads Sen Aiken
and other Sens to speculate that bombing is work of professional who had
complete knowledge of Capitol's layout; Capitol police and many Sens suspect
conspiracy; most of damage is to nearby hideaway offices used by Sens for
private meetings; architect's office rept on damage noted; some old cracks are
reopened and new ones develop in West Front; Vice Pres Agnew, Sens Mansfield,
Scott, McGovern comment; Cong reaction seen generally restrained, with notable
absence of appeals for action against terrorist groups; Capitol Police Chief
Powell estimates that 15-20 bomb threats are recd each mo; illus of damage, of
Mansfield and Scott inspecting it

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

US helicopter crewmen bring dead and wounded soldiers back from Laos to
emergency field hosp at Khesanh; N Vietnamese officer among most recent group of
wounded; S Vietnam repts total of 320 dead, 1,000 wounded and 99 missing in
action since start of operation on Feb 8; wounded illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 253 words

Sen Symington charges that Pres Nixon's security adviser Kissinger has become
State Sec in everything but title and that as result Rogers has become
'laughing-stock' in Washington, Sen s; charges increasing power in Kissinger
hands is upsetting balance of power between exec branch and Cong; suggests that
a Cong appearance by Rogers has become 'rather empty exercise'; White House
angrily rebuts Symington; Nixon quoted as saying his comments about Rogers are
'misleading, totally inaccurate and unfair,' that Rogers is Nixon's chief
adviser on foreign policy and will remain that; Rogers known to have become
increasingly sensitive privately to suggestions that he has become subordinate
in power and responsibility to Kissinger; Sen Javits says Rogers should resign
if case is as described by Symington, making it clear that he disagrees with
appraisal that Rogers has become laughing-stock; Symington says it is to Rogers
credit that he has not resigned; says Kissinger uses 'exec privilege' to keep
from testifying before Cong; Fulbright, in s at Fla State Univ, says effect of
exec privilege invoked by Kissinger is 'exactly same as break in diplomatic
relations between nations'; State Dept spokesman R J McCloskey holds Rogers, in
his appearances before Cong, has made every effort to be fully responsive under
prevailing circumstances; por; Adm Moorer testifies before Sen com; hails
success of Laotian operations, comment to reporters; says flow of enemy suppkies
along trail has been significantly reduced

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 35 words

S Vietnamese command repts 11 of its soldiers killed, 16 wounded in ambush near
town of Suong; US engineer convoy is ambushed near coastal town 100 mi NE of
Saigon; 1 Amer killed, 2 wounded; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

Kennedy is expected to permit Medina testimony at Calley trial on atrocily
charges in Vietnam when it resumes; Henderson may also testify

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 46 words

Lt Gen J W Sutherland Jr says 4 photographers (L Burrows, H Huet, K Potter and K
Shimamoto) on Vietnamese helicopter that crashed in Laos Feb 10 'must now be
presumed dead'; aerial search has produced no evidence that anyone survived
crash; biogs and pors of photographers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 3

LENGTH: 169 words

Sen subcom opens hearings on explosion in Sen Wing of Capitol; Capt E Joyner,
army bomb expert, says explosives could have been smuggled in bldg in briefcase;
speculates blast was caused by 15-20 lbs of dynamite connected to delayed timing
device; Chief Powell says 200 to 300 bomb threats were recd at Capitol in last
few yrs; says 6 more threats were recd and checked out after explosion; urges
certain areas of Capitol be off limits to tourists; urges patronage jobs for
Capitol police be sharply curbed; Capitol Architect White says blast apparently
did not damage 'structural integrity' of Capitol; officials put damage at
$300,000; group calling itself Weather Underground claims responsibility for
blast, lrs to NY Times, NY Post and AP; calls Capitol symbol of Govt which is
attacking Indochina; illus of last few lines of lr and signature; Atty Gen
Mitchell sees no evidence of conspiracy; Washington Daily News repts authorities
have staked out Washington house where they believe antiwar group made bomb

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 3

LENGTH: 26 words

Author K C Chen lr, commenting on Xuan Thuy's recent statement on US threat to N
Vietnam, says China's intervention in Vietnam is increasing possibility

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

Army life and career lauded by late Maj J A Hottell, 27-yr-old W Point grad, in
own obituary which he wrote for W Point alumni pub about 1 yr before he was
killed in Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 48, Column 4

LENGTH: 37 words

White House Communications dir H Klein charges press has not put enough emphasis
on 'good job' done by S Vietnamese in blocking Ho Chi Minh Trail; says Pres
Nixon wants NYC Mayor Lindsay to remain Repub, statement, NYC

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 249 words

More S Vietnamese troops cross into Laos to counter continued buildup of enemy
troops and armored forces in battle area; S Vietnamese marine bn estimated at
600 men joins S Vietnamese troops in Laos; another bn boards helicopters to fly
across border; Amer mil sources say enemy has been sending USSR-built T-54 tanks
to supplement lighter T-34 tanks; battlefield action is relatively light;
fighting continues around Hill 31; S Vietnamese rept killing 52 enemy in 2
battles on border; US plane, operating over Laos, crosses N Vietnamese border to
fire missile at AA site; S Vietnamese seem to be preparing for new thrust
westward along Route 9; both sides appear to be regrouping after heavy
engagements; S Vietnamese spokesmen confirm 2 S Vietnamese bns have evacuated 1
key base for tactical reasons; Amer mil sources rept enemy steps up assaults on
Amer and S Vietnamese ground troops providing support for Laotian operation from
bases in Quangtri Prov; outer defenses of Khesanh base shelled; Amer mil sources
say Laotian operation has succeeded in cutting 'vital portions' of enemy supply
system; Laotian mil spokesman says N Vietnamese engineers are building major
road in Laos W of Ho Chi Minh Trail; Amer sources rept on results of operation;
details; map; illus of members of Amer helicopter recovery team carrying out
operation in Laos; US fighter-bomber, operating over Laos, crosses N Vietnamese
border to fire Shrike missile at enemy AA position 10 mi NE of Bheban Raving
Pass

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 74 words

Allied forces will observe 40-hr truce in Kontum Prov in central highlands to
allow promised release of 39 wounded S Vietnamese prisoners by Vietcong; truce
is requested by Vietcong radio broadcast, which says wounded prisoners were
captured recently in battle where borders of Laos, Cambodia and S Vietnam meet;
S Vietnamese command regional spokesman says S Vietnamese troops suffered 'big
casualties' in fighting in area during last 3 days

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 126 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, for 2d time in a wk, makes pub statement
hinting invasion of N Vietnam is not out of question; does not commit his Govt
to any such course of action; makes remarks in closed meeting, but his press sec
releases official version to press; statement says after reviewing course of
operations in Laos and Cambodia, Nguyen Van Thieu cannot say in advance what
will happen; says attack on N Vietnam would be 1 in which S Vietnamese were
'legitimately' defending themselves; says if N Vietnamese want to avoid attack,
they must cease their aggression and withdraw their troops back to N Vietnam;
details on statement; Amer official sources say they were aware such a statement
was going to be released; Nguyen Van Thieu illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 65 words

Defense Dept officials concede 3-ft length of gasoline pipeline, displayed last
wk to reporters by Vogt as having been cut from Ho Chi Minh trail during
operation in Laos, was obtained earlier; Vogt did not say pipeline sample was
obtained during operation, but that was impression he left with reporters at
briefing; Pentagon spokesman refuses to say when and where sample was obtained

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 25 words

White House says there have been 'no discussions' in Nixon Adm about prospect of
S Vietnamese mil thrust into N Vietnam, with or without US support

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 62 words

Internatl Professional Com for the Safety of Journalists on Dangerous Missions,
com of newspaper men founded by 5 assns in Sept '70, says it is determined to
seek release of any survivors among the 17 war correspondents who disappeared in
Cambodia in '70; orgn sec gen U Schwarz says application has been made to N
Vietnam to send 3-man mission to Hanoi to begin search

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 31 words

US HR resolution to send 15-member team of US observers to oversee pres election
in S Vietnam in Oct is introduced by group of 43 Reprs; Repr Wolff, who is
resolution's author, comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 241 words

Calley trial; Lt Col F W Watke, who led co of helicopters in support of action
at Mylai, says mass killings of civilians were reptd to high-echelon officers of
Americal Div within hrs after incident; says he relayed promptly to superior
comdrs repts from his men of heavy casualties among civilians; says these repts
included complaint from Chief Warrant Officer H C Thompson; says he passed repts
on to Lt Col F A Barker and notified his commanding officer, Lt Col J Holladay;
says he reptd next morning to Brig Gen G H Young Jr, asst comdr of Americal Div;
says 2 hrs later Young told him to repeat same information in presence of
Henderson, who was directed to conduct an investigation; denies defense
suggestion that orders to kill all Vietnamese found in Mylai came down to Calley
through chain of command; Watke and former Capt W C Riggs testify they attended
briefing for co comdrs along with Medina and that nothing had been said about
killing civilians; Capt E M Kotouc, despite grant of immunity by Maj Gen O C
Talbott, pleads 5th Amendment protection against self-incrimination when called
to testify about briefings on eve of incident; says he will testify only on
orders from Kennedy; Kennedy says he will rule tomorrow on whether Kotouc must
testify; says he has decided to admit testimony that Calley shot woman who came
running toward him with her hands up, testimony that he shot Vietnamese man and
testimony on other matters

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 58 words

Subcom hearing; Maj C E St Martin testifies he was ousted from his job amid
rumors there was price on his head because he tried to disclose corruption in
operation of service clubs in Vietnam; Sen investigators accuse Army of covering
up evidence of wrongdoing at clubs; both men link Cole to Crum; St Martin says
he was threatened by Wooldridge

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Gallup Poll repts Nixon's popularity fell to lowest level of his Pres shortly
after S Vietnamese invasion of Laos; repts 51% of Amers approve of way Nixon
handles his job, 36% disapprove and 13% have no opinion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 234 words

US command repts N Vietnamese gunners have fired AA missiles across buffer zone
at Amer planes flying over S Vietnam; says attacks are 1st of their kind in war;
discloses 7 Amer helicopters were shot down and destroyed while supporting S
Vietnamese drive in Laos; describes toll as highest for a day since beginning of
drive; repts 1 crewman killed, 10 wounded, 6 listed as missing; says 1 USSR-made
missile was fired from N Vietnam at USN fighter-bomber returning from strike
along Ho Chi Minh Trail; says plane, flying 12 mi NW of Khesanh base, was not
damaged; says 2d missile was also sent across buffer zone against Army
reconnaissance plane flying 11 mi N of Khesanh; says 3d missile was directed
against plane flying over Laos in support of S Vietnamese drive; announcement of
firings raises question of whether US sets stage for intensified air strikes
against AA missile sites and other targets in N Vietnam; US helicopter pilots,
flying over Laos, rept they are encountering heaviest AA fire of war; Amer
comdrs must now take into account possibility of intensified threats to aircraft
flying in support of drive just below buffer zone; battlefield activity in Laos
reptd relatively light; S Vietnamese spokesmen rept heaviest fighting is around
Hill 30; more S Vietnamese troops are being flown across border; 18,000 S
Vietnamese troops now operate in Laos; details on fighting; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 328 words

Pres Nixon says allied operation in Laos has 'very seriously damaged' N
Vietnam's mil ability and thus assures continued withdrawal of Amer troops from
S Vietnam this yr and next, TV news conf; says he will make another withdrawal
announcement in April and that this would reduce Amer forces at least at present
rate of 12,500 men a mo; refuses to say when all Amers will be withdrawn; says
his goal is total withdrawal but that this cannot be reached until enemy forces
withdraw from S Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia and until N Vietnamese release Amer
POWs; indicates weariness with what he describes as 'drumbeat' of press and TV
criticism of Laotian operation; says he is somewhat surprised about degree of
skepticism about value of operation; cites Abrams rept on operation's
achievements; lets stand and seems to support Nguyen Van Thieu's threats of
possible invasion of N Vietnam; repeats earlier restrictions on use of Amer
combat troops outside of S Vietnam; says 'no plan' to use Amer air power in S
Vietnamese operation against N Vietnam is 'under consideration' in Washington;
says no such request has been received from Nguyen Van Thieu; refuses to rule
out completely possibility of Amer support of invasion; repeats his position
that he would not hesitate to use Amer air power against N Vietnam if enemy AA
activity threatens Amer planes or if enemy infiltration seems to 'endanger our
remaining forces in S Vietnam, particularly as we are withdrawing'; Nixon
expresses hopt that mideast cease-fire will be extended, tacitly if not be
agreement, publicly declines to put pressure on Israel to make negotiating
concessions even though Arabs have indicated willingness to sign peace
agreement; says he is still optimistic about eventual success of SALT talks, but
appears shade less hopeful than earlier that accord can be reached soon, news
conf; insists US will hold out for settlement imposing limitation on both
offensive and defensive nuclear weapons

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 144 words

S Vietnamese pilots involved in Laotian drive are being subjected to growing
criticism by many Amer pilots, who say S Vietnamese are not measuring up to
standard even though they went through same training in US as Amers; Vietnamese
pilots say criticism is unfair and is yet another reflection of superiority
complex of Amers, which they deeply resent; Amer pilots, to justify their case,
point to Hoang Xuan Lam, who has Amer helicopter at his disposal; some 60
Vietnamese are pilots in operation, compared with 1,200 Amers; some Amers praise
S Vietnamese; details on criticism and complaints by Amers; many newsmen have
refused to fly with Vietnamese pilots because of widespread conviction that
crash in which 4 photographers were killed was due to poor judgment by
Vietnamese pilots; comments of Maj Tran Duy Ky, who defends S Vietnamese pilots,
noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 38 words

Defense Sec Laird says it 'probably would have been better' if Defense Dept had
made clear that pipeline sample shown at briefing was not obtained during
current S Vietnamese operation in Laos; at 1st defends display of sample

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 41 words

Heavy fighting in Laos is reflected in wkly casualty repts issued by US command;
repts 69 Amers killed lask wk, 281 wounded; S Vietnamese command repts 898 S
Vietnamese killed last wk, 2,222 wounded; commands list 5,107 enemy troops
killed last wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 116 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky says unless S Vietnamese forces in Laos
receive increased Amer air support, they will be 'in a difficult situation'; is
on tour of inspection of Laotian drive; says S Vietnamese forces are not in
danger because of level of Amer support; says there were 'discrepancies' in Amer
support of operation until now, but stresses those problems occurred primarily
at outset of operation; more than 20,000 US helicopter sorties have been flown
since operation began; he says bombing of N Vietnam is 'necessity' to support
operation; refuses to comment on Nguyen Van Thieu's statement that S Vietnam may
invade N Vietnam unless Hanoi withdraws its forces from S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 419 words

Pres Nixon accuses Sen Symington of taking 'cheap shot' in suggesting that
Rogers is State Sec in title only, press conf; 'as to who is on 1st' between
Rogers and Kissinger, Nixon stresses he regards Rogers, as State Sec, as chief
foreign policy adviser and spokesman for Adm; he also says Rogers is his oldest
and closest friend in Cabinet; stresses Kissinger plays essential role as
foreign policy adviser; in defining Kissinger's role, Nixon seems to give him
broader mandate than 1 exercised by Rogers; he suggests Symington is playing
traditional capital 'game' of trying to divide Pres from his State Sec and to
build up divs between Sec and Pres' natl security adviser; takes issue with what
he says are Cong protests that Rogers is inaccessible and not available for
questioning by Cong coms; says Rogers appeared 14 times before coms in '69, 15
times in '70 and has held 165 private meetings with Cong members; Fulbright
cites examples of how Rogers 'withheld' information from Sen Foreign Relations
Com, s slated to be delivered in Sen; State Dept repr McCloskey says Rogers has
'never failed to answer questions' by com members; says only information
withheld had to do with impending mil operations; following release of
Fulbright's s, Rogers calls Fulbright and Fulbright reptdly explains that main
target is not Rogers but growing influence of Kissinger and his refusal to
appear before Cong coms; in s, Fulbright charges that power and influence in
foreign policy have passed largely out of State Dept_which is accountable to
Cong_into hands of Kissinger and Natl Security Council staff, which is not;
Fulbright charges Sec Rogers has 'all too often' withheld information on war in
Indochina; says neither Cambodian nor Laotian intervention was made known to
Foreign Relations Com before which he testified shortly before operations began;
plans, in s to Sen, to cite as another example of withholding of information,
exec branch's failure to reveal that US 'has been conducting a secret war in
northern Laos'; State Dept spokesman says Rogers has never failed to answer
questions by com; Fulbright reptdly tells Rogers, in telephone conversation,
that not he but growing influence of H Kissinger and his refusal to appear
before Cong coms is main target of his s; Fulbright is scheduled to offer legis
requiring officials of exec branch, when summoned, to appear before Cong coms;
legis is aimed especially at Kissinger whom he describes as 'the principle
architect of our war policy in Indochina'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 3

LENGTH: 93 words

105th session of Paris talks; Vietcong and N Vietnamese chief delegates stay
away from session to protest Amer air attacks on N Vietnam; their deputies
attend session, which is said to be 'grim and fruitless'; Hanoi delegation,
charging US masses forces near 17th Parallel, issues warning to 'Amer
aggressors' that they will receive 'appropriate punishment' for 'new adventure'
against N Vietnam; N Vietnamese spokesman comments; Bruce says other side is
still not interested in negotiated settlement; says absence of Xuan Thuy and
Nguyen Thi Binh is maneuver

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 146 words

S Vietnamese forces in Laos have begun new move westward; US helicopters
transport S Vietnamese troops 7 to 9 mi farther west; mil spokesmen say new
landings carry reinforced inf bn of about 500 men to forward position just SE of
Tchepone; US command announces 4 more Amer helicopters downed while supporting S
Vietnamese drive; also discloses belatedly that 3 missiles were launched late
Tuesday from sites in N Vietnam against unarmed USAF reconnaissance plane flying
over buffer zone about 20 mi NW of Khesanh; heavy fighting at Hill 31 reptd; N
Vietnamese regiment attacks 800 S Vietnamese; S Vietnamese mil spokesman repts
400 enemy killed by S Vietnamese troops, arty and air strikes; S Vietnamese
troops, supported by air strikes and arty fire, reptdly kill 325 enemy enemy in
battle about 5 mi W of Laobao; details on action in Laos; enemy shells Danang
air base; maps

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 53 words

Defense Dept spokesman says N Vietnamese may be firing new AA missile in Laos
against US aircraft supporting S Vietnamese drive; repts heavy missile fire from
Tchepone area yesterday; calls it 1st major firing of enemy AA missiles outside
N Vietnam; says returning pilots do not identify missiles as USSR-made SAM-2s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 2

LENGTH: 113 words

Ed says risk of further widening war has been increased by decision to push
deeper into Laos in face of strong and increasingly effective enemy resistance;
says it is doubtful whether even total stoppage of Ho Chi Minh Trail can justify
heavy price in allied lives that is already being paid; says casualties can be
expected to mount; says growing threats of some kind of concurrent action
directly against N Vietnam are more ominous than risks of Laotian operation
itself; says rept on firing of missiles by enemy across buffer zone is difficult
to explain except as prelude to new 'protective reaction' air strikes against N
Vietnam; notes Nguyen Van Thieu's threat of invasion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

W W Rostow, noting Laotian operation, discusses recent history of Laos; says S
Vietnamese are now trying to enforce agreement on Laos which N Vietnam and
Communist China signed in '62, which USSR undertook to guarantee, and for which
US continues to bear 'inescapable responsibility'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

C L Sulzberger comments on Laotian operation and purposes behind it; says Nixon
plan for Vietnamizing war depends on at least partial victory in Laos; says
ultimate implication of operation is that real negotiation will become possible
moment Saigon is able to demonstrate war is no longer winnable

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 5, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 70, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 35 words

Col E Castle (Ret) testifies, Sen panel, that as post comdr in Longbinh,
Vietnam, he waged running battle with various interests seeking to establish
brothel and other illegal activities in center of Army hq

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 178 words

More S Vietnamese troops move westward across trail in Laos; helicopter-borne
advance units prepare ring of troop landing zones near Tchepone; assault appears
immiment at Tchepone; S Vietnamese troops have reached points 25 mi inside Laos;
more than 1,000 S Vietnamese troops are 3 mi S of Tchepone; nore than 100 enemy
killed in fighting around fire base Sophia; S Vietnamese troops kill 152 enemy
in battle 6 mi E of Tchepone; 5 more US helicopters downed over Laos and
destroyed; US pilots say plans are under way to establish at least 2 arty fire
bases near Tchepone; missile attacks against US helicopters noted; S Vietnamese
spokesmen say S Vietnamese troops have begun '2d phase' of Laotian drive; US mil
sources say about 2,000 Amer troops, to counter increased enemy activity against
drive's rear flank in northernmost S Vietnam, have been shifted within Quangtri
Prov closer to buffer zone; US Army base at Longbinh is shelled; 335 enemy
soldiers have been killed in operation in mountain highlands where borders of
Laos, Cambodia and S Vietnam meet; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 118 words

Natl Assembly session held from March 2 to March 4; Premier Pham Van Dong, Pres
Ton Duc Thang and Sec Le Duan attend; Pham Van Dong calls on people of N Vietnam
to increase their 'support to the South' and be prepared to 'smash any war act'
against N Vietnam, rept to Natl Assembly; says allied troops have 'suffered
stinging defeats' in operation near buffer zone and in Laos; says US policies
will bring US 'bigger and bigger' reverses until its final defeat; claims US and
S Vietnam have 'suffered stinging defeats' in Laotian operation; declares N
Vietnamese must concentrate forces on promoting agr production and mfr of
consumer goods; rept shows preoccupation with question of manpower; details on
rept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

Hanoi broadcast says 4 US landing ships with 1,500 marines aboard have
approached close to N Vietnamese coast in southern panhandle 'ready for action'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 32 words

White House makes pub figures recapitulating Amer POWs and men missing in action
to clarify Nixon news conf statement; figures; there is discrepancy between
Washington's and Hanoi's figures

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

S A Boorman, 21-yr-old Harvard Univ student, builds 'simulation model' in which
Communist Chinese mil and pol moves are likened to complex oriental board game
go (wei-chi'i); top mil strategists laud model; go, game of strategy, described;
Boorman comments; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

T H Greer lr scoring Pres Nixon's State of World Message as insult to
intelligence of informed reader; links Kissinger as primary author; specifically
criticizes comments on Vietnam and Communist China

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

Amer citizens' group trying to learn more about war issues meets with N
Vietnamese officials in Paris; conflict shapes up over meeting with US
officials; group meets with Xuan Thuy; is scheduled to meet with Bruce

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 6, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 94 words

Blow-by-blow radio acct of Clay-Frazier bout may be broadcast only to S Vietnam
and possibly some other scattered mil outposts as result of promoters agreement
with Armed Forces Radio and TV Service to broadcast bout around world so long as
transmissions are not in conflict with existing exclusive contracts; commercial
contracts now exist in 40 countries; promoters have demanded $250,000 to provide
world-wide radio acct to troops and in addition wanted written guarantee of
right to sue Govt if Armed Forces Radio broadcast affected overseas commercial
receipts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 48 words

Article on US helicopter support for S Vietnamese troops involved in Laotian
drive; some US pilots question risking their lives for S Vietnamese; details on
kinds of helicopters used; heavy toll of helicopters noted; illus of S
Vietnamese troops craft boarding for operation at Tchepone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 144 words

Over 2,000 S Vietnamese troops move into Laotian town of Tchepone; are supported
by Amer aircraft; rept finding bodies of 200 enemy; S Vietnamese spokesmen say
their forces suffer light casualties; S Vietnamese troops rept town is destroyed
and almost deserted; US aircraft attacked area for days before assault; key road
junctions near Tchepone are said to be more important than Tchepone itself; US
command repts 2 helicopters downed in area; major enemy supply area is believed
to be near Tchepone, but enemy reptdly started removing supplies at outset of
allied operation; S Vietnamese spokesmen rept discovery of some supplies at
Tchepone; mil sources say objective is for S Vietnamese units to link up with
operation's main force a few mi E of Tchepone; details on drive; enemy shells
Khesanh base; other action reptd; US fighter-bomber downed over Laos; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 78 words

Sen R J Dole scores attacks on Amer defense establishment by potential Dem
candidates for US Pres; asserts that candidates are 'new Chamberlains in what
they hold will be another era of peace through appeasement'; charges that most
of Dems who are considered potential candidates have joined 'mob on left' in
attack on US defense establishment; names only McGovern; says McGovern has come
'as close as anyone has yet come to urging outright surrender' in Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

Young Maoist demonstrators attacking US Embassy at Colombo, Ceylon, carry
placards scoring US role, demanding its withdrawal from Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

5 Amers and 2 S Koreans killed in aerial collision of US helicopter and Korean
observation plane near Quinhon, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 97 words

Defense Dept planning calls for possible retention of more than 150,000 US
troops in Vietnam in summer of '72 and some 50,000 the summer after; estimate,
made by senior defense officials, has recently been circulated among mil
officials to assist them in drafting budget for submission to Cong; officials
say estimate does not represent firm withdrawal schedule approved by Pres Nixon;
some Adm planners emphasize that if Laotian operation is a success, they would
expect much more rapid withdrawal schedule; recent Nixon statements on
withdrawal noted; details on withdrawal program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

US command announces that last 2 press centers in S Vietnam will be closed March
31 for econ reasons; centers are operated by mil to provide billeting and meals
for newsmen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 95, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

Army concedes case of mistaken identity and drops charges of unpremeditated
murder against Pfc R A Christian in fatal stabbing of Red Cross woman near
Saigon last August

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 71 words

Article on controversy over Sec of State Rogers and Pres Nixon's security
adviser Kissinger as basic question of div of power between Cong and exec branch
on formulation of foreign policy and over issue of exec branch accountability to
Cong; way in which Symington came to make s charging that Rogers is State Sec in
title only noted; Fulbright bill noted; other aspects of Vietnam debate
discussed; Kissinger and Nixon illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 48 words

Comment on Laotian operation; presence of S Vietnamese troops at Tchepone noted;
helicopters used in operation illus; notes capture of Tchepone as important
psychological boost for S Vietnam, setback for N Vietnam; speculation on outcome
of new push westward and options for N Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 55 words

Article on Common Cause and its campaigns so far to 'uphold pub interest against
all comers'; orgn focused 1st on Fed issues, then state issues and now plans
drive to get US out of Vietnam; tactics combine mass efforts of members pressing
their Cong and state legislators and selective assaults on Fed Govt by Gardner
and others

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Comment on Calley trial on atrocity charges in Vietnam; actions surrounding
effort to get Medina to testify noted; calls for Henderson and Koster to testify
noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 81 words

Ed says Pres Nixon's determination to maintain US troops in S Vietnam so long as
there are US POWs in N Vietnam offers no practical promise for release of
captives; says best that can be hoped is that pressure of world opinion as
expressed in recent UN resolution will persuade N Vietnam to treat POWs in
accordance with Geneva accords; says Vietnamization is dead end as far as POWs
are concerned; says only realistic hope for safe release of POWs lies in
negotiated pol settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 20 words

P Wehr lr says moral bankruptcy of US policy is well-documented in some recent
news articles on developments in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

T Wicker on Repr McCloskey plan to challenge Pres Nixon in '72 NH Pres primary
if Nixon is still pursuing his policy of unrestricted air strikes in Indochina;
notes his background and qualifications for task

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 4

LENGTH: 14 words

J Reston urges special Fed and local programs to aid returning Vietnam war
veterans

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 4

LENGTH: 16 words

R Baker humorous comment on forgetting through sleep various aspects of Vietnam
war and US policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 121 words

Sen Jackson says USSR has been deploying a new generation of ICBMs as large or
larger than its SS-9, TV program; Adm officials confirm construction of some
ICBM silos but Defense Dept spokesman J W Friedheim says USSR may be installing
multiple warheads on SS-9s, putting SS-9s in new silos or bldg new missile
system; Jackson, in later int, declares several missiles have already been
deployed and appear to be 'follow-on generation to SS-9; estimates there are
15,000 Soviet forces in UAR, including 6 gens; warns against US pressuring
Israelis and says that Sinai Peninsula should be demilitarized to insure that
Israel's final borders with UAR will be secure; Jackson gives gen backing to
Pres Nixon's policy in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 175 words

US continues widespread bombing raids, sending more than 1,000 planes into
action against enemy forces in Laos and Cambodia; some of raids are in support
of 2 S Vietnamese operations in Cambodia; Amer planes also carry out heavy
strikes around Tchepone; S Vietnamese troops at Tchepone are reptd to be
consolidating their positions in anticipation of possible enemy counterattack
from north; some US planes are held in reserve, apparently for use against
missile sites in N Vietnam should they threaten US bombers attacking border
targets; US command says 2,400 helicopter missions were flown in Laos and
Cambodia yesterday; says 3 helicopters were downed and destroyed in Laos; says
56 helicopters have been lost in Laotian campaign; repts 50 Amers killed; S
Vietnamese communique says 5,699 N Vietnamese soldiers have been killed in
Laotian campaign; puts S Vietnamese losses at 423 killed during same period;
enemy shells Quangtri and Khesanh bases; map; Quantri staging base shelled, 2d
time in less than 24 hrs; at least 7 Amers killed, 8 wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 136 words

Reconnaissance planes and jeeps provided by US for opium control join in search
for 4 kidnapped US airmen in Turkey; US spokesman says kidnappers have not been
in contact with US Embassy, and Turkish officials rept they have received no
word from kidnappers; Ankara police continue to check out dozens of repts that
kidnappers or airmen have been sighted; former Pres and Premier Inonu asks
kidnappers not to 'stain their hands with blood'; holds safety of airmen is
responsibility of nation; says nation's hon 'has sustained severe blow'; Turkish
Law Assn pres M Aksoy holds 'true revolutionaries, socialists and humanists do
not spill innocent blood' to attain goals; columnist A Ipekci holds kidnappers
will be no better than 'those who shot innocent people whose hands were tied in
Vietnam' if they kill airmen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 25 words

S Vietnamese soldiers at Tchepone reptdly consol forces in anticipation of
possible counterattack from north; S Vietnamese comdr discusses outlook; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 30 words

S Vietnamese troops at Tchepone, Laos consolidate their positions in
anticipation of possible counterattack from north; S Vietnamese Gen Hoan Xuan
Lam comments; details on action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 13 words

N Vietnamese radio denies capture of Tchepone, Laos by S Vietnamese troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 29 words

7 crewmen of an Amer helicopter shot down over Laos rescued after being stranded
for 48 hrs in area surrounded by N Vietnamese troops; Capt R E Elliott describes
experience

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

Syria gives some aid to Vietcong for its 'struggle against imperialism'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

N Vietnamese radio denies S Vietnamese troops captured Tchepone, Laos; says N
Vietnamese troops 'smashed' S Vietnamese attempt to land troops at Tchepone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 36 words

7 crewmen of US helicopter downed recently over Laos are rescued after being
stranded for 48 hrs in area surrounded by N Vietnamese troops; were downed while
on mission to rescue another downed helicopter in area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 19 words

Descriptions of USSR-built T-54 tank in Laos indicate vehicle being used by N
Vietnamese is not latest model; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 129 words

Amer mil sources rept flow of enemy trucks along Ho Chi Minh Trail to area of S
Vietnamese operations in Laos has doubled in last few days to return to level it
reached before invasion; figures; assumption among mil sources is that N Vietnam
is sending supplies and ammunition to its forces defending trail so they can
counterattack; reasons for decline in truck traffic in wk ended March 2 said to
remain somewhat of a mystery; comments made by Nixon at his news conf noted;
Saigon sources say truck traffic into S Vietnam before incursion was already at
low level; increase in traffic along northern trail segments could indicate
response by enemy to setbacks caused by S Vietnamese operation; mil sources say
US planes have destroyed 8,000 trucks since Jan; other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

A Lewis discusses Pres Nixon withdrawal policy; says aim of 'indefinite
withdrawal' must be to hold Saigon Govt together at least until '72 election;
says Nixon wants to be candidate who withdrew most of US forces without 'losing
S Vietnam'; says Nixon gambles on belief that Amers will show no moral concern
for 'death and disintegration' among other people

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 4

LENGTH: 77 words

Repr Stratton, who was member of Repr Hebert subcom that investigated alleged
Mylai massacre, deplores dropping of charges against Koster; notes lr of censure
against Koster; says lr keeps case out of newspapers; holds Army realized that
pub airing of Koster's 'incredible mismanagement' of his command would make Army
look bad; says Henderson has been made 'fall guy'; urges alternative methods of
arriving at pub disclosure of facts of alleged massacre; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

Hsinhua repts Communist China issued strong protest against what it calls
'deliberate provocation' by US and S Vietnam against 2 Chinese fishing boats in
Gulf of Tonkin; previous confrontations recalled

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 143 words

Sen Foreign Relations Com opens hearings on various bills aimed at restricting
power of Pres to make war; Prof Commager, backing curbs, reinforces fears of
Sens that Pres infringes on Cong war-making powers; develops argument that
'abuse' of war powers is relatively recent development; challenges argument
commonly advanced by exec branch, and pursued at hearing by Sen McGee, that
factor of time in nuclear age does not always permit exec branch to 'consult
Cong'; Sen illus; Fulbright says com is embarking on task of trying to find some
practical means of 'maintaining dem controls over most antidem activity known to
man'; Sec of State Rogers says there is no reason why when S Vietnamese are as
strong as they are that they should be under any restrictions militarily in
operations against N Vietnamese forces, s, VFW meeting; defends Laotian
operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

South Vietnamese Govt introduces series of reforms designed to stimulate private
and corp investors to use Vietnamese banking system; new law permits deposits in
banks to be made anonymously while allowing Govt to fight inflation by
stimulating private savings and encouraging investment and production; Govt
raises imported flour, wheat, rice, and sugar prices 50%

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 87 words

250 N Vietnamese reptd killed in Laos in battle with S Vietnamese marines who
are heavily supported by arty barrages and Amer air strikes; action takes place
12 mi SW of border outpost of Langvei; 17 S Vietnamese killed, 50 wounded; 78 N
Vietnamese reptd killed 19 mi E-NE of Tchepone; other clashes in Laos reptd;
Hoang Xuan Lam comments on operation; US planes keep up heavy bombing in Laos
and Cambodia; 5 more US helicopters reptd downed and destroyed in Laotian
operation; figures on helicopter losses; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 63 words

Informed Amer sources say most of S Vietnamese operation against N Vietnamese
troop concentrations and supply depots in Cambodia has come to halt following
death of Do Cao Tri; say 2 of 3 large task forces involved are waiting for
orders; Nguyen Van Minh has reptdly still not developed effective battle plan;
details on S Vietnamese actions in Cambodia; casualties noted; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 24 words

Amb Kennedy tells Amer businessmen in S Vietnam that US business is not ready to
invest in S Vietnam, Amer Chamber of Commerce meeting, Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 95 words

Saigon area is worried because city's defense has been left to irregulars and
auxiliary forces while nearly 50,000 S Vietnamese troops are fighting in Laos
and Cambodia; fighting there obscures fact that war keeps grinding on, in
smaller ways, in hamlets and villages of S Vietnam; comparatively low level of
enemy activity within S Vietnam at moment leads to worry; recent series of enemy
moves in S Vietnam noted; in Feb around Saigon there were 66 assassinations, 62
kidnappings, and terrorist attacks in which 103 civilians were wounded; some
recent action discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 9 words

Premier Chou En-lai in Peking after visit to N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 112 words

Premier Chou En-lai and Chinese Communist leaders end visit to Hanoi; visit is
believed linked to war situation; follows Chinese statements that S Vietnamese
incursion in Laos poses threat to China; Premier Pham Van Dong welcomes Chinese
group; says visit is 'event of paramount importance' at time when US is
'recklessly engaging in new mil adventures'; says visit is encouragement to N
Vietnam; Chou En-lai says China is prepared to 'eliminate any enemy that
endangers its territory'; says China thanks N Vietnam for fighting in front
lines of 'anti-imperialist struggle'; Chinese group includes Yeh Chien-ying,
Chiu Hui-tso and others; group is met by Le Duan and others

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

US officials say there is no evidence Communist Chinese are about to commit
troops or volunteers to Indochina war; say they have no evidence to substantiate
repts Chinese troops are being massed near Laotian border

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 39 words

US group in Paris says disclosure that N Vietnamese negotiator Xuan Thuy told
Amer group he held repeated private meetings with Bruce is 'erroneous'; Xuan
Thuy says he was referring to meetings with former chief delegate H C Lodge

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

Calley trial; L B Martin, J R Bergholdt and B Carney testify Calley, about 1 mo
before alleged Mylai massacre, beat old Vietnamese farmer and shot him after he
was thrown in well; incident is not included in murder charges; Kennedy allows
testimony as evidence Calley was mentally capable of planning murder; cautions
jury not to infer from testimony that Calley is 'vicious person with criminal
propensities'; details on testimony, in which Medina is mentioned

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 83 words

Sen subcom hearing; Col J Ice denies $4,000 he recd from Korean officer to help
officer's bro set up laundry concession in Vietnam exch system was a bribe; Col
R Ivey, legal officer in Vietnam, declares he was tricked by Cole into using
Hong Kong hotel suite that he later found had been paid for by Price & Co, a
liquor distributor; Sen Ribicoff says conflicts between Ice's testimony and that
of earlier witnesses suggests someone has committed perjury; details on
testimony by Ice and Ivey; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Swiss Govt officials rept that Sun Chi-Chou, Nationalist Chinese diplomat who
disappeared from his hotel in Geneva, has defected to Communist China; Sun
Chi-Chou had completed an assignment in Senegal and was on his way to new post
in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 58 words

Australian Defense Min Fraser resigns from Cabinet; charges Prime Min Gorton
with 'significant disloyalty' to him; dispute arose after Australian Army
reduced its civil-action work in S Vietnam contrary to Govt policy and without
informing Govt; members of governing Liberal party in both houses of Parliament
will meet to discuss Fraser's charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

Prof W S Whiting lr, noting statements by S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu and
Pres Nixon, discusses implications of S Vietnamese invasion of N Vietnam,
including possible entry of Communist China in war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 5

LENGTH: 24 words

W M Read lr scores reaction of Pres Nixon and Cong to Capitol bombing in light
of US bombings in Indochina; deplores violence in US and in war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 101 words

Army orders Medina to stand trial on charges of premeditated murder and assault
with a dangerous weapon in connection with alleged Mylai massacre; 1 of
specifications brought against him alleges he murdered unkown number of
Vietnamese, not less than 100, by means of shooting them; Lt Gen A O Connor
makes ct-martial decision; no date has been set; Medina says he is innocent,
statement; notes petition that Army is trying to keep him from testifying at
Calley trial; Connor dismisses 4 other preliminary specifications that were
lodged against Medina for lack of evidence; details on charges; Medina illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 121 words

Air strikes by US planes in Laos reptdly set off 1,600 explosions of enemy fuel
and ammunition supplies; site is near Tchepone; US command spokesman says allied
forces have already destroyed or captured more supplies in last 4 wks in Laos
than enemy forces lost during 1st 2 mos of last yr's Cambodian invasion; US Army
spokesman cautions that it is too early to assess effect of Laotian operation; S
Vietnamese spokesman repts 78 enemy killed in 1 battle near Laoboa, 15 others
killed in another battle near town; enemy forces continue harassing US support
troops in S Vietnam; US command moves to reopen road between Quangtri and
Khesanh; mil sources say Route 9 is in danger of being washed away by mid-May
rains; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 14 words

US bombers kill 8 S Vietnamese soldiers and injure 54 in 2 accidents east of
Tchepone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 55 words

Laotian Govt repts Laotian troops under heavy attack by enemy in northern and
southern Laos, that mil situation is grave; says King Savang Vathana's residence
was damaged in bombing attack, that N Vietnamese troops are advancing on Ban Na
Hill, position serving as buffer between Long Tieng and enemy-controlled Plaine
des Jarres

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 32 words

Saigon hq repts S Vietnamese troops in Laos have cut 9 major branches of Ho Chi
Minh Trail; intensive air activity continues around Tchepone; S Vietnamese
officer comments on importance of area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 208 words

Sec of State Rogers characterizes Communist Chinese Premier Chou En-lai's Hanoi
visit as effort 'to give some comfort to the N Vietnamese because they have been
suffering setbacks', TV int; says allied successes in Laos have been causing
concern in N Vietnam and that is reason Chou En-lai made visit; says he does not
think there is any increased threat of Chinese participation in war; says
criticism of him by some Foreign Relations Com members was spurred by fact that
Sens are frustrated because they do not agree with US policy; says Nixon Adm's
objective in Vietnam is not to insure survival of non-Communist Govt but only to
give S Vietnamese right of self-determination; takes issue with Cong and pub
criticism that Adm has broadened war; says war has not widened but just changed
places; Chou-En-lai, N Vietnamese Premier Pham Van Dong and Pres Ton Duc Thang
in Hanoi illus; Rogers expresses optimism that US and USSR will reach accord to
limit both offensive and defensive missiles though he is not sure about timing
of it; blames 'senatorial frustration' for Cong criticism of him in regard to
consultations and Kissinger; says US Adm will 'not use sanctions' against
Chilean regime despite US uneasiness over its possible direction

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AFP)

LENGTH: 66 words

N Vietnamese press, in its 1st comment on Chou En-lai visit, hails modern
armaments and tech of Chinese army; correspondents from China, N Vietnam and
foreign press were asked to observe embargo on news of visit 'for security
reasons'; Nhan Dan says the more US 'intensifies its aggression', the more China
strengthens its support'; Communist China repts 2 violations of airspace by US
planes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 15 words

Lt Gen Hoang Xuan Lam's role as comdr of S Vietnamese forces in Laos discussed;
illus; biog

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

Group of 171 pacifists ends Paris visit after meeting with Bruce and his
associates and exploring issues of Vietnam war with all parties; at end,
consensus appears to be that key to peace is Amer decision to withdraw;
spokesmen say they find no such intention on part of US delegation, but, on the
contrary, 'rigidity' and inability to see other side; group is sponsored by Amer
Friends Service Com, Fellowship of Reconciliation and Clergy and Laymen
Concerned About Vietnam; some pacifists see merit in Nixon proposal for
cease-fire; singer J Collins leads meeting of group and US mission members in
singing peace song

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 39 words

N Vietnamese troops lure Lt Col S J Burnett's helicopter into Laos with false
smoke signal and then shoot it down; Burnett and another officer are listed as
missing; 2 other officers rescued unhurt; US sources give account of incident

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 126 words

Calley trial; former Lt J LaCross disputes Calley's testimony that he had orders
to kill everyone at Mylai except a few civilians who were to be used as human
mine detectors; says his (LaCross's) men turned over 23 civilian prisoners to
Medina, who released them after interrogation; Govt completes its case against
Calley; Medina to appear as ct witness; LaCross admits he used 4 Vietnamese
males to walk ahead of his men through suspected mine field, but says it was
'the accepted thing' and was not brutal; says civilians were used as 'guides';
cannot remember that any of his men shot civilian at Mylai, but says he answered
'6' when Medina asked him for enemy body count; says he saw between 22 and 28
bodies in Mylai; other details on his testimony

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 47 words

Pres Park repts S Korea plans to increase its defense forces at home to offset
withdrawal of 20,000 Amer soldiers from Korea before end of June; says S Korea
studies timetable for eventual withdrawal of 50,000 S Korean troops in Vietnam,
but no immediate pullout is planned, int

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 83 words

Brig Gen Moore, Army provost marshal in Eur, testifies that Cole went AWOL in
'69, when he was head of exch system in Eur; says that Cole, when found, said he
had been offered $50,000 bribe not to testify before Cong group that was
studying alleged corrupt activities in exch system in Vietnam; says Cole refused
to say who offered bribe or why it was offered; Moore testifies that his request
to follow investigative leads in US was rejected unless he recd permission from
Gen Westmoreland; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

RI Bldg Trades Council pres J J Kearney says that 3,000 construction workers
will conduct peaceful demonstration outside Newport, RI, Naval Base when Pres
Nixon visits; RC group will demonstrate against Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 3

LENGTH: 72 words

A J Rosenstein lr holds present provision for removing 'bad Pres' is antiquated;
urges Cong pass const amendment to provide for confidence vote in Pres in 'dire
emergency' situation; says if Pres fails to win vote, he and Vice Pres should be
obliged to resign; says Govt leadership, until next election, should be placed
in hands of Acting Pres elected by Cong; charges Nixon Adm with widening war 'in
expanding fiasco' in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

Lr, commenting on recent Reston column faulting Nixon Adm for seeking mil
resolution in Vietnam, says mil resolution is needed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Gen M D Taylor (ret) urges unity behind Pres Nixon's Vietnamization program 'to
give it a fair trial'; discusses program and opposition to it; notes Cambodian
and Laotian operations have spurred opposition; holds S Vietnamese incursions
into Laos and Cambodia can advance US troop withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 269 words

Pres Nixon, in on-the-record int with C L Sulzberger, Washington, expresses
confidence that Vietnam war is ending and says he seriously doubts US will ever
have another war; warns, however, against withdrawal into neo-isolationism;
holds no one who is really for peace in US can reject Amer role in rest of
world; recalls his pacifist commitment from his Quaker mother but stresses it is
not enough just to be for peace, that something must be done about it; recalls
telling Israeli Premier Meir there would be wave of isolationism, affecting even
Mideast, if Vietnam war wound up in failure and under circumstances permitting
impression war was fought only by 'stupid scoundrels'; holds US destined to play
superpower role for next 25 yrs; says it can do this and take care of domestic
priorities also; Nixon says supersonic transports will be built either by US or
other countries; says he does not contemplate any risk of falling behind in arms
competition with Russians; stresses importance of a non-Communist Asia and fact
that US is itself a Pacific power; stresses desire to open door of cooperation
to Peking; says he does not forsee withdrawing Amer forces from Eur until
balanced reductions can be arranged by mutual negotiation; expresses deep
cooncern for internal problems of US but says nation has to deal both with
domestic problems and with mantle of responsibility imposed on it abroad; Nixon,
asked if he feels it is essential to his long-range plans that he be re-elected,
says his theory is 'you should never leave undone somethin g you will regret not
having done when you had power to do it'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 99 words

Australia's Prime Min Gorton deposed as Prime Min after losing vote of
confidence by members of his Liberal party; Min McMahon defeats Min Snedden to
be elected new party leader and thus new Prime Min; Gorton casts decisive vote
against himself when secret ballot on retaining him as party chief ends in 33-33
vote; is elected deputy leader to replace McMahon; challenge to Gorton follows
Fraser's charge that he supported army officers against him in dispute over
forces in Vietnam, was guilty of 'serious disloyality' to him and was unfit to
hold office of Prime Min; Gorton career revd; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 10, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 6

LENGTH: 57 words

Pres R M Nixon says 'I'd like to see us not end the Vietnamese war foolishly and
find ourselves alone in the world. I could have chosen that course my very first
day in office. But I want the American people to be able to be led by me, or by
my successor, along a course that allows us to do what is needed to help keep
peace in this world'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 34 words

M Frankel analysis of Pres Nixon's int by Sulzberger as confident reassertion of
faith of World War II generation of Amer 'internationalists' against challenge
and disillusionment spread by war in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 156 words

Communist China and N Vietnam issue communique on Premier Chou's visit in which
China pledges 'the greatest natl sacrifices' to help N Vietnam; communique says
they have agreed on 'how to deal with possible mil adventures' by US; appears to
rule out any immediate commitment of Chinese troops to fighting in Indochina but
does refer to possibility of greater Chinese involvement as a reaction to
possible new US moves; Chou reptdly described communique as 'an important
document'; Jenmin Jih Pao ed warns 'Chinese people mean what they say, and what
we say, goes'; appear more preoccupied with widening war than with existing
situation; says they have agreed on how to deal with 'possible mil adventures'
by US; Chou En-lai and Pham Van Dong sign communique; communique appears to rule
out any immediate commitment of Chinese troops to war; communique quoted;
Chinese press warns Nixon about expanding war; Chou En-lai lauds communique

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 7 words

2 wounded S Vietnamese back from Laos illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 56 words

US officials say Communist China is expected to step up deliveries of mil items
to N Vietnam to make up for losses suffered in Laos; note that until now, China
has been almost entirely responsible for flow of small arms to N Vietnam;
Chinese aid to N Vietnam is estimated at $200-million annually, USSR aid
estimated at $500-million

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AFP)

LENGTH: 63 words

N Vietnamese war correspondent repts that truck drivers put on asbestos clothing
to drive through 'tunnels of fire' created by US bombers along certain secs of
Ho Chi Minh Trail; correspondent does not refer to trail by name but makes clear
it is major supply route; his article details measures by which N Vietnamese
forces immediately build new rds to replace those destroyed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 102 words

Heavy fog closes down air operations at Khesanh base and brings near halt to US
helicopter support of S Vietnamese troops in Laos; ground fighting also declines
in bad weather; S Vietnamese troops kill 31 enemy in 2 small clashes; bn of S
Vietnamese troops is still in Tchepone; no enemy attacks against troops have
been reptd; S Vietnamese command repts 705 S Vietnamese soldiers have been
killed in Laos since beginning of operation, repts 6,943 enemy killed; enemy
force attacks S Vietnamese position near Khesanh; 15 enemy killed; Amer air
strikes and arty destroy 5 tanks near Tchepone; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

McMahon sworn in as Australian Prime Min; faces task of rebuilding unity in
governing conservative coalition of Liberal and Country parties; no change seen
in Govt's conservative pro-Amer policy; is considered to be hawk on Vietnam war;
charges against Gorton of dictatorial tendiencies, disregard of claims of 6
Australian states and other grievances revd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 8 words

Excerpts from Medina testimony on Mylai massacre

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 2

LENGTH: 27 words

Ad by antiwar group, People's Peace Treaty, lists principles for joint US, N and
S Vietnam peace treaty; urges endorsement; deplores actions in Laos and Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 2

LENGTH: 138 words

Ed, noting that there is probably large amt of propaganda in visit of Chinese
officials to N Vietnam and considerable measure of bluff in S Vietnamese threats
to invade N Vietnam, says it would be dangerous to ignore warning that lies
behind China's promises of support for N Vietnam; says it is far from convincing
to assert, as Pres Nixon and Sec of State Rogers have done, that China has no
reason to be concerned about expanding war near its borders, or to assume that
China will not react strongly to further escalation; says Adm's movements in SE
Asia can only have effect directly contrary to Nixon's avowed goal of improved
relations with China; says essential step toward rapprochment with China is firm
disavowal by Washington of any intention to invade N Vietnam or to give mil
support to such a move by S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 243 words

Calley trial; Medina testifies he never gave Calley orders to kill women and
children at Mylai; quotes Calley as saying: 'My God, I can still hear the
screaming,' when, 2 days after alleged massacre, he asked platoon leaders if any
'atrocities' had been committed; this is stricken from record by Kennedy on
defense objection that alleged 'confession' extracted in this manner without
prior warning is inadmissible; Medina says he told his co on eve of attack that
common sense was to be used and women and children were not to be killed; under
cross-examination by Latimer, Medina admits trying to cover up incident; gives 4
reasons; admits he told Calley that he (Calley) could use prisoners to help lead
his unit through mine field; maintains he at no time suggested that 'innocent
civilians' be killed; says he twice cautioned his platoon leaders to avoid
indiscriminate shooting; concedes he shot Vietnamese woman, explaining he
thought she was reaching for weapon; denies he shot wounded boy, but says he was
so confused he might have ordered shooting; says he began to worry about
civilian casualties soon after assault began; says Koster countermanded order to
him to return to hamlet to get exact count of civilian dead after he told
Koster, over radio, that 20 to 28 civilians had been killed; is accompanied by
several lawyers, including F L Bailey; other details on session; illus of
Medina, Bailey and Capt J Truman, another of Medina's attys

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 90 words

Sen subcom hearing; Cole testifies; illus; calls charges against him
unprecedented, unproved, untrue and slanderous; admits he was offered $50,000
not to testify if called by Cong subcom; says he does not know who offered
bribe; Sen Percy scores he; says 'there is very good chance' that Cole has
committed perjury, disgraced uniform and betrayed trust; Cole to return for
detailed questioning; Cole denies any wrongdoing either in Vietnam or Eur;
testifies on alleged instances of his intervention on behalf of Crum; Cole and
Percy illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 41 words

Returning Vietnam war veterans finding jobs increasingly scarce, particularly
those lacking job experience and members of minority groups; problem is
particularly acute in NYC and other major urban areas; Fed efforts to spur
employment discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

Laotian mil command repts its troops driven from post called Position 22 and
from 3 smaller posts on eastern edge of Boloven Plateau after 2 days of heavy
bombardment; loss of Position 22, base vital for harassment and surveillance of
Ho Chi Minh network, leaves Laos without a base in eastern edge of strategic
plateau, poses threat to Govt's hold over area; US and Laotian planes reptdly
participated in battle; Maj Gen Vang Pao, comdr of irregular army of mt
tribesmen augmented by Thai troops, is optimistic on holding off enemy forces in
Long Tieng area until start of monsoon rains in May; role of Thai troops, whose
presence in Laos is officially denied, discussed; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

Army investigates charges by Lt Col A B Herbert, who served in Vietnam, alleging
variety of misdeeds by Amer and S Vietnamese and coverup by one of his
superiors; Herbert is now stationed in US; details on charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 81 words

Green Berets face uncertain future as their number is to be reduced as part of
gen troop reductions and sr Army officers seek gen reassessment of Special
Forces past performance and future value; forces role in nation-bldg in
underdeveloped countries and use as Mil Assistance Training Teams to teach local
forces how to fight insurgency noted; scandal and notoriety said to have
tarnished Green Berets' inage in Vietnam; Brig Gen H E Emerson lauds role of
Green Berets in Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 21 words

Mrs L Bruyn walking from Newton, Mass, to Washington to protest Vietnam war;
enters Manhattan on 23rd day of walk; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 152 words

Calley trial; Henderson testifies that troops involved in Mylai killings were so
unready for combat that brig comdr protested and asked for 60 additional days of
training in Hawaii before men were shipped to Vietnam in Dec, '67; says request,
which was made by Brig Gen A A Lipscomb, was denied by superiors; taking of
evidence in trial is completed; closing arguments will begin March 15 after
unusual session on Sunday, March 14, in which counsel for both sides will
discuss instructions that Kennedy will give to jury; Sgt D Mitchell, who was
acquitted last Nov at Ft Hood, declines to testify unless ordered by ct; O B
Brown, Mitchell's atty, says he advised Mitchell not to testify because he
learned Army has taken 'certain flagging actions' against Mitchell despite
acquittal; Kennedy does not order Mitchell to testify; Mitchell is excused;
Henderson says Barker briefed him on impending assault on Mylai

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 251 words

Pres Nixon calls for 'imagination and daring' as well as 'genuine reform' to
improve cts, s, Natl Conf on Judiciary; endorses proposals for taking minor
traffic offenses, loitering, drunkenness and other 'victimless' crimes out of
cts, assumption of many routine judicial tasks by nonlawyer 'parajudges,' more
use of computers to store and retrieve data by judges and lawyers, and creation
by states of judicial center, similar to one created by Fed Govt, to develop new
ways of streamlining justice; greeted by applause when he praises judges 'who
will not be bullied or stampeded' by rowdies and when he says that 'justice
dictates not only that the innocent man go free, but that the guilty be punished
for his crimes'; seen referring to Chicago trial of Judge Hoffman; says, in
giving encouragement to efforts by chief Justice Burger and other judicial
leaders who have been urging strong measures to make justice faster and more
efficient, that system of criminal justice that can guarantee neither speedy
trial nor safe community cannot excuse its failure by pointing to elaborate
system of safeguards for accused; opposes filming of judicial proceedings or
introduction of live TV into courtroom; demonstrators denouncing busing as
concept in school desegregation attend Nixon's s on ct system; Coll of William
and Mary students hold conf on 'Peace and Justice' attended by antiwar spokesmen
to counter s by Nixon in Williamsburg; pro-Nixon student group holds own conf on
campus in support of Nixon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 173 words

Herbert drafts mil charges against Maj Gen J Barnes and Col J R Franklin and
accuses them of covering up war crimes in S Vietnam; says he plans to file
formal charges and specifications tomorrow; accuses Barnes and Franklin of
dereliction of duty, misprision (concealment) of a felony and failure to obey
regulations; says as comdr of inf bn in Vietnam, he reptd total of 8 criminal
allegations to Barnes and Franklin, but nothing was done about repts until he
was relieved of his command in Vietnam and shipped back to US last fall; says he
forwarded same repts to Office of the Army's Inspector Gen when he returned, and
Army began inquiries; sources say Criminal Investigation Div of Army has
confirmed all incidents did occur; statute of limitations, in effect for
specific charges Herbert plans to file, ends April 4; Herbert notes delays he
has had to go through for 2 yrs; discusses, in int, account of his experiences
at village of Cu Loi on Feb 14, '69; says he reptd subsequent incidents to
Barnes and Franklin; Herbert illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 127 words

Amer officials say Saigon Govt's plan to move refugees from northern part of S
Vietnam to southern part has been quietly set aside in favor of resettling
refugees within their native provs; change follows survey which found
overwhelming majority of refugees oppose moving to other regions and want to
return to their native villages; survey has led S Vietnamese officials to
emphasize what is known as 'return to the village' program; refugee officials
now say all relocations involving movement from one region to another will be
strictly voluntary; plans to move some refugees in Mil Region I to Mil Region
III are still being considered; US officials comment; allied officials consider
refugee situation in northernmost provs to be most severe and complex

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

Paris Peace talks session; Bruce delivers shortest s on record at talks as he
denounces what he describes as Communist delegations' 'propaganda maneuvers';
addresses deputy chief delegates of Vietcong and N Vietnamese delegations,
because their chiefs boycott talks for 2d wk in protest against Nixon policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

US command announces 44 Amers killed in combat last wk, 434 wounded; S
Vietnamese and enemy casualties for last wk listed; US, S Vietnamese and enemy
casualties for war listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 21 words

US mil sources say Amer fighter-bombers have destroyed only N Vietnamese
surface-to-air missile site ever discovered in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 12, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 91 words

Mil sources rept S Vietnamese forces who occupied Tchepone, Laos have withdrawn
to positions in surrounding hills; say positions are temporary and were chosen
to avoid possible entrapment; S Vietnamese press search for enemy war stores;
fighting flares at several points near Tchepone; details on action; US spokesman
announces downing of 3 more US helicopters in Laos; US hq says 160 helicopter
sorties are flown as weather conditions improve; S Vietnamese hq repts more than
500 N Vietnamese were killed by 3 recent B-52 raids near Tchepone; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 82 words

S Vietnamese forces pull back from positions near Tchepone Laos; US helicopters
return in force over Laotian panhandle as weather improves; ground fighting
described as sporadic; S Vietnamese inf rgt reptdly pulls out of Fire Base
Sophia and moves SE toward S Vietnamese border; Gen Sutherland, comdr of Amer
forces supporting Laotian operation, says N Vietnamese tried an 'all-out gamble'
in their attacks on hill positions and have suffered heavy losses; illus of N
Vietnamese troops in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 67 words

Former N Vietnamese sgt says N Vietnamese forces were warned of S Vietnamese
attack in Laos last Oct and were told they must crush it at any cost, news conf,
Saigon; says his unit received its final orders to move into battle 6 days
before S Vietnamese troops crossed border; says N Vietnamese forces on Ho Chi
Minh Trail always have at least 30 minutes warning before B-52 raids;
surrendered Feb 18

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 26 words

Pentagon officials say it would have been impossible for N Vietnamese to know
about plans for Laos invasion last Oct because planning did not begin until Dec

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 5

LENGTH: 27 words

K F Bieber lr scores conviction of USAF Col G V Kehrli on marijuana charge;
notes legal action in Mylai case; urges all US troops be brought home from
Vietnam now

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 58, Column 8

LENGTH: 50 words

Sen Bentsen, just back from 2-wk trip to Indochina, says Pres Nixon has not
'leveled' with Amer people or Cong about 'full extent of risk' involved in
Laotian operation, news conf; says Nixon has committed 'error of omission';
calls for 'substantial acceleration' in rate of Amer troop withdrawals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 159 words

Cong informants say number of refugees in S Vietnam has risen dramatically,
perhaps by as many as 150,000, since new allied operations were begun late last
yr; Adm makes this estimate available to several Sens this wk in reply to
inquiries, but it is not made pub; estimate is based on repts from US Mission in
Saigon; cumulative totals since '65 are about 5-million refugees; secret surveys
by allied teams in refugee camps before latest mil movements indicate 'only a
minority' of refugees support Saigon Govt, most are 'politically neutral', and
large number are Vietcong sympathizers; Cong sources say latest developments
appear to be raising again question of effectiveness of pacification program;
Cong sources say that in preparation for current operations in Cambodia and
Laos, some 40,00 Montagnards were evacuated from border provs; some 38,000 new
refugees were forced out of U Minh Forest area as result of recent mil actions;
other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 13, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 207 words

Pres Nixon's security adviser Kissinger holds philosophical and pol discussion
with 3 antiwar protesters who have been named as co-conspirators in alleged plot
to kidnap him; meeting with T Davidson, Prof Davidon and Sister Bell takes place
in White House situation room; Davidson says discussion was 'civilized and
amicable'; Kissinger says meeting is kind he tries to have with outsiders to
give 'concerned people sense of being listened to; meeting, which was 1st
disclosed by M McCrory in Washington Star, was arranged by mutual friend, B
McDonnell; Davidson describes group's disagreement with Kissinger at meeting
concerning Vietnam war; Davidon comments; Davidson says Kissinger defended Nixon
policy of gradual disengagement and left clear impression that US will have
transferred ground combat responsibilities to Saigon by mid-72; says protesters
replied that US could continue to make heavy 'technological' contribution to
war; says they argued US should announce deadline for withdrawal; says Kissinger
replied that deadline would reduce enemy's incentive to negotiate and would
'prevent the US from getting out sooner than it might'; says Kissinger and
protesters disagreed over shape of possible pol settlement with N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Hanoi press agency repts N Vietnamese gave flower pot made from fragments of
downed US plane to Chinese official who visited Hanoi with Chou En-lai recently;
says plane was downed in May, '67

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (AFP)

LENGTH: 39 words

N Vietnamese newspaper says S Vietnamese have played final act of their
'Tchepone victory comedy' by announcing evacuation of their troops from city;
says S Vietnamese troops never reached Tchepone, Laos; outlines 7 'acts' of
'comedy'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 50 words

Tranh Van Hoa, N Vietnamese defector, repts journalists captured by N Vietnamese
in Cambodia are taken to Hanoi as a matter of policy, int pub in Hong Kong
newspaper; says he saw 6 captured journalists; US official repts that 3 Amer and
14 foreign newsmen are currently listed as missing in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 97 words

McMahon to face his 1st parliamentary test as Prime Min of Australia when he
replies to motion of censure against Govt by E G Whitlam, Opposition chief of
Labor party; McMahon acts to make adm establishment more effective, to attack
growing econ problems and mend poor relations between central govt and states;
abolishes Prime Min's Dept and Dept of Cabinet Office; replaces them with new
orgns called Dept of the Prime Min and Cabinet and Dept of the Vice Pres of the
Exec Council; orders complete rev of econ; discusses changes, news conf;
reaffirms his Govt's policy in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

French Natl Assembly member Servan-Schreiber holds SST project is 'indus
Vietnam', cable to Sen Proxmire; charges cost of project, which has increased 4
times since initial valuation, has been kept from pub; says flight tests have
reduced maximum passenger capacity from 134 to 110 or less and that craft's
range has been drastically decreased; holds project should have been canceled

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Comment on use of US air power in support of Laotian operation; air power said
to be making up difference between success and failure in Laos; US warplanes are
responsible for more than half of the 7,000 enemy troops reptd killed in Laos;
graph comparing US bombing tonnage in World War II (2,057,244) with that of
Korean War (635,000) and Indochina War (5,693,382, including small amt of S
Vietnamese bombing)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHS & CHARTS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 18 words

Illus of Amer helicopters at S Vietnam airstrip waiting to take off in support
of S Vietnamese troops in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 37 words

Brit correspondent R Hughes comments on question of whether Communist China will
intervene in war; says US sources agree Laotian fighting will not provoke
Chinese intervention; notes Chou En-lai visit to N Vietnam; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 13 words

US Sup Ct decision upholding draft in view of Vietnam war's legality analyzed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Ed, Leadership Needed, notes Pres Nixon, in int by C L Sulzberger, conceded
there is now a great challenge to US leadership, but scores his failure to
indicate he has 'slightest idea how to meet it'; disputing his
'neo-isolationist' concept, holds that opposition to escalation of US
involvement in Vietnam is largely based on deep sense of Amer commitment to and
responsibility for world peace; holds US activities in SE Asia undermine US
basic and essential moral and pol role to play in internatl community

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 5

LENGTH: 28 words

Lr on Pres Nixon's statement that US will withdraw totally and completely from S
Vietnam if N Vietnamese withdraw from S Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia and release
Amer POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 189 words

S Vietnamese forces move into several new combat bases on mt ridge SE of
Tchepone, Laos; are said to have made move to avoid becoming hemmed in by N
Vietnamese force and to try to counter apparent enemy move against Route 9;
drive against Ho Chi Minh Trail is expected to continue only until monsoon rains
begin in May; Govt troops rept enemy attack repulsed in Tchepone valley; action
light elsewhere; officials say S Vietnamese troops will withdraw to Khesanh when
rainy season begins; S Vietnamese troops rept they repulse attack on Tchepone
valley; battle action remains light and scattered; details on S Vietnamese troop
movements near Tchepone; S Vietnamese spokesman says some 12,000 to 15,000 enemy
troops are in arc W of Tchepone; scoffs at press repts that S Vietnamese troops
are trying to avoid fight at Tchepone; says S Vietnamese are determined not to
become 'fixed target' for enemy; details on operation; 15 N Vietnamese killed in
battle 14 mi W of Laobao; US helicopters fly 1,300 support sorties; Amer
officials say S Vietnamese have put out of action 10 of 30 N Vietnamese bns
defending Ho Chi Minh Trail; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 14 words

Comment on charges filed by Herbert; accuses Army of covering up atrocity in
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

S Vietnamese forces clash with enemy soldiers 9 mi NW of border town of Laobao,
Laos, kill 18; 2d clash takes place in Tchepone area; S Vietnam repts 303 of its
troops were killed in action in past wk; speculation on withdrawal of the 21,000
S Vietnamese troops in Laos by end of Mar continues; top US sources confirm that
they plan to stay on in Khesanh into rainy season; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 40 words

US fighter-bomber mistakenly attacks S Vietnamese ground troops in Laos in 5th
accidental bombing of campaign against Ho Chi Minh Trail; 10 S Vietnamese
killed, 12 wounded; fighting remains at low level; US helicopters kill 25 enemy
soldiers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 42 words

S Vietnamese Lt Gen Hoang Xuan Lam says S Vietnamese forces in Laos have
completed mission given to them by Pres Nguyen Van Thieu 'according to plans',
int; says main portions of Ho Chi Minh Trail have been cut and enemy's supplies
have been destroyed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 50 words

Adm Moorer says S Vietnamese strike in Laos is 'just about at the peak' and has
'severly disrupted' N Vietnam's mil operations, TV int; declines to estimate how
much longer action will last; discounts repts that S Vietnamese have been
pulling back under strong enemy pressure in some areas of Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

Antiwar soldiers see show Fayetteville, NC;, which stars J Fonda, D Gregory, D
Sutherland and others; US Servicemen's Fund, show's sponsor, characterizes it as
response to B Hope's annual excursion to Vietnam and other countries where US
soldiers are stationed; details on show; city officials refused to let show be
performed in municipal auditorium

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 5

LENGTH: 29 words

Lr links Sen Muskie's criticism of US policy in Vietnam to pol; queries reason
behind Muskie's being 'shocked' at current Laotian campaign and Cambodian
campaign last spring

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

H Mitgang comments on Vietnam refugee problem; notes Kennedy subcom estimate
that conduct of war in last 2 yrs has generated 3-million refugees; notes
Kennedy's comments on problem; notes invasions of Laos and Cambodia and US air
strikes have exacerbated problems of civilian casualties and refugees

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 126 words

Sen Kennedy estimates that at least 25,000 civilians were killed in war last yr
and that 100,000 were wounded; estimate, based on official figures, is not
disputed by US Govt officials; formula used by Kennedy in arriving at estimate
noted; other official statistics gathered from Pentagon show number of S
Vietnamese soldiers killed in action last yr, and number of Govt officials and
supporters killed in terrorist acts continue at high rate; figures; counsel of
Kennedy's refugees subcom says there have been 1.1-million S Vietnamese
casualties, including 325,000 deaths, since beginning of war; Sen Subcom on
Regugees charges intensification of air raids in Laos has increased civilian
casualties; estimate civilian casualties now exceed 30,000 a yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 115 words

Survival of Meo mt tribes in Laos seen periled by war and is source of major
concern; Gen Vang Pao, their leader, and Amer and Laotian friends query whether
time has come to move them out of war while there are still enough men left to
assure their survival; advances made by N Vietnamese have forced tribes to move
southward away from mts and towards Vientiane Plain; losses in battle and losses
resulting from their wandering has taken heavy toll; US planes drop food and
other necessities to them wherever they halt; 70 to 80% of the 170,000 people US
is currently feeding and supplying are believed to be Meo; Van Pao, destroyed
Meo hamlet of Ban Xon and group of tribesmen illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 37 words

Mil sources say S Vietnamese troops abandon Lolo fire base 9 mi SE of Tchepone
under heavy enemy pressure, leaving behind their arty pieces; say abandonment is
ordered because US helicopters can no longer supply base; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 82 words

Allied base at Khesanh, S Vietnam, comes under intense shelling, forcing Amer
helicopters to scatter into sky; shelling said to be heaviest since '68 siege;
spokesmen describe damage as light, with no fatalities; 2 US helicopters downed
in Laos; Amer pilots rept destroying 7 enemy tanks in Laos near Tchepone; S
Vietnamese command spokesman says S Vietnam still has forces operating in
Tchepone vicinity; S Vietnamese forces continue operation close to Laotian and
Cambodian borders; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 111 words

US lifts ban on travel by Amers to Communist China and discloses that it is
working through private diplomatic channels to bring Peking's Amb back to Warsaw
talks interrupted over yr ago; both steps are part of Nixon Adm's continuing
policy of seeking improved relations, but State Dept concedes no rapid response
is expected; Communist China has granted only 3 entry visas to Amers in last 18
mos; dept extends ban on travel to N Vietnam, N Korea and Cuba for 6 more mos;
seeks to evolve formula that may allow Communists admission to UN without
explusion of Nationalists; it is considered doubtful in Washington, however, if
Peking would accept such an arrangement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Australian Prime Min William McMahon defeats motion of no confidence in Govt,
wins his 1st parliamentary test since taking office; reiterates Australia's
stand beside Us on Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Lt Col Herbert prefers formal charges against Maj Gen John Barnes and Col J Ross
Franklin; charges them with dereliction of duty and failure to comply with mil
regulations; Barnes, now assigned to Pentagon, has denied allegations; Franklin,
still serving in Vietnam, has declined to make pub comment; Barnes and Franklin
are accused of ignoring repts of alleged atrocities in '69

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 27 words

US command repts US forces in Vietnam now down to 317,300; total does not
include about 19,000 Navy and Coast Guard personnel operating off coast of S
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 89 words

Sen Percy syas law firm of Trammell, Rand & Nathan, which is representing Cole,
is closely linked to lawyers representing other figures involved in allegedly
corrupt Amer business enterprises in Vietnam; identifies some figures as wife of
W J Crum, T Brothers who is accused of setting up PX concessions through Cole's
aid, M Bromley, who was Cole's sec and is alleged to have had over-all control
of Crum's enterprises and J Demarco, who allegedly had monopoly over
distribution of newspapers and magazines to servicemen in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 16, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

Fierce fighting reptd between Cambodian Govt and Vietnam forces, 13 mi NE of
Pnompenh; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 77 words

S Vietnamese forward units, which recently withdrew from Lolo base, reptdly
withdraw 5 mi eastward toward their own border under increasing enemy pressure;
take up positions at Landing Base Brown, which US helicopter pilots rept is
under heavy fire and difficult to get at to deliver supplies; abandonment of
Lolo said to mark another withdrawal from Tchepone area; details on mil action;
Laotian operation discussed; little ground action reptd in Cambodia; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 117 words

W J Crum, the money king of Vietnam, denies bribing Brig Gen Cole and denounces
Jack Bybee, int, Hong Kong, by CBS newsman Mike Wallace; calls Bybee vindictive
employe who had been fired; Wallace says Bybee misrepresented self as an atty
and, in effort to build himself up with mil in Korea and Vietnam, misrepresented
himself as nephew of Sen Goldwater; Crum says Bybee had 'bad habit of using his
uncle's name'; Wallace says Bybee admitted he never attempted to correct
impression; says Goldwater denied knowing Bybee and was dismayed that Sen com
would give platform to man like Bybee without checking on him; Wallace says Sen
com knew all along of misrepresentation but chose to omit it from record

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Defense Sec Laird indicates that fewer than 50,000 Amer soldiers will remain in
Vietnam by end of '72, TV int; does not make direct statement to this effect,
but concedes in reply to question that US forces will be reduced to that level
by continuation of withdrawal rate of 3,000 men a wk announced by Nixon; says
Nixon is committed to current rate; says it might be possible to increase rate
substantially later this yr; Dem leaders in House postpone showdown over
resolution calling for withdrawal of all US forces by end of yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 45 words

US Sec Rogers says repts of large oil deposits off shore of S Vietnam have
absolutely no effect on US policy, news conf; says he has sent lr to Sen
containing all information he has on issue; this lr and one signed by Asst Sec
Abshire have been sent to Sen Fulbright

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 6; (AFP)

LENGTH: 26 words

Communist command in Laos orders its troops to 'completely annihilate and
prevent withdrawal of S Vietnamese troops'; claims they are fleeing in disorder

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 3

LENGTH: 199 words

Vietnam Veterans Against the War announces that orgn, which claims to have 8,000
members and chapters in every state, will hold 5-day encampment in Washington
next mo to protest war and lack of adequate services for returned veterans, news
conf; group member charges veterans' hosps do not give adequate care to men who
were wounded in war or who became drug addicts there; Gen D M Shoup (ret) says
he supports effort but will not participate; J F Kerry predicts 5,000 veterans
will march on Capitol; return of combat decorations planned; Kerry charges Nixon
Adm gives men sent to Vietnam chance to die for 'biggest nothing in history';
declares Amer people have become apathetic about war; Sen Gravel discloses plans
to form No More War group in 90 days; details on plans of veterans; return of
combat decorations is included in plans for Vietnam Veterans Against the War
antiwar demonstration; Sens Humphrey, Mathias, Harris, Hughes, Cooper, Muskie
and Kennedy affirm support for an underground nuclear test ban, messages sent to
conf, Washington, on arms control and mil spending; conf sponsors include Natl
Council of Women, Amer Jewish Conf, Meth Bd of Soc Concern, US Cath Conf and UAW

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

C L Sulzberger says US Army is in trouble in Indochina because of psychological
repercussions arising from doubts as to validity or value of its mission; notes
diverse problems confronting Army; comments on possible effect psychological
condition will have as Army returns home

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 17, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 61, Column 5

LENGTH: 147 words

Small minority of some 500 stockholders, members of Downtown Peace Coalition and
Center for New Corp Priorities, offer leaflets to others criticizing Bank of
Amer's operation in Vietnam, BankAmer Corp's annual stockholders meeting; other
group members perform 'guerrilla theater' with anti-bank themes in plaza of co's
hqrs; chmn Lundborg and pres Clausen answer questions and deny charges that bank
contributed to continuation of Indochina war by financing some of war effort,
dealt with front of CIA and discriminated against women and racial minorities;
Clausen discusses co's commitment to its social responsibilities, reviewing
philosophy outlined in bank's annual rept; Bankers Trust NY chmn Moore discusses
whether NYSE membership would be advantageous for co, assuming co is permitted
to join exch, annual meeting; Wells Fargo & Co hopes to show 6% gain in earnings
this yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 71 words

S Vietnamese troops evacuate another base in Laos; 60 US helicopters haul about
700 S Vietnamese soldiers out of Landing Zone Brown and surrounding jungles; N
Vietnamese gunners continue to pound Saigon forces with mortar and arty fire;
Col Nguyen Xuan Loc repts 2 bns left near Landing Zone Brown; about 6,000 S
Vietnamese troops have been pulled back towards S Vietnamese border recently;
details on action; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 140 words

US command in Saigon has told Washington that lack of money for war has been
more crucial in determining rate of troop withdrawals than has progress of
Vietnamization or what enemy does on battlefield; document prepared by Mil
Assistance Command that summarizes activities for '70 for Pentagon states 'size
and timing of redeployments' are no longer based solely on Vietnamization;
document also indicates lack of funds and manpower reductions had adverse effect
on Vietnamization; copy of document is obtained by NY Times from mil sources;
appears to add new dimension to factors determining withdrawal rate; mentions
Abrams as stating criterion for withdrawals; Nixon's explanation of what
withdrawals are based on noted; his explanation includes progress in Paris
talks; details on document and other matters pertaining to withdrawals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 72 words

Group of activist clergymen opposed to war in Indochina, led by Rev R J Neuhaus,
persuades NYC Council of Chs to cancel '71 Family of Man award to B Hope;
presentation will be made instead to late W M Young Jr; Rev D M Potter says that
after debate, it was decided that award be withdrawn; says Rev W T Walker
suggested award to Young; choice of Hope was made at Feb meeting of council's
dirs bd; previous controversial awards noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 7; (GP)

LENGTH: 36 words

Gallup Poll finds that more Amers are worried about econ issues now than at any
time since '58 recession; Vietnam continues to be nation's top problem; repts
28% of Amers cite it as such; econ worries are close 2d

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 115 words

Some S Vietnamese forces in Laos continue to move SE back toward border, trying
to consolidate their positions after running into intense Communist attacks;
Saigon spokesmen rept S Vietnamese forces operating S of Route 9 recently
suffered and inflicted heavy casualties in withdrawing from arty outpost; repts
16 soldiers killed, 190 wounded; details of battle; US announces that
surface-to-air SAM missiles are fired from sites in N Vietnam at B-52s flying
over Laos, 1st time; S Vietnamese troops continue to meet enemy resistance; US
command announces missiles were fired from N Vietnamese sites at B-52s flying
missions over Laos; N Vietnamese troops continue attack on Khesanh base

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

Defense Dept says S Vietnamese forces in Laos are engaged in 'mobile
maneuvering' and proceed 'according to plan'; denies S Vietnamese are retreating

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 18, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 114 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, facing election this fall, has intensified
his efforts to reap pol as well as mil benefits from S Vietnamese campaign in
Laos; some observers say S Vietnamese pay little attention to campaign, other
say campaign seems to be paying off politically for Nguyen Van Thieu; travels
around S Vietnam extolling virtues of campaign, scoring those who criticize it;
repeated broadcasting of song called Tchepone Victory by Govt-controlled radio
and other moves described; details on activities of Nguyen Van Thieu; Nguyen Van
Thieu's pol rivals, Duong Van Minh and Nguyen Cao Ky, have tried to use campaign
to their pol advantage; Nguyen Van Thieu illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 151 words

Hundreds of battered and weary S Vietnamese soldiers are lifted out of Laos by
Amer helicopters after some of fiercest fighting of operation; estimated 1,000
to 1,500 S Vietnamese troops return to S Vietnam; spokesmen insist troops will
be replaced, but no sign of replacements can be seen; S Vietnamese withdrawn
from Laos are taken to Hamnghi, which is near Khesanh; body of Lt Col Le Huan is
carried back with troops; his troops are survivors of furious fighting around
Fire Base Lolo and Landing Zone Brown; intense fighting reptd in Landing Zone
Brown area; 4 Amers killed in fighting near Khesanh; Saigon spokesman says there
is no plan to pull S Vietnamese troops out of Laos; details on operation and
action near Tchepone; evacuation by S Vietnamese of Sophia and Lolo bases noted;
S Vietnam repts 110 of its soldiers have been killed recently in action near
Lolo, repts 1,667 enemy killed; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 162 words

Gen Westmoreland recommends that Maj Gen Koster and Brig Gen G H Young Jr,
Koster's asst in command of div involved in alleged Mylai massacre, be demoted
and reprimanded; Koster and Young are told in lr from Army's gen counsel that
Westmoreland recommends Koster be reduced to brig gen and Young to col; final
decision for administrative action will be made by Sec Resor after Koster and
Young are given chance to reply to charges; dismissal of charges against Koster
and Young by Army noted; Young says effect of action is that he is being
sentenced 8 mos after being declared innocent; Westmoreland also recommends that
Young be stripped of Distinguished Service Medal awarded for 18 mos duty in
Vietnam and that lr of reprimand be placed in his personnel file; Young says he
has been told Army takes action against him because of 'substandard performance
of duty' related to alleged massacre and subsequent investigations; makes other
comments; Koster and Young pors

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

Norway's Premier Bratteli says his new Cabinet will move to establish diplomatic
relations with N Vietnam; move expected to strain Norway's relations with US;
says his Govt will continue to support NATO and will press negotiations for
Norwegian membership in EEC; says oil exploration in Norwegian sec of North Sea
will be based on natl and community interests

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

Defense Dept officials describe as unimportant and not relevant to high-level
policy reptd complaint of some mil leaders in Saigon about pace and motivation
of rate of US troop withdrawals; Asst Sec Henkin says he knows of no document
prepared by Saigon command and addressed to Laird; says Amer comdrs have
'consistently and repeatedly' reptd to Laird that Vietnamization is on or ahead
of schedule in all of its mil aspects

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 165 words

Nixon Adm seeks to maintain both its composure and its optimism in face of
mounting repts that S Vietnamese are being compelled to retreat in Laos; White
House and Pentagon spokesmen say S Vietnamese have inflicted 'substantial'
losses on enemy and operation proceeds toward its objective of disrupting trail;
Pentagon spokesman discloses there have been indications of increased enemy
activity in northern half of buffer zone; there is some speculation that
Pentagon spokesman starts to build case for early withdrawals by S Vietnamese
from Laos, but spokesman denies this; spokesman, in response to questions on
evacuation of Lolo and other mil matters, says that instead of concentrating on
isolated tactical setbacks, newsmen should concentrate on 'over-all operation',
which he describes as successful; makes other comments; says Nixon bases his
optimism on daily repts from field; illus of gunpowder exploding at fire base,
destroyed by S Vietnamese to prevent enemy from using it

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 65 words

S Vietnamese spokesman says S Vietnamese troops are still in Laos, but
concentrated near border; says S Vietnamese troops are S of Route 9 and are
moving to 'let US bombers attack' enemy massing in area; Saigon hq repts major
setback to Communist forces in Cambodia; repts 409 enemy killed near Chup rubber
plantation about 110 mi NW of Saigon; 2 US helicopters downed; 5 crewmen killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 91 words

Provision in draft electoral law to limit number of candidates in forthcoming
pres election is defeated by large vote in S Vietnamese Sen; Nguyen Van Thieu's
supporters backed proposal in hope he could win majority in less complicated
race; Nguyen Van Thieu reptdly has said that provision is not necessary to
insure his success in election; rejection of provision means job of determining
qualifications of pres candidate is largely retained by Sup Ct; Sen debate over
provision and comments of Sens Ton That Dinh and Nguyen Van Chuc noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 56 words

Chief N Vietnamese and Vietcong delegates Xuan Thuy and Nguyen Thi Binh boycott
Paris talks for 3d wk in succession to protest against what they call US plans
to extend war into N Vietnam; Bruce calls boycott 'useless maneuver'; reiterates
US readiness to negotiate; N Vietnamese and Vietcong delegates score US
aggression and atrocities

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 2

LENGTH: 26 words

Mrs L Bruyn now on 31st day of solo walking trip from her home in Newton, Mass,
to Washington, DC, to protest war in Indochina; she comments on trip; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 19, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 125 words

Reston comments on current situation in which Chinese officials in Peking talk
more freely and ominously to Western diplomats about dangers of war; says repts
do not indicate China is about to intervene in Vietnam war; says Chinese imply
they will enter war rather than watch defeat of N Vietnam; says Washington
officials regard Chinese threats and promises more as propaganda and
pyschological warfare than anything else, but concede privately that both China
and USSR will increase aid to N Vietnam for 2d round of Laotian battle next
autumn and spring; says both China and USSR cooperate with N Vietnam for their
own reasons; holds US must face possibility of Chinese intervention if US
succeeds in crippling Hanoi and cutting of its supplies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 20, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 146 words

S Vietnamese command announces it has withdrawn 2,000 to 3,000 of its troops
from Laos in 48 hrs; other sources rept total of 5,000 has been withdrawn;
15,000 to 16,000 S Vietnamese troops are reptdly left in Laos; indications grow
that S Vietnamese prepare to end major operations against trail; spokesmen
caution against speculation on early completion of sweep, saying some 'secret
operations' are planned; Saigon command repts 3,000 marines are close to Laotian
border 'ready to move in on short notice'; action in Laos described as
relatively light; enemy pressure continues around Landing Zone Brown; US command
repts 4 helicopters lost over Laos; repts 1 Amer wounded, 2 missing; 73 US
helicopters have been lost in operation; enemy stages rocket attack against
Khesanh base for 6th consecutive day; details on mil action; Brig Gen Phan Van
Phu comments; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 20, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

Controversy over Vietnam war has abated on Capitol Hill for time being; Repr
Morgan concedes to visitors that sentiment among his colleagues has shifted
toward complete withdrawal as soon as possible; debate may erupt again, but more
moderate doves are keeping their own counsel; principal reason they offer for
doing so is reluctance to weaken pub's confidence in Pres; they still continue
to challenge tenets of Adm policy in private; stands and actions of Mansfield,
Cooper, Aiken, Church, McGovern and Fulbright noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 20, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 3

LENGTH: 48 words

Vice Pres Agnew says Nixon Adm would admit it publicly if S Vietnamese forces
were mauled by enemy in Laos, televised background briefing with newsmen from
Boston area; contends Laotian operation has been unqualified success; says
retreat by S Vietnamese troops toward border is orderly

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 20, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

Rev C McIntire's orgn announces demonstrations for mil victory in Vietnam by
July 4 will be held in state capitals and Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 20, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

A Lewis, noting staunch Wis war supporter has just come out for immediate
withdrawal of all US forces, says transformation reflects 'astonishing' shift in
pub attitudes in Wis; cites possibility of widening realization of what war is
doing to Amer people's attitude toward defense policy generally; notes
conclusion that US should get out of war now because its interests are not at
stake in Vietnam; drawing; repts indications war is undermining belief that US
must remain strong to carry out legitimate role in world affairs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CRITICAL REVIEWS & APPRAISALS

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAMS & DRAWINGS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 237 words

S Vietnamese troops retreat from 2 bases, Brown and Aloui, in Laos after
heaviest series of enemy attacks since beginning of operation; abandon Aloui and
Brown bases; Saigon command repts 784 enemy killed in attacks, 28 S Vietnamese
killed, 200 wounded; US planes and helicopters again go through heavy AA fire to
pick up S Vietnamese troops; several helicopters downed, many hit by ground
fire; S Vietnamese spokesmen insist withdrawals are 'tactical movements';
despite official denials, it seems apparent S Vietnamese prepare to end
operation; S Vietnamese spokesman adds to confusion by saying 1,000 more troops
have been sent into Laos; it seems clear N Vietnamese are determined to pursue S
Vietnamese as they pull back despite heavy casualties reptdly inflicted by Amer
aircraft; details on action in Laos; clash between Amer and enemy troops near
Khesanh reptd; US command says Amer planes have killed estimated total of 3,600
enemy soldiers, destroyed 1,750 vehicles and put 160 AA sites out of action
during Laotian operation; S Vietnamese say more than 11,000 enemy have been
killed in operation; put their own losses at 900 killed, 3,300 wounded and 200
missing; despite official denials, it seems apparent S Vietnamese prepare to end
Laotian operation; illus of Nguyen Cao Ky and his wife at post near Laos; illus
of S Vietnamese soldier riding skid of Amer helicopter as it returns to S
Vietnam from Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

Lt William Calley says that if he is acquitted of charges in Mylai massacre, he
will go on worldwide tour to deliver antiwar lectures; has already hired agent
for his tour; says he is 'nearly broke'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 37 words

Operations of chartered lines that return US servicemen and mil casualties from
Vietnam discussed; US soldiers returning to US fly on Freedom Bird, chartered
civilian jet; plane leaves every day from Bienhoa and Camranh Bay

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 24 words

N Vietnamese Deputy Premier Vo Nguyen Giap says US cannot avoid total defeat in
Indochina, s, Hanoi; says allies have been beaten back in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 46 words

Sir R Thompson, Brit guerrilla expert who is adviser to Pres Nixon, says
invasions of Cambodia and Laos have removed mil threat to S Vietnam, article in
Pacific Community (pub); says Vietnamization has succeeded so well that S
Vietnam can begin to return to normal this yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 3

LENGTH: 104 words

S Vietnam and Cambodia, in joint rept, call for radical measures to halt
violence and theft by S Vietnamese troops against Cambodian civilians; rept,
signed by all members of joint comm, concerned itself with only 18 cases in 3
provs; proposes that both Govts create permanent comm in Pnompenh and permanent
subcomms in each prov where S Vietnamese troops operate to investigate all repts
of misconduct and propose punishments and compensations; many Cambodians hold
their Govt lags in compelling S Vietnam to enforce discipline among its troops
and punish those who do commit crimes; doubt S Vietnam will act on comm's rept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 28 words

Hanoi radio repts B-52 downed over N Vietnam recently; foreign mil experts say N
Vietnamese used new AA rocket that cannot be detected by electronic devices in
B-52s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 24 words

US Defense Dept spokesman says no US B-52s have been lost in Indochina as the
result of hostile action, that 3 have crashed in area over the yrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 32 words

Vietcong gunners sink vital ferry on Tonle Sap River, break supply lines to
important mil installations in central and eastern Cambodia; Cambodian command
repts 5 clashes with enemy; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 49, Column 1

LENGTH: 108 words

Sen George McGovern says he would negotiate settlement of war within wks of
being inaugurated Pres in '73, taped int scheduled for telecast in Washington;
says he is positive he could break 'bottleneck on negotiations' in Paris; says
he would accomplish settlement by setting date for complete withdrawal of Amer
troops and by telling Nguyen Van Thieu and Nguyen Cao Ky that 'we're not going
to stay there indefinitely'; says he considers current Amer position in
Indochina 'infinitely worse' than 2 yrs ago because war has spread out now all
over Indochina peninsula; says war is 'disastrous mistake'; says Nixon had
opportunity in '69 to end war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 60, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 69 words

Wilmington, Del, city engineers remove police microphone from tree in Rodney Sq
several hrs before demonstration protesting war in Indochina; Mayor Haskell's
Administrative Asst A C Rusten says eavesdropping device has been used in last
several yrs to provide sound for police dept videotapes of rallies held in pub
square; removal of microphone is consequence of pub reaction to local newspaper
story about it

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 103, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

About 3,000 youths, demonstrating near White House for domestic reforms and end
to Vietnam war, urge guaranteed jobs for all citizens; demand destruction of
capitalist system

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 43 words

Comment on cost of invasion of Laos to S Vietnamese; notes resistance by N
Vietnamese was greater than expected; says degree to which N Vietnam has been
hurt will not be known until next yr; indications that S Vietnamese prepare to
end operation noted; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 30 words

Comment on action in S Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia and problem of refugees
generated by it; heavy US bombing makes refugees of thousands of Laotians; their
plight discussed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 16 words

Comment on problem of refugees generated by mil action in S Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 37 words

Natl Peace Action Coalition ad urges support for April 24 antiwar rallies;
includes lr by Sen Hartke; lr notes Sen resolution Hartke introduced on March 4
calling for immediate withdrawal of all US forces from Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 15 words

NZ Prime Min Holyoake announces remaining 131 troops from NZ in Vietnam will
leave in May

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 115 words

Ed holds Cong itself bears heavy responsibility for fact that it has not been
adequately consulted about steps that involved US in Vietnam war; notes thorough
Cong probe of Korean War in '51; holds that complaint that exec accountability
to Cong has been violated by refusal of President's men to appear for adequate
questioning is an indictment of Cong as much as criticism of exec; holds there
is no better way for Cong to reassert its const prerogatives in foreign policy
and defense than to exercise and thus reinvigorate its investigatory powers;
suggests Cong do this by approving Sen Brooke resolution for joint hearings by
appropriate Cong coms on how best to terminate Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 85 words

Repr Bingham lr says in committing Amer aircraft to support S Vietnamese
invasion of Laos, Nixon has again involved US in foreign hostilities without
Cong authorization; notes Javits recently introduced legis to limit Pres power
to carry on undeclared wars; says legis has grave drawbacks; says simpler and
wiser course would be to provide that Pres authority to carry on hostilities
without declaration of war could be terminated at any time by passage of
resolution of disapproval in either House of Cong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 210 words

NYS Gov Rockefeller, as part of pkg of health care reforms, to seek state
licensing and regulatory authority enabling paraprofessionals to aid drs; many
of new paraprofessionals would be med corpsmen who served in Vietnam; provisions
of legis, called Physician's Aid Program, outlined; controversy surrounding use
of paraprofessionals recalled; Calif was 1st state to authorize dr to hire as
many as 2 drs aides to relieve him of certain duties; performance of certain gen
med duties is allowed in some other states; notes his proposed bill to encourage
establishment of prepaid med group practice, provision of which will give
participating drs preferred tax treatment; Rockefeller to propose legis to
encourage establishment of prepaid med group practices; says 1 of his proposals
would permit 90%, low-interest state bldg loans to drs who formed nonprofit
corps for group practice; plan would allow patient to keep his regular dr but
would be paid by salary and enjoy 'preferred treatment' under tax laws; plan
would be voluntary and is aimed as alternative to rather than replacement for
present fee-for-service system; Rockefeller s, Founders Soc annual meeting;
other speakers include C C Bassine and N L Goldstein, who is succeeding M Levin
as soc chmn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 110 words

Article on S Vietnamese pullout from Laos; some S Vietnamese said to be coming
out in orderly fashion, others in panic; N Vietnamese troops said to be right
behind them; Amer helicopters have been shuttling S Vietnamese troops out of
Laos for past 5 days; Amer pilots tell 'horror' stories concerning S Vietnamese;
repts that S Vietnamese troops are carried out of Laos clinging to landing skids
of helicopters are frequent; say 'we just have to kick some of them off, we have
to think about ourselves too'; Amer helicopters are repting enemy ground fire
closer to Khesanh every day; enemy bombardments of Khesanh noted; other details
on action and operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 178 words

More than 2,000 S Vietnamese troops retreat hastily from Laos; N Vietnamese
forces pursue them, posing possible threat to Amer installations supporting
Laotian operations; virtually every US helicopter is thrown into effort to bring
back S Vietnamese; helicopters again run into heavy AA fire; about 8,000 S
Vietnamese remain in Laos; mil sources say enemy troops in S Vietnam will try to
cut Route 9; enemy gunners attack several Amer units around Khesanh; pulling S
Vietnamese out of Laos said to be more difficult than getting them in; US
command says US planes raid in N Vietnam in response to AA attacks against US
planes operating over Laos; mil sources confirm Laotian operation is in
'withdrawal phase'; insist no date was set by planners before operation; discuss
operation; list problems encountered in it; 6 more US helicopters downed over
weekend, brings total to 82 destroyed, 59 Amer crewmen killed, 68 wounded and 20
missing; mil sources say poor showing of some S Vietnamese units should not
reflect on all of them; details on mil action; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 98 words

Nixon Adm officials continue to maintain that quickening S Vietnamese
withdrawals from Laos represent 'orderly retreat', not a rout, and that gains in
operation still outweigh losses; in private, officials acknowledge series of
difficult and embarrassing questions have arisen; repeat recent Agnew statement;
call attention to White House and State Dept statements stressing degree of
disruption of enemy supply trails; say they are unable to reconcile present mil
situation with Nixon March 4 statement that S Vietnamese can 'hack it' by
themselves; several unaswered questions noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 25 words

Saigon's black mkt activities have almost been wiped out as result of crack-down
by Maj Gen Tran Thanh Phong, who was apptd police dir gen last Dec

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 32 words

N Vietnamese news agency repts Pathet Lao forces almost completely wiped out S
Vietnamese regiment and shot down some 90 aircraft and taken 250 prisoners in
attacks on Peak 660 in southern Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

Robert Kleiman questions proposed increases in fiscal '72 budget in light of
apparent decline in mil operations, including winding down of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 4

LENGTH: 72 words

Excerpts from recent comments on war made by former Sec Rusk at Ga broadcasters
conf; Rusk holds SE Asia is not likely to engage Great Powers; says S Vietnam
depends good deal on pace of Vietnamization; holds peace talks are important;
makes other comments; notes Rusk considers Middle East highly dangerous
situation in which 2 sides show little indication of being willing to make
concessions necessary for peace; drawing of Rusk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CRITICAL REVIEWS & APPRAISALS

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAMS & DRAWINGS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 35 words

Study program for disabled Vietnam veterans at Tripler Gen Hosp, Hawaii, run by
Mrs J Parrish, described; teaching levels range from grade school through coll;
individually instructs as many as 35 patients a day

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 44 words

Rev F F Johnson lr says problem with Pres news confs is that there is no
confrontation between Adm and news media on facts concerning Vietnam or anything
else; accuses newsmen of being afraid of Nixon Adm and of failing to ask
pertinent questions at press confs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Tom Wicker, noting some S Vietnamese holding on to skids of US evacuation
helicopters have been kicked off, deplores Laotian drive and US policy; notes
destructiveness of drive; says it would be mistake to think that 'Laotian
repulse' will lead Nixon to significant change in policy; holds fighting ability
of S Vietnamese was overrated, and power and determination of N Vietnam and
people it commands were underestimated

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 15 words

Army sets hearing in ct-martial of Kotouc for alleged maiming of Vietnamese near
Mylai

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Soviet newspaper Pravda prominently displays news of S Vietnamese pullback,
claims Saigon's forces have lost over 1,000 dead and wounded in withdrawal from
Fire Base Lolo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 69 words

High-ranking N Vietnamese officer writes in N Vietnamese army newspaper that S
Vietnamese forces are in midst of 'bloody retreat' but it is 'too late' for bulk
of troops to escape from Laos; says S Vietnamese units in Laos are now in 'dead
end'; says Khesanh and other bases in northern S Vietnam are encircled and under
fire; opinion widely held in Hanoi is that US may attack N Vietnam and use
atomic weapons

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 230 words

US and Allied govts put USSR mil aid to Communist and underdeveloped countries
at more than $19-billion during '55 to '70; recent rept says assistance is
increasing in value and geog scope; says only 10 non-Communist countries
received mil aid in '62 compared to 25 in '70 and that annual aid in arms rose
to $800-million from $110-million; says number of USSR mil advisers and
technicians around world is now estimated at 25,000; estimates that USSR current
annual bill for econ and mil is more than $2-billion; notes recent repts of
criticism over expenditures have reached West from USSR although Russian people
are said to be unaware of full extent of foreign aid; notes that UAR receives
largest share among countries of non-Communist underdeveloped world; UAR's
dependence on Soviet aid reptdly increased dramatically after introduction of
SAM-3 missiles and modern antiaircraft defense system in '70; entire aid program
from '55-'70 reptdly cost $2.7-billion excluding mil and econ aid contained in
pact signed in Dec '70; authoritative sources in US and allied govts say N
Vietnam has been getting largest share of USSR mil aid to Communist and
underdeveloped countries, rept; N Vietnam recd $1.4-billion from '54 through
'68; '69 aid estimated at $120-million; US and its allies rept USSR aid to its
Warsaw Pact allies averaged about $500-million yrly in fiscal '61-71

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 292 words

Pres Nixon says S Vietnamese drive in Laos 'has made considerable progress' thus
far toward goals of insuring US withdrawals from Vietnam, reducing threat to
Amer forces still there and developing ability of Saigon's army to defend
itself, TV int with ABC correspondent H K Smith; Indochina dominates int,
although Nixon discusses his relations with Cong and press, views of '72 Pres
campaign and his domestic programs; cautions it might not be possible to judge
drive as 'a success or a failure' even after it is concluded; indicates his
assessment of drive is 'interim'; says assessment is based on advice of Abams;
suggests that impression created by TV films on S Vietnamese army were not
entirely accurate, that only films of difficulties of men in 4 of the 22 bns
were shown; Sec Laird says enemy attacks on Khesanh have been anticipated; says
next withdrawal announcement will be made in April and will be at least at
number that he has been withdrawing over past few mos; discusses at length
whether Laotian drive is 'victory or defeat' after Smith cites Indochina as
instance of 'credibility gap' involving Adm; says purpose of drive was to defend
S Vietnam, not conquer Laos; emphasizes S Vietnamese forces 'developed a
considerable capability on their own' during drive, but refuses to make
forecasts; suggests impression created by films on S Vietnamese in Laos were not
entirely accurate; Sec Laird tells newsmen that question of whether there will
be large air strikes against N Vietnam will be answered by what happens from now
on; comments on mil situation on Laos-S Vietnamese border; White House press sec
says recent 'protective reaction' air strikes against N Vietnam were consistent
with Nixon's pledges to protect Amer withdrawals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 306 words

US planes raid missile sites in N Vietnam in retaliation for attacks against US
planes operating over Laos; S Vietnamese troops retreating in Laos continue to
encounter heavy enemy assaults; US planes operating over Laos are attacked by
missiles and other AA weapons; S Vietnamese spokesman says 10,000 men have now
been pulled out of Laos, leaving about 12,000 still there; other sources say
fewer than 8,000 are still in Laos; for part of day, bad weather and intense AA
fire inhibit US helicopters flying into Laos to rescue S Vietnamese; US
fighter-bomber downed by enemy ground fire over Laos; mil sources say all S
Vietnamese troops should be out of Laos within a wk; say decisions are now
pending on future operations; Route 9 becomes nightmare for S Vietnamese troops
trying to push to border; at least 2 S Vietnamese tanks destroyed; US soldiers
with tanks and armored personnel carriers try to clear part of Route 9;
spokesman berates newsmen for calling withdrawal of S Vietnamese troops a
'retreat', but then inadvertently uses word himself, briefing; many diplomats
and other observers in Saigon believe Laotian operation is ending earlier than
planned; S Vietnamese marine bn on southern flank of operation is attacked
again; 85 marines killed, 38 wounded; spokesman estimates 600 enemy killed,
mostly by Amer air strikes; enemy gunners down 2 more Amer helicopters; another
helicopter found destroyed; US planes strike at missile sites inside N Vietnam
for 2d consecutive day; raids, directed at targets up to 140 mi S of Hanoi, said
to be in retaliation for attacks against US planes operating over Laos; 1 US
plane downed over N Vietnam; details on raids; 85 helicopters have been lost in
operation; 61 crewmen have been killed, 71 wounded, 24 missing; map; illus of US
helicopter pilots at briefing on trips into Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 23, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 44 words

US command says N Vietnamese soldiers carrying satchel charges break into
Khesanh behind heavy arty barrage, but are driven out with heavy losses; several
helicopters destroyed; less than a dozen Amers reptd killed or wounded; 20 N
Vietnamese killed; other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

Ed says precipitate withdrawal of S Vietnamese troops from Laos may not
represent 'humiliating rout', but it is 'painfully clear' that operation has
fallen far short of expectations of allied mil planners; says N Vietnamese
fought with strength and determination that obviously were not anticipated;
notes Nixon statements on operation; says inconclusive results of operation have
'ominous implications' for Nixon's Vietnamization program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              260 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

Ed scores Pres Nixon for criticizing press because of Laotian campaign coverage;
says lack of coverage of good performance of S Vietnamese troops is Nixon's
fault because he could have reversed decision barring Amer correspondents from
Amer helicopter transport to Laotian front for all but brief few moments of
campaign; says Laotian operation involved news blackout virtually unprecedented
for major operations in war; says credibility gap will remain hard to close;
says Nixon 'cannot have it both ways' in assessing operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              261 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 167 words

Defense Dept spokesman acknowledges S Vietnamese troops might have stayed longer
in Laos if Communists had not reacted as strongly as they did; emphasizes that
if N Vietnamese response had been even more powerful, withdrawal might have come
earlier; says Laird, when he was briefed last Jan, was told by allied comdrs
that campaign would last 5 to 8 wks, depending on enemy reaction; Mansfield
challenges Nixon view that principal objectives of campaign have been
accomplished; says it looks like trails will be in operation again shortly; says
he was never optimistic about drive; Adm officials say extensive air strikes on
mil targets throughout N Vietnam cannot be ruled out should Hanoi attempt major
offensive in S Vietnam; cite Laird's comment; details on statements made by
Nixon concerning Laotian operation; Defense Dept spokesman refuses to say
whether US forces plan to abandon Khesanh; other Adm officials say there is
uncertainty over whether Communists will mount major assault on Khesanh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              262 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

N Vietnam disputes Pres Nixon's appraisal of Laotian incursion; holds it failed
completely

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              263 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 14 words

Laotian Govt troops recapture position held by N Vietnamese, 5 mi N of Luang
Prabang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              264 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 105 words

Comment on Laotian operation; says thrust may have achieved some ltd mil success
and killed thousands of enemy, but N Vietnam has won propaganda victory; says
allies are coming out looking like losers; says image of defeated S Vietnamese
Army is likely to remain; says operation ended more quickly than planners would
have liked, enemy resistance and AA fire were more intense than anticipated, and
operation fell short of its goals; says debate over operation is just beginning;
opinions discussed; official spokesman said to be echoing Nixon's view that
operation was success and that they are satisfied; details on operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              265 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 212 words

S Vietnamese armored force of 100 tanks and heavy tracked vehicles fights its
way out of Laos; S Vietnamese operation nears end; less than 5,000 S Vietnamese
remain in Laos; 90 vehicles lost in fighting; only 2 marine brigades remain as
'rear guard for the retreat'; dismantling operations appear under way at
Khesanh; air near base is almost deserted; troops are still dug in deeply, but
helicopter command post is reptd being moved out; it is understood Khesanh will
be closed in 3 wks; 3 Amers killed, 13 wounded at Khesanh; enemy destroys 2 Amer
helicopters, damages 3 others and blows up 2,000 rounds of air-to-ground
rockets; 1 enemy captured, 14 killed; another helicopter is lost in Laotian
operation; increase in enemy attacks near Khesanh noted; details on retreat of S
Vietnamese armored column; most of S Vietnamese troops that have been withdrawn
from Laos are now at bases at Dongha and Hue; those remaining in Laos are at
Hong Ha and Dong Da fire bases; troops are trying to withdraw from these bases
also; map; US command makes pub further details on recent air strikes; says
raids were on sme scale as those of last Nov, which involved 250
fighter-bombers; repts 3 missile sites destroyed; says enemy fired at least 5
missiles at planes, and 1 was downed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              266 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 24, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 37 words

Amer tank crews covering retreat of S Vietnamese on last 4 mi of Route 9,
between Laotian border and Khesanh, undergo daily ordeal from hail of enemy
bullets and rockets and ambushes; 1 such mission detailed; US armor illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              267 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 91 words

Vietnam said to be recurring topic in audiences that Amb Lodge has with Pope
about once every 3 mos; such an audience expected this wk; Lodge is Nixon's
special envoy to Vatican; informed churchmen say Pope, in every meeting with
Lodge and other US officials, presses US to explore all avenues for early
negotiated peace; Lodge is known to have assured Pope that Nixon means what he
says about mil disengagement; they converse in French; Pope signals when meeting
is over; Lodge is intimate with many high church leaders; his personal staff
noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              268 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

S Vietnamese spokesman says S Vietnamese forces accomplished 80% to 90% of their
objectives in operation; US sources rept N Vietnamese are repairing parts of Ho
Chi Minh Trail and rebuilding at Tchepone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              269 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 27 words

State Dept spokesman shrugs off move by Hanoi and Vietcong delegations to Paris
peace talks; says US is as anxious as it has always been for serious
negotiations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              270 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Saigon adolescent boys, 'cowboys,' occupy themselves with restless, wild
behavior, seeking escape from ever-present tensions of war and violence; illus
on motorcycles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              271 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 52 words

Hanoi and Vietcong, protesting against latest Amer bombing of N Vietnam, call
off tomorrow's session of Paris talks; N Vietnam charges populated areas were
bombed; scores 'impudent acts of war'; 2 delegations nevertheless signify their
willingness to continue conf by saying they postpone session until April 1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              272 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 235 words

Dem party's Policy Council votes unanimously to support Cong cutoff of all funds
for Amer mil operations in Indochina after Dec 31; endorses no specific bill,
but adopts statement that speaks of 'legis such as the proposes Vietnam
Disengagement Act of 1971'; resolution also registers opposition to 'any
expansion of the war by Amer or S Vietnamese forces in Cambodia, Laos or N
Vietnam or by the bombing of N Vietnam'; council members generally regarded as
Hawks, including former USIA dir L H Marks and former Gov McNair, raise no
serious objections to resolution; Humphrey presides when resolution is adopted;
votes in favor of resolution; W A Harriman prepared original draft; faction
headed by Amers for Dem Action head J D Duffey added language discussing fund
cutoff and opposing expansion of war; wanted to insert other provisions,
including acknowledgement that Dems bear part of blame for war, and expression
of moral outrage at civilian casualties; Humphrey illus; Dem party's Policy
Council does not adopt antiwar faction's provision in resolution on war
expressing moral outrage at civilian casualties; discusses Nixon Adm econ policy
but defers action on a relevant resolution; Sen Humphrey accuses Pres Nixon of
condoning what he calls Agnew's 'media guerrilla warfare'; accuses Adm of
relying on 'unique mixture of exec arrogance, pub relations gimmickry and
blatant intimidation of news media'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              273 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 271 words

Well-placed Pentagon sources say S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu decided to
curtail Laotian operation despite suggestions from some senior Amer mil men that
he send in replacements and try to stay on for a few more wks; rept Nguyen Van
Thieu, with unseasonably bad weather in Laos and at Khesanh, decided against
running risk of seeing some of his units trapped and battered with insufficient
air support; says Nguyen Van Thieu feels his forces have accomplished a good
deal; hint commando-style raids may be staged by small S Vietnamese units
against Ho Chi Minh Trail before onset of monsoon rains in early May; Defense
Dept spokesman Friedheim says he cannot 'absolutely preclude' new S Vietnamese
raids in Laos in near future; Laird concedes Laotian operation was cut short
because of 'tremendously vicious and violent reaction' by N Vietnamese and
because S Vietnamese feel they have carried out primary objective of operation;
he and dept spokesman stress that when he was briefed by S Vietnamese in Jan,
operation was described as lasting from 5 to 8 wks; spokesman says that if S
Vietnamese wanted to stay longer than 8 wks, they would have had to ask US to
extend its air support several Adm planners privately are in gen agreement that
operation accomplished some of its objectives but fell short of expectations;
other opinions of Amer officials noted; some mil men fear N Vietnamese will seek
to move in force into Khesanh area; most mil analysts do not believe major enemy
ground offensive will succeed; Pentagon spokesman says it is 'possibility' that
N Vietnamese are moving heavy arty into buffer zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              274 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 25, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 229 words

S Vietnamese drive in Laos ends after 44 days; about 500 S Vietnamese marines
are left behind to man mt position 2 mi from S Vietnamese border, but their
mission is to hold ground in defense of Khesanh base; are expected to be
withdrawn within 2 days; about 1,500 other marines are withdrawn from Dong Da,
last S Vietnamese base in Laos; N Vietnamese troops continue to put heavy
pressure on allied positions inside S Vietnam; Amer arty units dig in at
Khesanh; enemy shells targets at and near Khesanh; last major unit to leave Laos
is column of tanks and armored personnel carriers that fights its way out with N
Vietnamese tanks close behind; 21 enemy tanks are attacked by US planes on trail
1 mi SW of border-crossing point of Laobao; 7 tanks destroyed; 3 other tanks
attacked by helicopter gunship 1/2 mi closer to border; 1 destroyed, 2 damaged;
in closing phase of operation, S Vietnamese are said to have been outnumbered 2
to 1; S Vietnamese command repts 1,146 S Vietnamese killed in operation, 4,235
wounded and 245 missing; repts 13,668 enemy killed, many of them by B-52 air
strikes; some Amer officers regard S Vietnamese rept of enemy losses as
exaggerated; US command repts 89 Amer helicopters destroyed in operation, 51
Amers killed, 78 wounded, 28 missing; many other helicopters were damaged or
shot down and recovered; other details on operation; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              275 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 121 words

James Reston says it is clear from Laotian operation that US and S Vietnam are
running into dangerous problem in final phase of war of divided command; says
Abrams wanted S Vietnam to commit more troops to operation and remain longer in
battle, but Nguyen Van Thieu chose different course; says lately Pentagon has
been taking more candid and believable line on operation; notes Laird
statements; says it is conceded in Washington that 'somebody' underestimated
strength of enemy forces in Laos; says both allied camps are more disappointed
over operation than they let on in pub, and both now tend to blame the other for
not doing more; holds there is not much likelihood that future will solve
problem of divided commands

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              276 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 3

LENGTH: 60 words

US Atty's office asks new hearing on contempt sentences of Chicago 7 case
defendants; hearing requested by Atty Gen Mitchell on basis of recent Sup Ct
ruling that judge who has been insulted in ct may instantly impose contempt
sentence but that if he waits until end of trial he should let another judge
punish offender; defendants and their sentences listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              277 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 164 words

Max Frankel comment on current period as one of storm for Pres Nixon from econ
and other problems; incursion cited among issues that will give Pres Nixon his
stormiest season yet; Nixon reptd calculating that by next yr he will have
fashioned enough econ recovery, with diminished inflation, and large enough
withdrawal of troops from Vietnam, to let him take proud record into Pres
campaign on issues of peace and prosperity; says he is not doing well with
programs in Cong, is not doing as well with econ as he hoped, his explanations
of Indochina tactics are being questioned by many, and he is not doing well with
pub opinion polls; says there is no longer any easy White House appeal to silent
majority; notes concern among some of his assocs that he cannot afford further
damage to aura of Pres or to his credibility with pub; Nixon aides feel he has
not been given enough credit for his efforts to improve environment because of
his support of supersonic transport plane project

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              278 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6; (AFP)

LENGTH: 46 words

Communique pub in Hanoi says US raids over southern provs have caused some 100
casualties since beginning of mo; says US aircraft, during same period, have
carried out daily reconnaissance flights over nearly all of provs and cities of
N Vietnam; repts details on US raids

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              279 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 110 words

Defense Dept spokesman, guardedly discussing recent movement of N Vietnamese
weapons into buffer zone, issues veiled warning that air strikes against N
Vietnamese arty and rockets might have to be ordered if they fire from new
positions within buffer zone; other sources say several bns of long-range arty
and rockets have been dug into positions at several points in northern half of
buffer zone; spokesman recalls Laird declaration that it is his responsibility
to recommend necessary 'protective reaction' steps; details on his statements;
spokesman declines to say whether Adm regards new development violation of '68
understanding that led to Paris talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              280 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 17 words

Article on plight of US soldiers at Khesanh base, S Vietnam, which has been
shelled for last 9 days

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              281 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 8

LENGTH: 41 words

N Vietnamese commercial mission is formally recognized by Chile as 1st step
toward establishment of of diplomatic relations between 2 countries; Min Almevda
says people of Chile admire people of Vietnam for their fight against 'intruding
forces'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              282 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 26, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 201 words

US units begin pulling away from Laotian border as concern continues that N
Vietnamese troops will try to intensify their attacks against Amer
installations; soldiers begin dismantling some equipment at Khesanh base; S
Vietnamese troops abandon their westernmost position at Langvei, 4 mi from
Laotian border; last few hundred Vietnamese who have been covering rear of
retreat from Laos also return to their bases; B-52s raid hilltop position in
Laos; Saigon spokesman repts S Vietnamese and enemy casualties in Laotian
operation; US command repts 8 Amers killed, 7 wounded in clashes with enemy
infiltrators near Amer support bases; 5 helicopters downed near Khesanh while
supporting S Vietnamese retreat; 94 helicopters have been lost in Laotian
operation; 66 Amers have been killed, 79 wounded, 28 are missing; mil officers
hold there is clear threat to US troops in S Vietnam's northernmost provs; US
planes continue to pound Ho Chi Minh Trail; details on action; US command repts
54 Amers killed, 335 wounded in action last wk; says recent raids destroyed at
least 3 missile sites; Vietnamese spokesman says Laotian operation has not
officially ended, although all troops are now outside of Laos; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              283 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 61 words

Lr says Pres Nixon's and Pres adviser Kissinger's assurance that Laotian
operation will end war sooner has proved to be case, but, paradoxically, through
defeat rather than victory; notes 2 policy alternatives open to Nixon; holds
Nixon can either 'plam off his defeat as a qualified success' or begin to
negotiate seriously toward interim coalition govt in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              284 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 36 words

Several hundred antiwar demonstrators break up teach-in on Indochina shortly
after it starts at Harvard Univ; Prof A Cox scores demonstrators; teach-in
sponsored by Young Amers for Freedom and Harvard Young Repubs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              285 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 2

LENGTH: 104 words

Overseas Press Club Polk Awards to J Laurence, K Kay, J Clevenger and R Bensley
(CBS team), A Lewis (NY Times Magazine), Times financial-business news sec and
Op-Ed Page, K Sawada (UPI), who was killed in Cambodia, H Meyerson and J Toland
(for their books), D Belnap (Los Angeles Times), T Darcy (Newsday), R Shaplen
(New Yorker), T Koppel (ABC-TV News), K Jones (NBC-TV News), NBC Radio News, L
Cioffi (ABC Radio News), CBS radio, L Burrows (Life), who was killed in Vietnam,
D Cook (UPI), J Hughes (Christian Science Monitor); awards dinner will include
memorial to all newsmen killed covering Asian conflict since '65

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              286 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 56, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

Army TV station in Saigon airs controversial CBS TV documentary Selling of the
Pentagon; broadcast does not include critical remarks by Vice Pres Agnew which
were added to repeat broadcast of show in US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              287 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 92 words

Group of 46 Amer Protestant ch leaders, clergymen and laymen, at news conf
following wk-long discussions with 4 participants in Paris talks, issues appeal
urging US to pledge unconditional withdrawal of its troops in immediate future
to facilitate pol settlement at talks; says no mil solution, including
Vietnamization, is possible; says conflict could continue indefinitely if it is
not resolved through pol negotiation; repts that US may call off next session of
talks in retaliation for Communist cancellation of last session cannot be
confirmed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              288 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 68 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu announces Govt plans 5-yr program to bolster
rural econ by cutting agr imports and increasing exports, s, Longxuyen; says
program will cover all 4 fields of agr; Thieu informally opens his re-election
campaign; announces he will hold news conf; has not formally announced that he
will run for 2d term; says S Vietnamese operation against Ho Chi Minh Trail
still continues

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              289 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

Scattered clashes reptd in northwestern S Vietnam as allied troops continue to
withdraw eastward; Khesanh and other targets shelled; details on action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              290 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 195 words

Several hundred S Vietnamese marines sent to patrol in small units along Laotian
border and in Laos to protect continuing withdrawal from northernmost S Vietnam
of troops involved in Laotian operation; some units ordered to reoccupy hilltop
position overlooking Khesanh plateau; fresh regiment of S Vietnamese inf moved
to post 2 mi W of Khesanh; actions come amid repts that N Vietnamese are
infiltrating northernmost part of S Vietnam and imperiling Amer forces near
Khesanh; S Vietnamese hq says N Vietnamese arty in buffer zone recently hit base
at Dongha; Amer command says US arty fire killed 15 enemy soldiers in zone and
destroyed 9 bunkers; US command announces 20 US fighter-bombers recently
attacked N Vietnamese missile site in Laos; site reptdly was raided before it
fired any missiles at Amer planes supporting Laotian operation; Amer mil sources
say they contemplate withdrawal within 2 wks of US forces now at Khesanh; vast
bombing campaign against enemy forces and supply routes in Laos continues;
Saigon command says 20,000 S Vietnamese troops that have been withdrawn from
Laos are 'relaxing and recuperating and preparing for a new attack'; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              291 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 217 words

Calif Gov Reagan defends invasions of Laos and Cambodia, s, St Paul, Minn;
credits Pres Nixon with effectively 'winding down the war'; says Laotian
invasion is success; lauds S Vietnamese Army; Gov Reagan scores Sen vote on SST;
Reagan predicts Nixon's re-election; Goodell accuses Nixon of 'dictatorial
attitudes' and urges 'open insurgency' by Repub moderates in advance of
primaries; says he hopes Nixon will change course so he can back him; says
insurgency, if necessary, will be carried to primaries; lists as potential
candidates Sen Hatfield, Repr McCLoskey, NYC Mayor Lindsay, J W Gardner; sees
Nixon having to drop Vice Pres Agnew from ticket; ex-Sen Goodell predicts that
unless Nixon changes his policy, war will be 'rock' upon which Repub party
'founders', s, Macalester Coll, Minn; says Laos is disaster; says, in int, that
Nixon, to avoid challenge in primaries, must make clear commitment to get all US
troops out of Vietnam by fixed date; Reagan's inv to s at Minn party's annual
dinner provokes Adm critics to stage competing rally with Goodell; Reagan
defends Nixon record, Goodell criticizes it; Nixon's Minn Repub critics seek to
avoid bitter intraparty fight; as result, many of those who sat at head table
and heard Reagan met secretly earlier with Goodell and other Adm critics

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              292 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

Comment on Laotian operation and assessments of it; questions raised by it
noted; illus; major issue is 'was it worth it'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              293 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 150 words

James Reston on how Pres Nixon's 'almost desperate efforts to increase his pub
support recently have resulted only in decline in his standing' in polls; says
he has dealt with his problems as if they were primarily personal and could be
removed or eased if he were more visible, amiable and accessible to his critics;
cites recent TV ints and other efforts; says trouble is that he has been
persuaded, not that his policies are wrong but that his pub relations are wrong;
holds Sen defeat of SST was because Pres Nixon's priorities were out of order
and his econ arguments for liner development fallacious; holds Nixon's TV int
with Smith and other pub relations moves will not win for him the acceptance of
his Indochina policy which he apparently seeks; says major problem is failure to
convince pub that Amer sacrifices will achieve objectives and claims that
Laotian operation were successful

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              294 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 5

LENGTH: 18 words

Cartoon on Pres Nixon's expansion of war into Laos and Cambodia in order for him
to withdraw from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              295 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 0

LENGTH: 42 words

Neil Sheehan, examining question of possible US war crimes, comments on several
aspects of US policy; bibliography of books on US policy and questions of US war
crimes; includes books on alleged Mylai massacre; Prof M Sacharoff provided
bibliography

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              296 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 7 words

Msgr P M Nguyen Nang named Bishop of Vinh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              297 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 264 words

Sec Rogers issues to Cong 617-page rept United States Foreign Policy--1969-70,
revg events in Nixon Adm's 1st 2 yrs; says Vietnam war has pre-empted attention
from other areas of concern but that perspective will be restored by ending
Vietnam involvement; also says US, by altering character of its involvement in
world, will re-establish balance in conduct of its relations; says some progress
has been made in SALT talks and that US remains determined to move ahead to an
accord that will contribute to security of both sides; Rogers holds new methods
of internatl orgn and cooperative action are required to alleviate ecological
problems; contends pollution is global problem; sees increasing awareness
throughout world that unbridled econ growth threatens quality of life; says US
seeks to bring about more normal pattern of relations with Communist China but
has no expectation its overtures will produce rapid changes; says world has
become aware that overpopulation threatens quality of life; says US is committed
to solution to problem of population growth and that it is spending $100-million
in current fiscal yr on related internatl problems, 20 times expenditure of 4
yrs ago; rept notes that if present birth rate continues, population will
increase to 7.5-billion in 2000 and 55-billion within 100 yrs; notes that during
'70 alone, population grew by 70 million; sees Nixon policies reflecting
attitude of 'practical involvement' in world of today and tomorrow; State Dept
notes 1st such rept was issued by Sec Jefferson in 1790 and last previous one by
Sec Olney in 1896

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              298 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 95 words

Reprs Rosenthal, Badillo, Halpern and Abzug, and a number of NYS and local
officials, stage series of antiwar rallies in Bronx, Queens and Westchester
County to raise support for new move in Cong to cut off funds for war by end of
'71; rallies attract small crowds at shopping centers and intersections; are in
support of Vietnam Disengagement Act; hundreds of persons sign petitions backing
act; Rosenthal says war will be ended with or without Nixon; 4 Reprs are joined
by State Sen Bronston, Councilmen E Sadowsky, D Mannes and A Frankenberg, and
Boro Pres Abrams

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              299 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 164 words

Coalition of antiwar and civil rights orgns plans mo-long series of
demonstrations this spring, including mass rally April 24 on steps of Capitol
and attempt to 'stop the Govt'; most of actions will be directed against Cong
and Govt agencies; 1 segment of coalition, known as May Day, urges demonstrators
to remain in Washington and engage in militant activities with aim of guaranteed
annual income of $6,500; among orgns involved are: SCLC, Vietnam Veterans gainst
the War, People's Coalition for Peace and Justice and Natl Peace Action
Coalition; plan tributes to Rev M L King in several cities; protest will begin
April 2; details on plans, which include encampment by veterans as close to
Capitol as possible; veterans to turn in medals and decorations at antiwar
demonstration to be held in Washington; April 24 rally has been endorsed by
McGovern, Hartke, Gravel and others; orgns plans series of demonstrations for
Apr 5-9 directed against financial center on Wall St, NYC

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              300 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 118 words

US and S Vietnam reject Communist proposal to hold next peace talks session
April 1; move for 1-wk delay by proposing April 8 as date of next session;
Communists protest allied move and withhold their acceptance; resumption of conf
is placed in doubt as procedural issue is added to those of substance that have
deadlocked meetings; neither Amer nor S Vietnamese delegation explains its
refusal to participate in next session; it is clear delegations respond to other
side's decision to boycott last session; N Vietnamese delegation says new allied
tactic is 'proof' allies seek to drive talks into 'still deeper impasse';
Vietcong delegation accuses Nixon Adm of deliberately seeking to hinder work of
conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              301 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 28, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 253 words

Enemy continues rocket and mortar attacks on US troops near Laotian border amid
increasing signs that all Amer units at Khesanh base will be pulled out soon;
mil command says 4 significant attacks against Amer forces in northwestern
corner of S Vietnam cause light casualties and damage; S Vietnamese troops open
new arty positions along border; Amer officers say they will supplement and
replace Amer fire bases, continuing to shell hills of Laos; US planes raid Ho
Chi Minh Trail; mil sources rept continuing infiltration of enemy forces trying
to harass Amer troops that supported Laotian operation; say S Vietnamese troops
still conduct small-scale operations across border; intentions of S Vietnamese
said to remain mystery; US command raises its estimates of damage caused by Amer
air power during operation; says air strikes killed 4,100 enemy and destroyed 69
tanks and 14,000 tons of ammunition; spokesman, seeking to explain why estimates
are so much lower than those provided by S Vietnamese, says Amer estimates
derive only from damage caused by air strikes, while Saigon's figures include
results of ground action; morale of many S Vietnamese soldiers who fought in
Laos is shattered; members of 1st Inf Div say invasion was a nightmare for them
and for other soldiers; describe wave after wave of enemy soldiers who
outnumbered them and enemy's ability to survive US air strikes; S Vietnamese
veterans admit their forces failed, question whether effects of Laotian
operation will be permanent; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              302 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 54, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 57 words

More than score of state legislators bearing petitions signed by 625 lawmakers
begin what they say is state-to-state campaign to end war; petitions calling for
withdrawal of all US forces from Indochina will be carried to White House and
delivered in lobbying effort to various Cong leaders; campaign is organized by
Wis State Repr M Miller

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              303 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 4

LENGTH: 45 words

M R Josephson lr deploring implications of power and war in Prof Lawrence Mar 8
lr supporting NATO study of 'discriminate' use of tactical nuclear weapons;
noting Stratton call for civilian tribunal to investigate alleged Mylai
massacre, says war itself is an atrocity

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              304 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 72 words

Roots of Involvement, new book by M Kalb and E Abel on Amer presence in Vietnam,
includes account of exch of secret messages in which Gen Wheeler encouraged Gen
Westmoreland to request large-scale troop reinforcements of 206,000 men during
Communist Tet (lunar new yr) offensive in '68; request was later denied by Pres
Johnson; book says Westmoreland also asked Johnson to authorize 'amphibious
landing' by US Marines in N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              305 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 116 words

N Vietnamese Communist party leader Le Duan arrives in Moscow with ranking
Vietcong and Pathet Lao officials to attend 24th Soviet Party Cong and discuss
Indochinese developments with USSR leaders; Western diplomats hold USSR may be
concerned about Hanoi's overextending itself and about apparent increase in
Communist China's influence in Hanoi; China rejects invitation to attend cong;
Soviet sources say China has rejected inv to attend Soviet party cong and that
diplomats expect new Chinese attack on Soviet leadership; strong pressure on
Brezhnev seen to reply in kind, but presence of such 'neutrals' at conf as N
Vietnamese leader Le Duan and Rumanian Pres Ceausescu seen inhibiting factor

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              306 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 16 words

Laotian troops reptdly force N Vietnamese rgt back 5 mi from Luang Prabang;
retake Ban Doncho

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              307 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 31 words

Bad weather and heavy AA fire prevents about 300 S Vietnamese commandos from
raiding N Vietnamese div hq in southern Laos; commandos were aboard 45 US
helicopters when ordered to return

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              308 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

US command records dating back to beginning of '67 indicate Amer death toll at
base S of Danang is highest in that time in any single attack on US installation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              309 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 27 words

Illus of Laotian hillsman, who were captured by S Vietnamese in Laos and are
suspected of being Communist sympathizers, under guard by S Vietnamese at
Langvei base

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              310 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 94 words

Enemy kills 33 Amers, wounds 76 in attack on US arty base 50 mi S of Danang, S
Vietnam; partly overruns base; official rept says base remains 'in friendly
control'; details on fighting at base; enemy arty and ground forces in Laotian
border area continue their pressure on allied troops; most combat activity takes
place around Khesanh; details; 2 Amers killed, 7 wounded in enemy ambush near
Khesanh; speculation that new operation is planned for area is fed by repts that
possibly as many as 300 Amer helicopters are being prepared at Quangtri and
Khesanh; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              311 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 1

LENGTH: 135 words

Ed says jury has discharged its duty in finding Lt Calley guilty of killings at
Mylai; but conviction of Calley, which reaffirms moral standards that US invoked
against Ger and Japanese war criminals, cannot alone clear conscience of Army or
nation; says although Calley's personal guilt is beyond question, there remain
grounds for complaint of his atty that Calley has been made scapegoat; notes
Prof T Taylor has pointed out ample precedent for much broader assignment of
responsibility at higher levels of command for war crimes committed at Mylai and
elsewhere in Indochina; notes actions against Koster and Young; says they should
be brought to trial if they are found guilty of any command decision; says
beyond Mylai, nation still has not faced up to moral and legal implications of
civilian deaths

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              312 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 5

LENGTH: 32 words

Lr noting Sec Laird's statement that operation into Laos proceeds according to
plan, suggests it must be Gen Giap's plan, not Laird's; says operation proceeds
according to N Vietnam's plan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              313 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 19 words

History of events concerning alleged Mylai massacre; men accused, charges
against them and dispositions listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              314 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 37 words

Concerned Veterans from Vietnam natl comdr B Wright says orgn has asked meetings
with several Congressmen and Defense Dept officials to seek special
consideration for some servicemen released with less than hon discharges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              315 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 11 words

Calif Gov Reagan to visit Japan next fall and possibly Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              316 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 104 words

Dem Pres aspirant Sen McGovern campaigns in NYC; says he started campaign so
soon to get 'kind of surging and meaningful dialogue' that used to characterize
campaigns, s and press conf; calls NY central to his plans; confident he can
carry NY and Calif; also s on Mideast peace, Vietnam, neoisolationism; says he
wants to stop measuring internationalism in terms of number of troops US has in
other countries; notes Dem party's natl com now supports resolution offered by
himself and Hatfield for complete withdrawal of Amer troops by end of '71; says
Vietnamization is formula to perpetuate war into indefinite future; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              317 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

US Army advisers and other observers in field ascribe S Vietnamese Army's
performance in Laos to difficulties allies failed to anticipate and to tactical
challenges it had not been trained to meet; Amer advisers rept Communists
pressed their numerical advantage fiercely; Amer and S Vietnamese officers
concede poor planning and lack of intelligence coordination contributed to S
Vietnamese problems; magnitude of enemy's AA firepower also caught allies by
surprise; uncertainty of mission said to be another problem faced by S
Vietnamese; Amer officers and observers hold S Vietnamese soldiers were not
eager for fight

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              318 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 68 words

US base S of Danang is shelled by enemy; has been reinforced; enemy also shells
S Vietnamese resettlement village 25 mi to north, reptdly killing 13 civilians
and wounding 21; N Vietnamese arty hits targets at Chulai and Danang; US command
repts 2 helicopters downed, 1 in Laos; 99 helicopters have been lost in Laotian
operation; US command repts 2 Amers killed, 12 wounded in recent clashes near
Khesanh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              319 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 102 words

Some S Vietnamese troops continue operating in Laos near area from which large
Govt task force withdrew last wk; S Vietnamese command acknowledges their
continued presence, but refuses to discuss their activities; Nguyen Van Thieu
calls off news conf after he learns that Amer-supported S Vietnamese raid on N
Vietnamese div hq in Laos was called off; US troops search for N Vietnamese who
staged recent raid S of Danang; S Vietnamese Govt spokesman denies Laotian
operation resulted in total of 10,000 S Vietnamese killed, wounded or missing;
enemy carries out 3 small attacks on Amer units in Khesanh area; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              320 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 110 words

Repr O'Neill, Dem whip, breaking with other members of House Dem leadership,
calls for withdrawal of all US mil forces from Indochina by end of yr; is joined
in 'statement of purpose' by Reprs Rostenkowski, Carey and Corman; Mansfield
says Nixon Adm fails to 'follow through' with Nixon Doctrine of reducing US
commitments abroad; says Adm entraps itself in pattern of expanding violence in
SE Asia; denies that those who question course of Adm policy are retreating into
isolationism; stand by 4 Reprs and Mansfield complaint said to be equally
significant; Reprs said to give momentum to move already under way for adoption
of House Dems antiwar resolution

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              321 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 172 words

Calley is found guilty of premeditated murder of at least 22 civilians at Mylai,
S Vietnam, in '68; faces mandatory sentence of death or life imprisonment;
arguments in mitigation to be heard tomorrow, when punishment will probably be
announced; appeal is automatic; scene in courtroon during pronouncement of
sentence described; jury finds Calley guilty on all 4 specifications; its
finding said to reflect its effort to reconcile contradictions in testimony
concerning number of civilians killed; Calley has orders from Latimer to keep
silent until after sentencing; Latimer scores decision; Calley is put in cell
with 2 rooms; Latimer says Calley is 'product of the system'; says he will call
no witnesses for hearing on mitigation and extenuation; Calley is among 25
officers and enlisted men originally charged by Army in connection with alleged
massacre; charges against 19 were dismissed; Medina, Henderson and Kotouc await
trial; testimony of Calley, Meadlo and Medina recalled; Calley, Latimer, Kennedy
and Daniel illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              322 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 30, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 167 words

Pres Nixon has begun rev of post-mortem studies of Laotian operation, which
cover some serious mil misjudgments as well as claims of strategic benefits; is
being advised that allies badly underestimated N Vietnam's battlefield strength
while overestimating their own; despite high costs and failure to realize
maximum objectives, he is being asked to take some comfort from fact that more
time was gained for defense of S Vietnam and continuing withdrawal of Amer
forces; most conspicuous tactical setbacks are being attributed to intelligence
failures; Amer air cover is judged to have been much less effective than planned
during early but critical stages of operation; highest Washington officials do
not accept judgment of some analysts and journalists that operation was
ill-conceived or that mil results failed to justify costs; it is acknowledged
around White House that opposition to Nixon's tactics of gradual withdrawal has
been reignited by operation; other details on assessment of operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              323 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 6

LENGTH: 152 words

Sen Edmund Muskie says he is sorry he did not make pub as far back as '65 his
'real doubts' concerning US involvement in war, TV int; says he voiced his
doubts privately to Pres Johnson; says he has 'real doubts' about wisdom of
assaults into Cambodia last yr and Laos this yr; says 'risk of longer
involvement' is created by mil operations in 3 countries; says S Vietnamese
elections next fall should be test of Saigon's pol viability; his war stand over
yrs noted; criticizes Nixon's conduct of war; restates his support for complete
withdrawal of Amers from Indochina by end of '71; Muskie offers bill to permit
pub interest law firms and some other groups and orgns to present their views to
Cong without risking loss of their tax-exempt status; says he has 'real doubts'
about wisdom of mil assaults into Cambodia last yr and Laos this yr; says
elections next fall should be test of Saigon's pol viability

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              324 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 3

LENGTH: 17 words

P C Clarke lr urges support for Nixon's Vietnam policy; notes criticism of Nixon
policy by some newsmen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              325 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Lr, saying Vietnam war has been proved 'tragic mistake', proposes several steps
toward peace and US pledge to restore econ of Vietnam after peace

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              326 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 136 words

Comment on impact of Lt William Calley trial; US, in convicting Calley for
killing of Vietnamese civilians at Mylai in midwar, breaks with historical
tradition that war crimes trials are business of victors; confronts its soldiers
and comdrs with series of legal conflicts; Calley conviction demonstrates that
excuse of following orders will not work; US tactics that are arguably in
violation of laws of war noted; Georgetown Law School Dean A S Fisher says Amer
mil command must now 'taste the cup' of guilt that it forced upon Japanese after
World War II; points out US hanged Yamashita for atrocities committed by troops
under his command; makes other comments on Yamashita case; dismissal of charges
against Koster discussed; complaints that Calley was used as scapegoat while
gens protected their own noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              327 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 94 words

Immediate reaction of many soldiers in Vietnam to Calley conviction for killing
of Vietnamese civilians at Mylai is one of indignation; dozens of soldiers say
they believe Calley is being used as scapegoat; handful of S Vietnamese
politicians and intellectuals privately attack Nguyen Van Thieu for remaining
silent during disclosures of Mylai slayings and during trials; Buddhist faction
says cable will be sent to mil ct asking Calley be spared death; Vietnamese pub
does not give any indication that conviction matters much; details on reactions
of US soldiers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              328 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Soviet Communist party leader Leonid Brezhnev reaffirms USSR-Cuban ties, rept,
24th Commnist party Cong; excerpts; illus; Brezhnev charges US 'aggression
against peoples' of Indochina is major atrocity; cites Allende victory in Chile
as most important recent event in Latin Amer

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              329 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

Sen Hart says recent articles raising possibility that oil reserves off coast of
S Vietnam are 'real reason' for Amer involvement in SE Asia are 'inaccurate and
misleading'; says repts do disservice to antiwar effort

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              330 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 80 words

Mrs G W Clark, mother of Amer POW, says FBI agent warned her to have nothing to
do with families liaison com, which relays mail between prisoners and their
families; rept brings immediate demand from Repr Bingham for retirement of FBI
Dir Hoover; Mrs Clark says she knows of no other POW family receiving such a
warning; FBI spokesman says agency plans no comment; Bingham says it is not
within FBI's authority to issue warning; sends telegram to Hoover asking for
explanation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              331 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 210 words

Confidential Army directive obtained from Vietnam shows Army comdrs have been
ordered to intercept and confiscate personal, 1st-class mail containing antiwar
or other dissident publications sent to Amer soldiers in Vietnam; Army spokesman
in Washington confirms authenticity of message making order known; says policy
is authorized under regulation for Army in Vietnam that 'encourages' soldiers to
rept receipt of 'inflammatory' mail or mail that is 'critical of the mil effort'
in Vietnam; US Postal Service spokesman says Govt has no authority to seize
1st-class mail without ct order; explains postal regulations; Army lr sent to
all commands in May, '69, says comdr may not prevent distribution of pub 'simply
because he does not like its contents'; Army regulation dated March 20, '70,
prohibits dissemination of dissident literature only when Sec of Army considers
that it 'presents a clear danger to the loyalty, discipline, or morale of
troops'; mail in question was sent from offices of GI Press Service and is
published by Student Mobilization Com to End the War in Vietnam; sources in
Pentagon say sr officials in Washington and Saigon are disturbed that Army
communications might have been compromised by confidential directive becoming
public

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              332 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

US command repts 4 Amer warplanes bomb N Vietnamese arty site in northern half
of buffer zone; says raid was ordered because guns were threatening allied
personnel in S Vietnam; says raid follows increase in enemy arty attacks against
targets in northern part of S Vietnam; US command repts 1 Amer killed, 5 wounded
during enemy attack 16 mi W of Katum; US raid on buffer zone is called
'protective reaction'; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              333 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 48 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu announces S Vietnamese commandos raid N
Vietnamese base area on Ho Chi Minh Trail, news conf; allied officers say force
of 200 to 300 men is flown into Laos; Nguyen Van Thieu says operation still goes
on; 1 Amer killed, 7 wounded in ambush near Khesanh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              334 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 31 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu repts S Vietnamese commandos conducted raid
on N Vietnamese base area on Ho Chi Minh Trail, news conf; troops airlifted into
Laos in US helicopters

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              335 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

N Vietnamese soldiers reptdly seize 10-mi stretch of Route 4; attack task force
of Cambodian bns moving down rd after earlier ambush of rear elements; Cambodian
soldiers illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              336 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

Laotian drive against enemy troops menacing Luang Prabang checked by N
Vietnamese dug in 3 mi N of city

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              337 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 180 words

Sen Fulbright tells Sen that Sen Foreign Relations Com has decided to push ahead
with pub hearings on 'how to end the war'; move said to signal end to truce in
Indochina debate; Fulbright charges Nixon Adm is guilty of either 'massive
deception' or 'massive misjudgment' and perhaps both in Laotian operation; says
none of 5 principal objectives he contends Adm laid down for operation have been
achieved; says operation was based upon miscalculations; com decides not to
begin hearings until after Nixon makes his troops withdrawal announcement;
Fulbright observes com has been 'muted' since operation began; State Dept aides
say Rogers feels truce on criticism of operation should be extended until there
is clearer evaluation of results; Fulbright makes clear he no longer feels bound
to maintain his silence because operation is over; explains his decision to
speak out; notes series of questions concerning operation; State and Defense
Dept spokesmen decline immediate comment on Fulbright's remarks; Fulbright says
questions he asks cannot be answered with 'simple yes or no'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              338 of 338 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 31, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 18 words

Text of Lt William Calley statement to the court after being found guilty for
killings at Mylai, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
