
                               1 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 1, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 74 words

USSR leader Brezhnev accuses West of taking 'an unhealthy interest' in Africa,
at dinner in Moscow honoring Madagascar Pres Didier Ratsiraka.  Asserts that
USSR opposes division of Africa into military blocs.  Reaffirms Soviet support
for Vietnam in apparent allusion to pressures in Ghana.  Questions right of
Western leaders 'to speak and pass decisions on behalf of the Africans'.
Accuses US and NATO of aggressive actions in Africa (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 182-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 2, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 2

LENGTH: 24 words

Vietnam closes consulates in Kunming and Canton, China, and 17 staff members
depart.  Nanning consulate is scheduled to close on July 3 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 183-4

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 2, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Yunann Prov, China, official Pan Ching-sen charges Vietnamese security guards
fired on 2 Chinese farm workers in 1st reptd shooting incident along Vietnam/
China border.  Says Vietnam is increasing frontier troop strength, bldg roads
and adding security checkpoints.  Foreign correspondents saw no unusual mil
activity.  Pan denies Vietnamese accusations that China is concentrating troops
in frontier (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 183-4

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 4, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT D MCFADDEN

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 107 words

US Govt analysts and figures made public by Chinese leaders at various times
indicate that amount of aid given by China to Vietnam in last 20 yrs was between
$10 billion and $18 billion.  USSR, country's chief benefactor, continues to
provide about $500 million annually, while Chinese aid in recent yrs was about
$300 million, with aid limited since end of war chiefly to rice and other
commodities.  Most visable aid accomplishments by China have been Thai Nguyen
steel complex and Red River bridge.  Econ success of ethnic Chinese has led to
ambivalence by many Vietnamese, who envy and resent their gains but need their
expertise (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 185-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 4, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

China announces it has formally ended all economic aid projects in Vietnam,
noting it has advised Vietnam Govt that aid advisers are being withdrawn because
of treatment of Chinese in Vietnam.  Diplomatic sources contend, however, that
main reason for action is Vietnam's recent admission to USSR-bloc's Council of
Mutual Economic Assistance (Comecon).  Action ends long association that brought
Vietnam more than $10 billion in Chinese assistance in last 20 years, and leaves
few links between China and Vietnam other than cool relations at embassy level
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 185-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 5, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 111 words

Article on plight of ethnic Chinese in Vietnam who are forced to pay bribes to
Vietnamese officials to obtain false travel documents to enable them to leave
country for People's Repub of China.  Some refugees say they have bribed their
way out of prison after having been caught trying to flee country by boat and
proper exit visas cost up to 20 oz of gold, depending on seniority of official
involved in making arrangements.  Refugees say bribery and corruption in
southern Vietnam is as rife as they were under pre-Communist S Vietnamese Govt.
Photo released by Hsinhua purporting to show Chinese refugee from Vietnam being
taken into Yunnan, China, hosp (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 186-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 6, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT S BROWNE

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 127 words

Article by Robert S Browne, Black Econ Research Center pres who served as
economist with US aid program in Cambodia and Vietnam, on current econ scene in
southern Vietnam.  Notes most noticeable changes in Ho Chi Minh City are marked
reduction in police and mil personnel and disappearance of hundreds of shops and
street merchants after Govt crackdown on private enterprise.  Notes natl
'inventory' of goods has geen undertaken and new currency, to be used by
northern and southern sections of country, was issued.  Notes combined effect
was to break inflation, put spending power on fairly equalitarian basis,
mobilize savings for purpose of econ development and prevent its being exported
and replace private mkt with state-controlled system.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 18

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 6, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 135 words

State Dept official says Pres Carter will order Amer ships to pick up Indochina
'boat' refugees, most of whom come from Vietnam, and says US will allow them to
resettle in US if they wish.  Says Immigration and Naturalization service will
expedite refugee travel to destinations.  Decision will affect any Amer carrier
or any ship with US registry, many of which have been refusing to pick up
refugees to avoid difficulties at their next ports of call.  State Dept official
indicates decision was prompted by abrupt rise in May and June in number of boat
people who have arrived in Asian ports.  Says US hopes other countries will now
be encouraged to aid refugees.  About 172,000 Indochinese refugees have entered
US since '75 and new Carter order will be under 'parole auth' granted to US Atty
Gen (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 187-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 7, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

Dow Chemical Co denies responsibility for discharging into Saginaw and
Tittabawasee River chem TCDD, defoliant used by Amer troops in Vietnam and later
linked to birth defects and other illness (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 188-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 8, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 86 words

Judge Oren R Lewis rules that Frank W Snepp 3d violated his CIA contract in
writing unauthorized book about agency activities.  Orders him to turn over to
Govt his 'ill-gotten gains'.  Snepp says he will appeal ruling.  Robert L
Bernstein, chmn of Random House, Snepp's publisher, scores decision, noting that
Richard Nixon, Henry Kissinger and other high officials have been free to use
classified secret material in preparation of their books, while Snepp used no
classified information in his.  Snepp illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 189-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 8, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BURNHAM

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

Fed Dist Court Judge Albert V Bryan sentences convicted spies Ronald L Humphrey
and Truong Dinh Hung to 5 yrs in prison.  Both have denied spying for Vietnam
and plan to appeal their convictions.  Case recalled (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 189-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 9, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD BURT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

Richard Burt reviews Soviet Union's growing influence in Africa and South Asia
and US efforts to counter it.  Asserts USSR is beneficiary of recent government
coups d'etat in Afghanistan and South Yemen, and is securing closer military
ties with Ethiopia.  Suggests tensions between Vietnam and People's Republic of
China are strengthening Soviet position in Southeast Asia.  Indicates US is
bolstering its Indian Ocean military forces, aiding regional powers such as
Saudi Arabia, Iran and India, and improving ties with People's Republic of China
to counter Soviet influence.  Map of Indian Ocean, cartoon (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 19

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              July 9, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 24 words

People's Repub of China's action ending all aid to Vietnam, in light of
'harassment' of 800,000 ethnic Chinese living in Vietnam, revd (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 190-4

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 10, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 95 words

White House and Defense Dept differ over whether to use random but widespread
urinalysis tests to determine amount of drug use among servicemen in Europe.
Defense Sec Harold Brown opposes tests because they failed to restrict drug use
in Vietnam and created morale problems.  Some Pentagon officials believe Dr
Peter G Bourne, Pres Carter's chief advisor on drug use, is seeking to regain
leverage in Cabinet after losing some bureaucratic struggles with HEW Sec Joseph
A Califano Jr.  Bourne says few people at Pentagon fully appreciate all the
issues involved (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 191-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 11, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Page 17, Column 5

LENGTH: 71 words

Russell Baker article on 7 ancient Anglo-Saxon words declared unfit for gen
broadcast on TV and radio.  Says all words refer to bodily wastes or sex.  Finds
its ironic that war against Anglo-Saxon is waged at time when Latin is no longer
taught in Amer schools.  Recalls practice on 'Latinizing' words during Vietnam
War, when 'bombing' was rendered 'interdiction' and people against war were
Latinized into 'dissidents' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 19

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 11, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

US State Dept spokesman says Us has not been informed officially that Vietnam is
ready to establish full diplomatic relations without any pledge of US financial
aid.  Says US is ready to do so (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 192-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 11, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min Phan Hien says he expects new developments in
relations between US and Vietnam and talks on missing Amer servicemen will be
conducted in Honolulu, Tokyo news conf.  Says problems between both countries
are normalization of relations, returning of bodies of missing Amers and US war
reconstruction aid.  Japanese officials had said Hien was prepared to discuss
normalization of relations without preconditions, but during news conf he made
no reference to dropping any preconditions (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 192-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 12, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 47 words

Deputy Asst Sec of State Frank Sieverts welcomes Vietnamese delegation headeded
by Vu Hoang, Honolulu, Hawaii, at start of meetings between Amer and Vietnamese
officials in effort to identify Vietnam war dead and step up flow of information
on those still listed as missing (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 193-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 12, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 105 words

Peking (China) diplomatic sources report China has cut off all economic and
technical aid to Albania, formerly its closest ally but now one of its strongest
critics.  Hold Govt, which did not immediately confirm disclosure, informed
Albania of its decision July 7. Assert amount of past aid to Albania was second
only to that received by Vietnam, whose aid was cut off July 3. Strained
Chinese-Albanian relations have been evident for several years as Albania has
been increasingly critical of China's 'three worlds' theory dividing world into
Third World and China, world of industrialized nations, and world of superpowers
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 193-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HERBERT MITGANG and WILLIAM STRAUSS

SECTION: Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

Book Chance and Circumstance: The War and the Vietnam Generation by Lawrence M
Saskir and William A Strauss revd by Herbert Mitgang.  Baskir and Strauss pors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 19

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 15, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 52 words

China tightens controls on entry of ethnic Chinese from Vietanm, accusing
Vietnam of taking advantage of situation to send spies and 'other bad elements'.
Chinese press agency Hsinhua says Vietnamese troops have fired shots to force
Chinese refugees to cross frontier.  New security regulations noted (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 196-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 16, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DOUG HOSTETTER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 5

LENGTH: 72 words

Doug Hostetter letter sees similarities between trial of Anatoly Shcharansky in
USSR and conviction on espionage charges in US of David Truong and Ronald
Humphry.  Holds that Truong and Shcharansky were charged with espionage rather
than with political activities they were engaged in.  Also points out that
Vietnam, through its UN officers, and US, through Pres Carter, both have denied
that Truong or Shcharansky were spies (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 19

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 16, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY NORMAN PEAGAM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 91 words

Norman Peagam article on historical background of current conflict between
Vietnam and Cambodia and China.  Notes Chinese occupied Vietnam for almost 1,000
yrs and later made repeated attempts to dominate it.  Says at same time, Vietnam
has historically pursed expansionist policies at expense of Cambodia, generating
intense animosity based on Cambodian fears of eventual extinction.  Stresses
importance of French colonialization of Indochina on course of future regional
alignments.  Illus.  Map shows southward march of N Vietnam since 939

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 197-4

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 16, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Vietnamese Communist Party newspaper Nhan Dan accuses China of being 'main
culprit' in alleged genocide in Cambodia and in Cambodia. S border war with
Vietnam.  Accuses Cambodian leaders of 'dipping their hands in blood' of
Cambodian and Vietnamese people.  Describes Cambodia as 'hell on earth' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 197-4

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 18, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 207 words

Cambodian Deputy Prime Min Ieng Sary, at press conf at end of official visit to
Thailand, declares that Cambodian people, army and Communist Party have 'heavily
crushed Vietnamese enemy'.  Statement embarrasses Thailand, which has exchanged
ambs with Vietnam and is trying to estab normal ties with region's other
Communist powers.  Diplomatic sources rept that Thailand had persuaded Ieng Sary
not to meet with foreign newsmen for fear he would spread Cambodia's views on
Vietnam, but he used press conf for same result.  Ieng Sary denies charges that
Cambodian Govt us engaged in large-scale massacres of Cambodia's population.
Links charges to refugees.  Puts population, according to '76 statistics, at
7,760,000, which would be higher than estimated '70 population.  Brushes off
substance of talks with Thais.  No progress appears to have been made on
eliminating Thai-Cambodian border conflict and on exch of ambs.  Absence of
achievement seen bearing out belief of Thai and diplomatic sources that Ieng
Sary went to Bangkok only because China wanted him to and not because Cambodia
is ready to abandon its isolationism and mil incursions.  Ieng Sary leaves
Bangkok for Yugoslavia.  Illus with Thai Prime Min Kriangsak Chamanand (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 199-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 19, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

Editorial takes note of China's breach with former allies Albania and Vietnam.
Interprets Vietnam's recent overtures toward relations with US as evidence of
anxiety over its northern neighbor.  Points out that during long Vietnam War
various US scholars had predicted renewal of centuries' old tensions between
China and Vietnam and that both Washington and Peking failed to grasp
implications of that likelihood (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 20

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 19, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY NORMAN PEAGAM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

Vietnam's official radio is broadcasting plight of Cambodian population.
Refugees in Thailand and Vietnam give virtually identical accts of life in
Cambodia.  Recent arrivals say conditions have not improved despite good crops,
steady consol of power by regime and internatl outrage.  Describe continuing
reign of terror in which many perish from forced labor and disease and there are
frequent executions.  Say population is organized into work collectives in which
almost everyone works up to 16 hrs a day.  Story of Net Phoumary as related by
radio noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 200-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 20, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 22 words

Laotian radio repts Laos has ended its neutrality and pledged full support for
Vietnam in its disputes with China and Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 201-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 20, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

China, switching from taking retaliatory action against Vietnam to recalling
their 'traditional friendship,' proposes on July 19 that they make fresh attempt
at negotiating settlement of question of repatriating ethnic Chinese living in
Vietnam.  Suggests, in view of deadlock in talks between lower-ranking
officials, issue be taken up at level of deputy foreign mins.  Move seen sign
that China considers it impossible to break deadlock that bars Chinese ships
from entering Vietnamese ports to evacuate Chinese (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 201-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 21, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Vietnam News Agency says Chinese border guards have refused to allow hundreds of
people of Chinese origin to cross bridge from Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 202-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Ed notes important steps Carter Adm has taken toward fulfilling US's obligations
to refugees from Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.  Notes it will admit 25,000 more
before next May under Pres's 'parole' authority, raising to 197,000 total number
authorized to enter US.  Holds US will have to provide for more to enter while
pressing other prosperous nations also to admit refugees (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 20

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 33 words

Hanoi radio repts Vietnam has accepted China's proposal to open talks on deputy
foreign min level on exodus of Chinese across Vietnamese borders.  Says talks
could start in Hanoi in Aug 8 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 205-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 20 words

China has no comment on Vietnam's acceptance of talks to settle their dispute on
exodus of Chinese from Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 205-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 24, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

About 20 Japanese men who stayed in Vietnam after World War II return to Japan
on July 23, saying they were forced out by econ pressure from Hanoi.  Say they
lost their jobs and were told to leave.  Rept seeing ethnic Chinese being hauled
away in mil trucks (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 205-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 26, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

Vietnam radio repts Vietnam has inducted more than 650,000 persons into armed
forces to protect itself against 'foreign aggressors' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 207-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 27, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 4

LENGTH: 43 words

Sen Edward M Kennedy says 5-member comm will visit Vietnam to arrange for
reunion of several children separated from their Amer fathers after '75
Communist takeover.  Says Vietnam has indicated it will permit departure of
children with their mothers (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 208-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 28, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Cuban Prime Min Fidel Castro scores China's treatment of Vietnam and attacks it
for what he says is gross criticism of his own African policies, speech,
Santiago, Cuba.  Says China is behind Cambodian attacks on Vietnam.  Charges US
is trying to turn nonaligned movement against Cuba.  Says it has approached 15
nations of movement, whose foreign mins are meeting in Belgrade (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 209-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 29, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Ed is unimpressed with Pres Carter's exec order on classified information and
public's right to know.  Holds that such orders, 1 of which was also issued by
ex-Pres Nixon, are sometimes used as cloaks for secretiveness.  Says Carter will
be judged not by his exec order but on his action in cases such as Govt
prosecution of former CIA agent Frank Snepp and of 2 agents for Vietnam.  Claims
he does deserve credit, however, for continuing rrend toward tighter definiation
of what can be stamped secret (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 21

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 29, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 91 words

Thailand, having been visited in last 2 wks by high-ranking officials of both
Vietnam and Cambodia, is taking more positive attitude toward ties with Vietnam
than with Cambodia.  Min Upadit Panchariyangkun, in int, describes his talks
with Vietnamese Deputy Min Phan Hien as showing encouraging movement toward
accepting position of SE Asian Nations Assn that region should be 1 of peace,
freedom and neutrality.  Says Cambodian Deputy Prime Min Ieng Sary, on other
hand, would only reaffirm Cambodia's desire to live in peace with Thailand (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 21

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            July 29, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 155 words

Cambodian Deputy Prime Min Ieng Sary says closing of Cambodia and evacuation of
Phnom Penh after Communists took over in '75 was necessary because there
otherwise would have been civil war, statement, Belgrade, where he is attending
conf of foreign mins from nonaligned nations.  Cambodia has asked for expulsion
of Vietnam from group as an aggressor and is seeking sympathy in its war with
its former allies.  Says Cambodia does not intend to maintain isolation, but it
is 'period of our revolution which requires this attitude'.  Says domestic
situation has improved to such an extent that Cambodia will take part in
internatl affairs and allow foreign visitors.  Says, for 1st time, that
revolutionaries considered Phnom Penh to be full of agents, ammo dumps and
conspiracies to undermine new regime, and therefore felt total evacuation to be
necessary.  Says Prince Sihanouk is now permitted to travel around country (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 210-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 30, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY SUZANNE GORDON

SECTION: Section 6; Page 23

LENGTH: 85 words

Profile of 93-year-old Helene Deutsch, last of original Freudians, focuses on
her renowned two-volume work The Psychology of Women, one of most comprehensive
psychoanalytic accounts of subject to date.  Notes Deutsch has been prime target
for many archfeminists in recent years because of her championing of Freudian
theories about women, but she has lived her life as a 'liberated' woman,
fighting for women's rights in '30's and marching against war in Vietnam while
in her '80's.  Photos of Deutsch (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 211-3

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             July 31, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 56 words

Hsinhua, Chinese press agency, protests that Vietnam is continuing to drive to
border areas and to harass Chinese natls who have not gone through formalities
for return to China.Vietnamese press agency accuses Chinese Embassy in Hanoi of
rejecting requests for entry visas from ethnic Chinese who returned from border
to get them (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 212-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 1, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 42 words

Vietnam demands that China accept more than 4,000 ethnic Chinese camped on
border in 2 northern provs.  China has said that only Chinese with papers issued
by Chinese Embassy in Hanoi and Vietnamese exixt visas will be allowed to cross
border (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 213-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 2, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

US intelligence rept says Vietnamese forces are bombing and strafing Cambodian
troops on unprecedented scale in their border war.  Says Vietnam is using
US-built planes (Sz).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 214-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 4, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Page 26, Column 2

LENGTH: 87 words

House votes 203 to 198 to reject amendment to $7.4 Billion foreign aid
appropriations bill which would have banned indirect use of foreign aid funds
for Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam and Uganda.  Action follows arguments claiming such
restrictions would require US withdrawal from international aid banks and other
institutions.  House also votes to cut $45 million from $3.8 Billion in direct
aid, with Israel, Egypt, Jordan and Syria exempted from cut.  Details of other
rejected amendments to foreign aid bill cited (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 216-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 4, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 102 words

Henry Kamm reports that sudden upsurge in refugees to Thailand from northwestern
Cambodia is believed largely result of thinning out of military guard in this
region.  Reports opinion of observers that absence of troops in this region is
result of transfer of Cambodian troops to main battlefront with Vietnam and is
first serious indication that conflict with Vietnam is placing severe strain on
Cambodia's military and manpower resources.  Says refugees cite harsh treatment,
food shortages and continuing executions of backers of former regime.  Finds
that Buddhist monks are reportedly being persecuted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 216-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 5, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ALFONSO A NARVAEZ

SECTION: Page 47, Column 3

LENGTH: 23 words

Veterans Adm regional office is conducting summer-long program to advise Vietnam
veterans in NJ of their educ benefits under GI Bill (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 217-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 5, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 95 words

Representatives of Assn of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) say they enjoy
satisfactory to good relations with Communist countries in the region.
Philippines Foreign Min Carlos P Romulo, ASEAN spokesman, says membership for
Vietnam would require consensus vote.  Joint statement issued by ASEAN and US
says they have agreed to form common fund to promote stabilization of supplies
and prices for goods produced in developing countries.  ASEAN ministers agree to
form business council with US.  Ministers were visiting US for discussions with
Carter Administration (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 217-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 5, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 22 words

Hanoi radio reports that about 2,000 ethnic Chinese who fled into China from
Vietnam Aug 1 have been forced back into Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 217-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 6, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MICHAEL WRIGHT and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 70 words

Summary of Belgrade (Yugoslavia) conference of nonaligned countries finds
delegates failed to take stand on Vietnam-Cambodia border war or
Somalia-Ethiopia conflict, and sidestepped energy policy.  Holds final
declaration condemning expansionism is study in ambiguity, since Cambodia
interprets clause as directed against Vietnam, Vietnam sees it directed toward
China, and China defines it as applying to USSR (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 218-3

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 6, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 5

LENGTH: 31 words

NY-NJ-Conn House of Representatives roll-call vote on amendment to prohibit use
of funds to provide aid to Uganda, Cambodia, Laos or Vietnam which was rejected
203 to 198.  Chart (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 218-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 6, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 81 words

West Point superintendent Lieut Gen Andrew J Goodpaster comments that new morals
and ethics course at West Point aims to produce officers better qualified to
deal with kinds of corruption that afflicted US Army during last stages of
Vietnam war.  Cites problems of faked reports on states of readiness or
equipment and other 'corrupt' information forwarded to higher headquarters.
Decline in discipline is cited as related to questionable practices by officers
during Vietnam war (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 218-4

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             August 6, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 89 words

Henry Kamm analyzes rift between China and Vietnam, allegedly caused by
Vietnam's alliance with USSR.  Says observers do not fear war.  Notes that
economic mismanagement by Hanoi Government coupled with widespread resistance to
Government by South Vietnamese caused Hanoi to turn to USSR for economic
assistance.  Discounts speculation that China broke with Vietnam over its
treatment of Chinese minority.  Notes opinion that China has thrown its support
more behind Cambodia as a state than behind regime of Prime Min Pol Pot (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 21

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 8, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Vietnam Prime Min Pham Van Dong allows US delegation to facilitate first reunion
of Vietnamese wives and children with their American husbands and fathers since
'75 communist victory.  Vietnamese Govt withdraws conditions which it had
previously imposed on US, apparently as move toward normalizing diplomatic
relations.  US delegation members Jerry M Tinker and RC Archbishop Philip M
Hannan concur in belief that Vietnamese Govt's initiative is sincere.  Photo of
Vietnamese-American family reunion (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 220-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 9, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 79 words

World Bank affiliate International Development Assn approves $60-million
long-term, low-interest loan to Vietnam for $110-million irrigation system that
will expand rice production by 100,000 tons annually in southwestern section of
country.  Credit will be supplemented by $30-million loan from Netherlands,
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development and OPEC Special Fund.  US opposed
credit, in accordance with Congressional opposition to foreign aid to Vietnam
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 221-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 9, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 90 words

China's Deputy Foreign Min Chung Hsi-tung during first session of China-Vietnam
refugee talks accuses Hanoi of impairing relations between China and Vietnam by
reneging on '55 agreement between two countries on status of ethnic Chinese in
Vietnam.  Two countries accuse each other of trying to dominate Southeast Asia
and are reportedly at loggerheads over Cambodia.  Related article discusses
reports by Vietnamese official press agency that Chinese security men roused
Chinese crowd stranded at border to attack Vietnamese personnel (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 221-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 10, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 25

LENGTH: 101 words

Group of 28 persons, including last known US citizens stranded in Vietnam during
'75 communist takeover, comes to US and is reunited with families.  Was allowed
to leave Vietnam as result of initative headed by Sen Edward Kennedy and aided
by Red Cross and UN.  Included David Gerzevske, who had not seen wife Nguyen Thi
No and three children since '75.  State Dept official Frank Sieverts emphasizes
there are about 300 relatives of Americans still in Vietnam who do not hold US
citizenship.  Mentions there are about 5,000 relatives of Vietnamese refugees
who would like to join families in US (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 222-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 10, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY PEGGY SIMPSON

SECTION: Page 1

LENGTH: 100 words

Pres Carter's proposal to overhaul civil service system faces challenges in HR.
Some of strongest opposition comes from fellow Democrats.  Bill seeks to create
elite corps of 9,000 Federal managers, streamline procedures to ease firing of
incompetents and reduce veterans' lifetime Federal jobs preference to open up
more Federal jobs to disabled and Vietnam veterans.  Carter supporters must
delete labor-backed provision that would weaken prohibitions on Federal workers'
political activity to win overall bill, but such action would elicit barrage of
amendments from labor-backed Democrats (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 222-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 12, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 31

LENGTH: 22 words

Three US naval vessels, carrying 77 Vietnamese refugees who were picked up off
coast of Vietnam Aug 9, arrive in Thailand (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 224-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 15, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY EDMOND LEBRETON

SECTION: Page 85

LENGTH: 64 words

House passes $7.1 Billion foreign aid appropriation, 223-167.  Applies 2% cut to
most items in measure, thereby reducing $7.3 billion figure.  Exempts funds for
Israel and Egypt from across-the-board cuts.  Rejects Repr Clarence E Miller's
proposal to slash bill by 8%.  Votes 241-152 to forbid use of US money
contributed to International Development Assn for loans to Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 227-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 15, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 77

LENGTH: 59 words

China lodges formal protest with Vietnam over alleged incursion by Vietnamese
forces into Yunnan Province bordering Vietnam and their interference with
workers in field of a collective farm.  Meanwhile, Vietnamese Communist Party
calls on people to prepare to defend Vietnam against a 'war of aggression'.
Other charges and countercharges noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 227-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 15, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 37

LENGTH: 68 words

Chinese refugees leaving Vietnam for China say that they were driven out by
measures taken against private business at Cholon, center of Chinese life in
Vietnam.  Also report rumor that legal emigration to a Western country is
feasible from China.  Another reason they give for the exodus is fear of
possible warfare between China and Vietnam.  Businessman refugee describes his
experiences in Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 227-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 15, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 151

LENGTH: 63 words

Presidential adviser Stuart Eizenstat maintains, in Issues and Answers TV
interview, that Carter's drop in popularity in polls reflects post-Watergate,
post-Vietnam era of mistrust in elected officials.  Blames legislative problems
on 'marked decline in party loyalty' in Congress and still-evolving
relationships between legislative and executive branches of Government (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 227-4

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 16, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 36

LENGTH: 135 words

Tran Van Han, refugee in Thailand from North Vietnam, describes life in Roman
Catholic villages in North that have existed since division of Vietnam in '54
almost officially ignored by Hanoi Government, interview.  Villages were totally
distrusted, men excluded from draft, no Communist Party sections created, no
Government schools created and mail reached village only by messenger when
addressed in care of Catholic Archdiocese of Hanoi.  Residents had been allowed
to sell only part of fish catch, were not included in distribution system and
had to buy clothing and necessities from neighboring villages at black-market
prices.  Villagers reportedly listened to South Vietamese broadcasts and were
surprised when North won war.  US planes periodically bombed villages, killing
and maiming residents (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 22

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 20, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 57

LENGTH: 87 words

China presents four-point proposal to Vietnam on solving problem of Chinese
residents in North Vietnam.  Calls for gradually guiding Chinese in Vietnam onto
course of adopting Vietnamese nationality voluntarily through persuasion and
education.  Says Vietnam must stop persecution and expulsion of Chinese
residents.  Proposal is submitted at third session of Sino-Vietnam negotiations.
Chinese officials claim about 160,000 Chinese have returned from Vietnam to
China and over 10,000 more have applied to return (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 232-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 21, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 28

LENGTH: 29 words

Cambodia challenges Vietnam's claim to Wei Island, Gulf of Thailand, stating
island has been Cambodian territory since 'time immemorial', broadcast Radio
Phnom Penh (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 233-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 22, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 37

LENGTH: 42 words

Tufts University pres Jean Mayer, chairman of President's Commission on World
Hunger, declares US should help Vietnam solve its severe problems of hunger and
overpopulation.  Will report on his recent Vietnam trip to Senate Judiciary
Committee (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 234-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 22, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DENIS D GRAY

SECTION: Page 105

LENGTH: 62 words

Repr G V Montgomery, among 8 congressmen visiting Vietnam and Laos to obtain
information about Americans missing in action there, reportedly learned from
Vice Foreign Min Phan Hien that Vietnam had found and would return remains of 11
more Americans, unnamed, missing in action.  Reports Vietnam has set up an
organization to search for Americans missing in action (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 234-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 23, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DENIS D GRAY

SECTION: Page 55

LENGTH: 90 words

Vietnamese officials inform visiting US Congressmen they are eager for full
relations with US, and promise to return remains of 11 more US servicemen killed
in Vietnam War.  Premier Pham Van Dong reports Vietnam is dropping its demand
for reparations for destruction caused by war, and Vice Foreign Min Phan Hien
accepts invitation to visit US.  Foreign Min spokesman Ngho Diem reveals China
is attempting to persuade other countries to 'follow their line,' but maintains
Vietnam is not 'tool' of any other country, including USSR (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 235-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 23, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD PYLE

SECTION: Page 33

LENGTH: 87 words

Senate mission, which recently toured Vietnam under auspices of Senate Judiciary
subcommittee on refugees, calls for US to establish full relations with Hanoi
and provide extensive humanitarian aid to help speed Vietnam's recovery.
Maintains country has pressing need for food, medical supplies, fertilizer and
other commodities, and that responding to needs would restore US prestige in
Southeast Asia.  Urges US to lift '76 trade embargo and pledge at least $10
million for relief of Cambodian refugees in Vietnam (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 235-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 24, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 57

LENGTH: 78 words

Bangkok (Thailand) sources report that Vietnamese troops have invaded rubber
plantation border area northeast of Phnom Penh, have captured district capital
of Snuol since July 28 and control area around district capital of Mimot,
probably including town.  At same time, Cambodian antigovernment insurgents,
trained in Vietnam and reinfiltrated into Cambodia, are active west of
plantation region.  Cambodian attack to retake Snuol is said to have been
repulsed (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 236-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 24, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DENIS D GRAY

SECTION: Page 125

LENGTH: 71 words

Profile of Hanoi (Vietnam) finds continuing austerity and absence of luxuries
and return of military uniforms and war preparations as territorial and
political disputes with Cambodia and China worsen.  Shortages of housing,
schools, hospitals and essential necessities detailed.  Contrast is made between
lower-priced Government food stores, and privately run markets.  Importance of
bicycle for transportation noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 236-4

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 24, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 7

LENGTH: 87 words

David Binder sees cautious renewal by US of its tangled Indochina policy after
pause of many months.  Holds that caution stems from shifting relations between
Vietnam, China and Cambodia as they are caution deriving with debacle of final
defeat of US forces in Vietnam Cambodia and Laos.  Argues that Vietnam's current
border war with Cambodia and troubles with China have made it abandon
reparations claims against US.  Contends that Vietnam is only country in area
upon which US can hope to attain any leverage (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 23

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 25, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 63

LENGTH: 74 words

US Cong delegation visiting Vietnam announces names of 8 of 11 Amer Vietnam war
dead whose remains are to be turned over to delegation.  8 names listed.  Since
end of war in '75 Vietnam has delivered remains of 38 other Amers.  About 2,500
others are still unaccounted for.  Delegation head Repr G V Montgomery says
after meeting with N Vietnamese that he believes that none of them is alive.
Reprs Sam G Hall and W Henson Moore comment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 237-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 25, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY DENIS D GRAY

SECTION: Page 61

LENGTH: 90 words

8 Congressmen, 1st US delegation to visit Ho Chi Minh City since Communist
victory in '75, greeted warmly.  Delegation is headed by Repr G V Montgomery.  3
sr Vietnamese officials meeting Amers include Natl Assembly member Madame Ngo Ba
Thanh, who spent yrs in prison under fallen, US-backed Saigon Govt.  Vietnamese
Premier Pham Van Dong has promised delegation that Vietnam will return remains
of 11 US servicemen missing in action during war.  Montgomery says Vice Foreign
Min Phan Hien has accepted delegation's inv to visit US (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 237-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 33

LENGTH: 40 words

Eight-member Congressional delegation arrives in Vientiane, Laos, after visit to
Vietnam's Tay Ninh province for look at border war between Vietnam and Cambodia
and vist to camp for Cambodian refugees.  Members of delegation noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 238-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 158

LENGTH: 30 words

Vietnam and China report fighting incident at a border crossing point inside
Vietnam.  Several deaths and many injuries reported.  Different versions of the
incident detailed (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 238-4

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 26, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 140, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

Two high school teachers and a Saigon university student who left Vietnam in
early August say that the education system of what was once South Vietnam is
overwhelmingly political and evidently designed to eradicate traces of political
past from young people's minds.  Changes in school curriculum and administration
after communist takeover detailed (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 238-4

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 27, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FRANCIS K ICHIGAYA

SECTION: Page 17

LENGTH: 90 words

Border clash between Vietnam and People's Republic of China leaves six dead and
dozens wounded on Aug 25.  Episode began at Friendship Gate, about 100 miles
northeast of Hanoi, and then allegedly spread into Chinese territory.  Two sides
offer conflicting accounts of clash.  Root of conflict is issue of ethnic
Chinese in Vietnam.  China claims more than 160,000 Chinese fled Vietnam because
they were persecuted by authorities.  Vietnam claims 2,000 refugees are camped
at Friendship Gate because China closed border on July 12 (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 239-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 29, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT B CULLEN

SECTION: Page 43

LENGTH: 96 words

Delegation of congressmen returns from Vietnam reporting a 'fundamental and
dramatic change' in Vietnam's attitude toward diplomatic relations with the US.
Says Vietnamese officials no longer demand $3 billion in war reparations as a
condition for establishment of diplomatic relations.  Repr John Murtha says
committee report will be 'piece of paper' Carter Administration needs to see
changes in Vietnam's attitude.Repr Henson Moore reports Vietnamese have
appointed a full-time committee to search for remains of 340 US servicemen who
are still missing in action (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 241-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 29, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY BRUCE DUNFORD

SECTION: Page 15

LENGTH: 97 words

Repr Sam Hall Jr, member of special House committee which recently went to
Vietnam and Laos for 6-day visit, reports Vietnamese are interested in onshore
and offshore oil and gas exploration, and that US companies may be able to
participate in development of resources if US-Vietnam relations are restored.
Notes Vietnamese have been drilling in Mekong Delta, where oil has sulphur
content of less than 2%, but not in commercial quantities.  Reveals committee
was also given remains of 15 US servicemen killed in Indochina war, which were
taken to lab for identification (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 241-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            August 29, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 127

LENGTH: 43 words

2 military officers of former Saigon regime who escaped from Vietnam after
imprisonment in 're-education' camp claim they were forced to do hard labor on
hunger diet and were subjected to brain-washing.  Say physical mistreatment
occurred but was rare (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 241-5

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 30, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 90

LENGTH: 83 words

Jane Fonda and Tom Hayden sent telegram to Pres Carter urging him to
diplomatically intervene in Cambodia to stop widespread reported executions
there.  Recommend that Carter urge China to sever its military support of
Cambodia, in return for which US would improve relations with China and
normalize relations with Vietnam by lifting embargo against Vietnam.  Disagree
with Sen George McGovern's proposal that international military force be formed
to overthrow Cambodia's communist regime (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 242-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 30, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 76

LENGTH: 57 words

Chinese news agency Hsinhua alleges Vietnamese security forces are tearing down
houses of ethnic Chinese living in Vietnam near Chinese border.  Also alleges
Vietnam is halting food rations to Chinese near border.  Report follows
allegations that Vietnamese troops advanced 1,000 yd into Chinese territory and
erected barbed-wire fence (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 242-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 30, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4

LENGTH: 96 words

Chinese Embassy in Hanoi lodges vigorous protest with Vietnamese Foreign
Ministry over Vietnamese troops' alleged incursion into China.  Chinese news
agency Hsinhua has reported that Vietnamese troops moved 1,000 yds into Chinese
territory and then erected barbed wire fences.  Also alleges Vietnamese security
forces are tearing down houses of ethnic Chinese living in Vietnam near
Chinese-Vietnamese border.  Charges Vietnam has terminated food rations for
Chinese residents of Vietnam, in effort to force them out of border region or
adopt Vietnamese citizenship (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 242-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           August 31, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD PYLE

SECTION: Page 55

LENGTH: 101 words

Deputy Asst State Sec Frank Sieverts, coordinator of prisoner-of-war and
missing-in-action affairs, declares that Vietnam seems willing to make
information about recovered American remains available to US officials at
'workable level'.  Bangkok (Thailand) is mentioned as likily site for meeting
between Vietnamese and US officials.  Sieverts adds that it is possible that
Vietnamese would allow US plane to pick up bodies without having to wait for
visit by official US delegation.  Concedes that Vietnamese may be holding bodies
for political concessions, but finds this difficult to ascertain (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 243-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 1, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 59

LENGTH: 67 words

Repr George Danielson asserts Congressional fact-finding committee that toured
Vietnam and Laos will recommend that US servicemen classified as
missing-in-action be reclassified as killed-in-action.  Is convinced there are
no US prisoners of war alive in Southeast Asia.  Congressional delegation
brought back to US remains of 15 servicemen released to them by Vietnamese and
Laotian Governments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 244-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 1, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 173

LENGTH: 122 words

Thailand faces diplomatic problems in attempt to normalize relations with
Communist countries.  Falling out among People's Republic of China and Cambodia
on one side and Vietnam on other complicates Thailand's efforts.  Thailand is
aware that warming of relations with either side would jeopardize relations it
is trying to establish with Communist countries and those between Communist
nations and Assn of Southeast Asian Nations.  Vietnam has told Thailand that it
would like to conclude friendship treaty.  Prospect of treaty troubles Thailand
because of displeasure it would arouse in China and Cambodia.  In related
development, Vietnamese Prime Min Pham Van Dong will arrive in Thailand for
five-day official visit on Sept 6

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 244-2

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 2, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 23

LENGTH: 110 words

US officials report USSR has conducted major airlift of military and civilian
supplies to Vietnam over past several weeks in wake of worsening relations
between Vietnam and China and Cambodia.  Say airlift involved 15 to 20 planes
with stops in Pakistan and India and that airlift ended within past few days.
Indicate some intelligence reports say that USSR sent technicians to replace
Chinese technicians who left Vietnam as tensions between Hanoi and Peking
mounted this summer.  Note that USSR military advisers were also believed aboard
flights.  Add USSR supplying of Vietnam has been going on for years, and this
airlift was not extraordinary (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 245-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 3, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 66

LENGTH: 72 words

Veterans Adm reports number of veterans using GI bill to attend college declined
28%, from 1.9 Million in fiscal '76 to 1.38 million in '77.  Asserts decline
coincides with peak '67-'68 years of Vietnam War since vets have 10 years from
date of discharge to use benefits.  Reveals $3.9 Billion was provided in '77,
noting 1.2 Million vets are seeking undergraduate degrees and over 150,000
veterans are in graduate schools (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 24

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 5, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY TOM WICKER

SECTION: Page 95

LENGTH: 98 words

Tom Wicker analyzes Sen George McGovern's recent statement suggesting that
international community use military force to end savagery of Cambodian regime.
Holds that while Cambodian actions are repellent to any civilized person,
McGovern's advocacy of armed intervention seems uncharacteristic since he was
anti-war movement leader.  Points out, however, that many movement members
originally supported Vietnam War, and suggests it may not be too surprising that
old impulse to clean up world would surface again.  Cites other factors that may
have prompted McGovern's statement (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 24

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 5, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 67

LENGTH: 71 words

China's chief negotiator with Vietnam Chung Hsi-tung has reportedly returned to
Hanoi to renew talks on issue of alleged Vietnamese harassment of ethnic Chinese
living in Vietnam.  Chung's sudden departure from talks on Aug 28, following
flurry of accusations over Chinese-Vietnamese battle at Yu Yi friendship pass,
led to speculation Peking had broken off talks.  Details of controversy, and of
Yu Yi battle, cited (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 248-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 6, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY FRANCIS K ICHIGAYA

SECTION: Page 78

LENGTH: 71 words

Hsinhua, official news agency of People's Republic of China, reports that
Cambodia charges USSR sent military advisers, tank crews and material to Vietnam
in '77 to back major Cambodian invasion by Vietnamese troops.  Notes Cambodia
claims USSR wants to gain control of Southeast Asia and use Vietnamese forces as
mercenaries.  Contends statement was issued by Cambodian Foreign Ministry and
broadcast by Cambodia radio (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 249-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 7, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 148

LENGTH: 130 words

Vietnamese Prime Min Pham Van Dong arrives in Bangkok, Thailand, for five-day
official visit during which he is expected to make overtures to link Vietnam
with Assn of Southest Asia Nations (ASEAN).  Diplomats report Thailand as well
as other ASEAN member-nations intend to resist overtures.  Say Thailand,
unwilling to offend Vietnam's enemy China, is not prepared to sign any sort of
friendship treaty with Vietnam.  Note Thailand will try to have Dong agree not
to assist subversive activities in the other country.  Vietnam is suspected of
providing arms and training to Thai Communist guerrillas at Laotian border.
Diplomats indicate Thai officials expect communique from visit to restate
traditional diplomatic themes and perhaps take some steps to activate trade (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 250-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 8, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY VISETSAK SANGUANGPONG

SECTION: Page 123

LENGTH: 90 words

Vietnamese Premier Pham Van Dong, on second day of visit to Thailand, and Thai
Prime Min Kriangsak Chamanand issue joint communique detailing new agreement
between countries.  Agreement calls for release of 30 Thai fishermen and 2
trawlers captured off Vietnamese coast, cooperation in telecommunications,
postal service, agriculture and fishing matters, creation of committee to
repatriate Vietnamese who fled to Thailand, and end to Vietnam's demand for
aircraft and ships taken to Thailand by those fleeing fall of South Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 251-3

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 12, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 98, Column 0

LENGTH: 63 words


Military experts have confirmed identification of remains of 11 US fliers
returned to US by Vietnam in August.  remains, now in Hawaii, will be flown to
Travis Air Force Base in California Sept 12 and given full military honors.
names of 11 fliers listed.  in related development, remains of 4 US fliers
returned by Laotian Government have still not been identified (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 12, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 98

LENGTH: 62 words

Military experts have confirmed identification of remains of 11 US fliers
returned to US by Vietnam in August.  Remains, now in Hawaii, will be flown to
Travis Air Force Base in California Sept 12 and given full military honors.
Names of 11 fliers listed.  In related development, remains of 4 US fliers
returned by Laotian Government have still not been identified (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 255-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 14, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 71

LENGTH: 85 words

Vietnam and China argue at talks on their conflict over ethnic Vietnamese who
are among 160,000 supposedly Chinese refugees who have fled from Vietnam to
China.  China's negotiator calls for Vietnam to take back their own citizens who
have been driven to China by Vietnamese Government.  Vietnam's Deputy Foreign
Min Hoang Bich Son replies that China could not first claim Hanoi was
persecuting ethnic Chinese in Vietnam and then arbitrarily call them Vietnamese
citizens.  Other issues in talks detailed (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 257-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 14, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 56

LENGTH: 109 words

Washington Post reports Federal authorities are pondering whether to prosecute
former US Amb Graham Martin for keeping classified documents presumably taken
along when US citizens were evacuated from South Vietnam in '75.  Says any
prosecution could involve seldom-used statute barring misuse of classified
documents.  Quotes Martin as saying he considered materials to be his personal
property and that he intended to turn them over to Lyndon B Johnson Library.
Cites unnamed official as saying documents include CIA communications between
Saigon embassy and Washington and cover entire period of US involvement in
Vietnam war from '63 to '75 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 257-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 15, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 85

LENGTH: 77 words

Existence of top-secret Government papers, taken by former Ambassador to Vietnam
Graham Martin before fall of Saigon in '75 and later kept in trunk of his car,
was reportedly disclosed by a Winston-Salem high school student.  Student then
identified car thieves who had stolen car and found documents.  Car thieves were
later given their freedom by FBI in exchange for their help and the documents.
Martin contends documents are his personal property (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 258-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 16, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 64

LENGTH: 55 words

Vietnam veteran Giles Pace arrives in Rhodesia Sept 15 with plans to set up
armed mission stations along border being areas infiltrated by black nationalist
guerrillas.  Former Green Beret Pace claims he was recruited by Chicago-based
Church of Christian Liberty and that he is forerunner of a 300-man expeditionary
force (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 259-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 17, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 20

LENGTH: 26 words

Vietnamese Premier Pham Van Dong begins five-day visit of Philippines Sept 17.
Visit is second stop on tour of Vietnam's non-Communist neighbors (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 260-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 19, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DONALD SANDERS

SECTION: Page 5

LENGTH: 97 words

Former US Information Agency employee Ronald L Humphrey, who was convicted of
spying for communist Vietnam, is released from prison pending outcome of
appeals, with only requirement that he appear in court if ordered to do so.
Release follows District Judge Albert V Bryan Jr's recent order reducing bail
from $150,000 to $75,000.  Calvary Baptist Church Rev Dr George W Hill reports
he coordinated effort to raise money for Humphrey, and notes major contributors
were American Baptist Church's board of ministries, American Friends Service
Committee and Prison Fellowship (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 262-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 21, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 90

LENGTH: 134 words

Dispute between China, Vietnam and Cambodia has now spread to Laos.  Diplomatic
sources in Peking report that Chinese leader Hua Kuo-feng told visiting former
French Prime Min Jacques Chirac that Laos is now completely under civilian and
military control of Vietnam.  China is said to have charged during continuing,
but acrimonious, talks with Vietnam that Hanoi has stationed massive forces in
unnamed country in attempt to gain control over all of Indochina.  Unconfirmed
reports from Bangkok (Thailand) sources say that China has withdrawn 2,500
civilian and military technicians from northern Laos where they had been
building series of roads in sparsely populated region.  Diplomats in Hong Kong
assert that China could cause Vietnam serious difficulties in Laos at little
risk to itself (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 264-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 21, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 88

LENGTH: 43 words

Vietnamese Prime Min Pham Van Dong arrives in Jakarta (Indonesia) for 3-day
official visit.  Is welcomed by Pres Suharto.  Object of trip is believed to be
to seek diplomatic support or neutrality in Vietnam's continuing dispute with
China and Cambodia (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 264-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 21, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 45

LENGTH: 75 words

Senate passes $1.7 Billion economic aid bill designed to meet basic human needs
and $1.9 Billion foreign relations appropriations bill.  Latter bill authorizes
funds for State Dept, International Communications Agency, Board for
International Broadcasting and other programs in '79.  Includes prohibion on use
of funds for aid or reparations to Vietnam and requests that Pres Carter review
relations with Cuba in light of its African activities (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 264-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 22, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 111

LENGTH: 109 words

Concept of Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality (ZOPFAN), originally shunned by
Communist nations in Asia, now is being approved by China, Vietnam and USSR.
ZOPFAN, which was proposed by Malaysia and approved by Assn of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) members when they concluded US would not win Vietnam War, is an
unclarified diplomatic concept pertaining to Southeast Asia region.  Vietnam
tries to declare region a Zone of Genuine Independence, Peace and Neutrality,
then refuses to make its concept any clearer than ZOPFAN.  China is expected to
express its view of concept when Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping visits ASEAN
members in Nov (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 234-5

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 23, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY LAWRENCE L KNUTSON

SECTION: Page 3

LENGTH: 79 words

Senate, by 39-20 vote, passes $9.2 Billion economic foreign aid bill.  Includes
Frank Church amendment cutting off most aid to Nicaragua and holding up $2.5
Million in fiscal '78 aid because of human rights violations.  Senators had
refused to reduce to $500,000 from $1.8 billion, US contributions to an IMF fund
that helps poor nations cope with oil price rises.  Had also refused to ban
indirect aid to Vietnam and Cuba through international financial institutions
(L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 266-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 23, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY CYNTHIA KYLE

SECTION: Page 1

LENGTH: 86 words

National Organizing Conference to Stop Government Spying contends Law
Enforcement Intelligence Unit (LEIU) created to monitor organized crime is also
clearinghouse for information about private citizens' political activities.
Claims LEIU kept secret records on anti-nuclear demonstrators, Vietnam War
protesters, black activists and American Indians.  Documents obtained in suit
filed against Chicago police cover 8 people who were targeted for police
scrutiny solely because of their political activities (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 266-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 25, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 20

LENGTH: 67 words

Cambodian Premier Pol Pot reportedly accuses USSR of plotting to seize control
of Southeast Asia under guise of a federation with Vietnam.  Asserts that area
would then be used as a springboard for invading other countries.  Contends plan
is being obstructed by Cambodian resistance.  Maintains that imperialist and
expansionist elements have invented reports of Cambodian massacres of civilians
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 268-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           September 25, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY GEORGE KRIMSKY

SECTION: Page 2

LENGTH: 97 words

Al Fatah official Salah Khalaf contends US Amb to Lebanon Francis Meloy,
economic adviser Robert Waring and chauffeur Zuhair Moghrabi were murdered
during '75-'76 Lebanese civil war by Lebanese leftists who hoped to drag US into
conflict.Claims informant overheard trio's assassins saying they hoped murders
would bring US intervention in Lebanon, war between Syrians and Palestinians,
and transformation of Lebanon into new Vietnam.  Notes anti-American leftist
Lebanese group Arab Socialist Action Party announced support for murders without
claiming responsibility for them (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 268-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          September 28, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 55

LENGTH: 131 words

Communist courting of non-Communist nations of Southeast Asia enhances stature
of their regional organization, Assn of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), to
greater degree than it has been able to achieve in 11 years of uneventful
existence.  Organization, consisting of Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Singapore and Thailand, was condemned as a Western, specifically American,
puppet by China, USSR and Vietnam.  Courting of ASEAN began slowly when China,
in pursuit of its present moderate and conciliatory policy to every nation
except USSR and Vietnam, found it politic in '77 not only to further good
relations with ASEAN countries individually, but also to give its blessing to
ASEAN as a group.  China's action spurred USSR and Vietnam to become more
friendly with ASEAN (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 271-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 2, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY EDITH M LEDERER

SECTION: Page 29

LENGTH: 55 words

Australian TV personality Graham Kennedy discusses his new movie The Odd, Angry
Shot, first non-US movie about Vietnam.  Hopes movie, biting comedy about
Australia's oft-forgotten participation in Vietnam War, will be sold overseas,
especially in US, so that Americans can see aspect of Vietnam from Australian
viewpoint (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 275-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 3, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 78

LENGTH: 75 words

Cambodia's Prime Min Pol Pot attacks Vietnam and USSR as aggressors and
expansionists and predicts even heavier defeats for Vietnam during speech read
over Phnompenh radio Sept 29.  Tone of Pol Pot's speech is martial,
unconciliatory and studded with apocalyptic remarks presenting struggle as one
for survival of Cambodian people.  Links USSR and Vietnam in charges of
attempting to seize all of Southeast Asia.  Other details from speech (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 276-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 5, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 70

LENGTH: 103 words

Vietnam appeals to the international community for food relief because of the
disastrous floods that are ravaging much of Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and
Thailand.  However, a knowledgeable international official attributes Vietnam's
long-term food problem to more deep-seated problems including pervasive pests
that have wrought havoc with rice, the national staple food, in the north and
south and lack of pesticides and spraying equipment to combat them.  Official
also says that a solution to Vietnam's basic rice problem is planting of
resistant strains, the seeds of which are not available in the country (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 278-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY JONATHAN KANDELL

SECTION: Page 42

LENGTH: 85 words

French leftist press and intellectuals are becoming disillusioned with
liberation movements abroad and more critical of events in Indochina, Africa,
Middle East and elsewhere in third world.  Bitter relations between French
Communists and Socialists has led non-Communist left to challenge traditional
Marxist concepts.  Leading leftist weekly Le Nouvel Observateur's series
critical of political repression in third world cited.  Review of French leftist
criticism of situation in Vietnam and Cambodia (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 280-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 8, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 74

LENGTH: 64 words

Thousands of Chinese refugees from Vietnam who fled to Canton, China, in hopes
of emigrating to Hong Kong have recently been sent to work in state farms in
China's countryside, according to refugee sources.  Refugees were driven away in
trucks after Chinese authorities closed down overcrowded hostel where they had
been staying since their escape from Vietnam in summer '78 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 281-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 8, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 28

LENGTH: 110 words

Malcolm Browne interviews Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min Nguyen Co Thach.  Thach
contends People's Republic of China deliberately hamstrung Vietnamese Communist
war efforts against US.  Suggests that current Chinese threats have forced
Vietnam to brace for war with China itself.  Maintains Vietnam's troubles with
China go back long time and have nothing to do with fact that Vietnam is ally of
USSR.  Holds that relations with Chinese are based on how useful country is to
China's strategic interests.  Reviews China's current relations with Cambodia.
Disputes Chinese charge that Vietnam has been using violence against and
expelling ethnic Chinese (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 28

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 8, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 25

LENGTH: 100 words

Analysts of Indochinese affairs in Bangkok report growing signs of military
buildup by Vietnam and Cambodia during monsoon season.  Conclude Vietnam is
preparing major military offensive and Cambodia is girding for it.  Deduce from
intelligence data that Vietnam's north-south transport network has since June
'77 carried massive military traffic of men and supplies southward toward
Cambodia.  Believe Vietnam has not been deterred by heavy political pressure
from People's Republic of China in carrying out presumed objective of
overthrowing regime of Prime Min Pol Pot by military action (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 281-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 11, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY H JOSEF HEBERT

SECTION: Page 82

LENGTH: 135 words

Vice Pres Mondale announces that Carter Administration study of Vietnam veterans
shows that their unemployment rate is now better than for non-veterans, their
income is higher and drug abuse among them is declining.  However, notes that
20% are found to face readjustment problems, especially disabled or
minority-group veterans.  Reports Government will try harder to hire Vietnam
veterans for Federally funded jobs and will expand treatment for veterans
suffering psychological problems.  Notes that 'a fitting memorial' will be
established for Americans who died or are missing in action in Vietnam war.
Reports that Administration will ask for extension of GI Bill education
benefits.  Council of Vietnam Veterans Inc leader Robert Muller maintains that
problems are greater than study portrays (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 28

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 12, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY MIKE SHANAHAN

SECTION: Page 57

LENGTH: 137 words

Veterans Administration reports that about 500 Vietnam War veterans have filed
disability claims for ill effects allegedly suffered from exposure to herbicide
Agent Orange.  Officials state that there is no positive evidence that herbicide
was to blame, and, consequently, 72 applicants have been refused, 8 have been
approved and rest are pending.  Meanwhile, Air Force Deputy Surgeon Gen, Maj Gen
Garth Dettinger, tells HR Veterans Affairs subcommittee that best evidence is
that herbicide causes no permanent damage.  VA official Dr Paul Haber concurs,
saying that any veteran seeking treatment for problems believed caused by
herbicides will be treated, but predicts that claims by Vietnamese doctors that
herbicides have caused infertility, cancer and other disorders will be proved
false in future research (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 285-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 13, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY DENIS D GRAY

SECTION: Page 54

LENGTH: 75 words

Monsoon floods and rains across Indochina peninsula leave thousands facing
starvation and millions more in need of emergency relief.  Floods destroy large
quantities of vital rice crop and stall postwar reconstruction.  Western and
local officials say economies of Vietnam and Laos will require international aid
to survive.  Harm done to agricultural base in Thailand and Cambodia is also
serious, but not as serious as in Vietnam and Laos (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 286-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 14, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 30

LENGTH: 64 words

Henry Kamm reports that Malaysia is treating visiting Vietnam's Prime Min Pham
Van Dong with polite caution, determined to maintain its neutrality.  Finds that
principal result of Dong's tour of Southeast Asian states has been 'remarkable
display of political cohesion' among Assn of Southeast Asian Nations to avoid
siding with Vietnam in its conflict with China and Cambodia (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 287-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 14, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Page 26

LENGTH: 64 words

Cambodian Deputy Premier Ieng Sary tells news conference at UN that he has
invited UN Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim to visit his country 'to see for himself'
whether allegations of human rights violations are true.  Claims former
Cambodian ruler Prince Norodom Sihanouk is leading comfortable life in his
palace.  Blames Cambodia's current problems on Vietnam's hopes of annexing it
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 287-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 17, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 63

LENGTH: 83 words

Vietnam's Prime Min Pham Van Dong asserts at Malaysian news conference that he
feels 'very wicked' about burden which flow of refugees from Vietnam is imposing
on Malaysia.  Malaysian Prime Min Datuk Hussein bin Onn declares in separate
news conference that Malaysia would continue to give temporary shelter to
Vietnamese boats reaching country.  Emphasizes he did not request that Dong take
measures to prevent refugees from departing.  Expresses concern about eventual
fate of refugees (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 290-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 19, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 52

LENGTH: 83 words

Cambodian Premier Pol Pot, in interview published in Istanbul (Turkey), accuses
Soviet Union of using Vietnam in Indochina in similar way it uses Cuba in Africa
and of having expansionist designs on Southeast Asia.  Vietnamese Deputy Pres
Nguyen Huu Tho, in report published in Bulgaria, claims that China is involved
in war against Vietnam and has been helping Cambodia for three years.
Vietnamese-Cambodian border war still continues, folowing Communist takeover of
both countries in 1975 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 292-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 21, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY NORMAN PEAGAM

SECTION: Page 67

LENGTH: 57 words

Cambodia's Deputy Prime Min for Foreign Affairs Ieng Sary arrives in Indonesia
for a four-day visit during which he plans to seek Indonesia's support in
Cambodia's bitter dispute with Vietnam.  Diplomatic observers believe that
Indonesia, like other members of ASEAN, will listen politely to Sary, but will
remain scrupulously neutral (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 294-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 21, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 50

LENGTH: 65 words

Vietnam News Agency claims that more than 1,000 Chinese soldiers, police and
militiamen supported by artillery crossed into Vietnamese territory at three
points along the border and committed 'arson and other acts of destruction'.
Reports that hundreds of Chinese opened fire while advancing into Tan Thanh
village and destroyed 100 yards of border fencing.Other incursions noted (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 294-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 22, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JANE SEE WHITE

SECTION: Page 26

LENGTH: 87 words

Outline of controversy over Agent Orange, herbicide sprayed on thousands of
acres across US annually, notes EPA is currently studying whether to ban one of
its compounds 2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid.  Reports 2,4,5-T contains
contaminant that causes birth defects and miscarriages in laboratory animals,
but farmers and foresters contend chemical is safe when used properly.  Notes
500 Vietnam veterans are seeking disability for problems they claim stem from
exposure to Agent Orange 10 years ago in Vietnam (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 295-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 22, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 13

LENGTH: 110 words

Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping has told group of visiting Thai
journalists on Oct 3 that Vietnam is preparing major offensive against Cambodia
in dry season later in '78 and may even occupy Phnom Penh.  Other points:
Vietnam has strengthened its troop strength along Chinese border and border
incidents continue.  Continuously emphasizes that USSR is trying to use Vietnam
to infitrate all of Southeast Asia like an 'Asian Cuba' and asserts that USSR
has military bases in Vietnam.  Declares that food situation in Vietnam is very
bad since end of Chinese aid.  Vietnamese Prime Min Pham Van Dong angrily denies
that USSR has bases in Vietnam (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 295-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 24, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 76

LENGTH: 145 words

Cambodian sources disclose that Cambodian leadership is convinced CIA is
actively working with Vietnam to overthrow regime.  Claim that Government has
captured documents and equipment, obtained confessions, broken up at least 2
agent networks and arrested a senior member of Government who worked with CIA.
Report that persons arrested in attempted coup in '78 and linked with Vietnam
revealed names of Cambodians working with CIA who were subsequently arrested.
Cite aborted coups in '78 allegedly fomented by CIA or Vietnam.  Hold that US
wishes overthrow of regime to make Vietnam more amenable to US and more
independent of USSR.  Report that St Louis Post Dispatch correspondent Richard
Dudman will probably be invited to visit Cambodia around end of '78.  Dudman
would be first American journalist to enter Cambodia since fall of Phnom Penh in
April '75 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 297-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 26, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 80

LENGTH: 153 words

Negotiations between US and Vietnam over establishment of diplomatic relations
reptdly have reached point where timetable and ways and means of aiming toward
normal relationship are being discussed.  No final decision has been taken by US
Pres Carter on exchange of embassies.  US Asst Sec of State for E Asian and
Pacific Affairs Richard Holbrooke says informal meetings between Amer and
Vietnamese officials at UN are continuing.  Chinese reaction to possibility of
exchange of embassies is unknown.  Intelligence sources say Vietnam has
concentrated troops and supplies at Cambodian border and action could set off
major offensive later in '78.  ASEAN members reptdly favor Amer diplomatic
relationship with Vietnam and urge US to maintain policy of not yielding to
Vietnamese demands for large-scale econ assistance.  Holbrooke says major topic
of discussion is continuing flow of refugees from Indochina (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 299-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 27, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY SCOTT STOKES

SECTION: Page 74

LENGTH: 67 words

Article examines Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping's 8-day visit to Japan
following signing of peace agreement between China and Japan.  Analysts in Tokyo
see visit as attempt by Teng to pursue major Chinese policy aim of strengthening
China and to increase its security, particularly from threats from Soviet Union
and Vietnam.  Chinese interest in purchasing armed from Japan discussed (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 300-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 27, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 24

LENGTH: 87 words

US intelligence sources rept Vietnam has sent 10,000 to 15,000 reinforcements to
army facing Cambodia amid expectations of intensified fighting within next few
wks.  Estimate Vietnam has about 100,000 men in position to push deeper into
Cambodia if necessary.  Say there is no evidence to support repts that China has
supplied Cambodia with Soviet-built jet fighters.  Vietnamese air force, using
US-built bombers captured from S Vietnam in '75, reptdly is carrying out
unimpeded air strikes in Parrot's Beak area (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 300-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 27, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 23

LENGTH: 45 words

Horror stories from refugees continue to contrast with repts of major
achievements from Cambodian leaders.  Deputy Prime Min Ieng Sary's trip has
yielded no known pol gains with every country contacted maintaining neutrality
regarding Vietnam-Cambodia conflict (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 300-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 27, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 22

LENGTH: 98 words

Diplomats and other experts based in Thailand say Cambodia's Deputy Prime Min
Ieng Sary, in globetrotting mission, is seeking allies who will side with him
against Vietnam and wants to offset charges that Govt has fostered mass killings
and other atrocities.  Say country is beset by Vietnamese-backed insurgency,
econ hardships and lack of major outside support, except from China.  Some say
Ieng Sary's mission was launched at China's urging.  Ieng Sary, during UN visit,
says Western journalists will be able to visit Cambodia and that country would
welcome relations with US (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 300-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 27, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 21

LENGTH: 75 words

Citizens Com for Peace with Freedom in Vietnam reptdly was established by former
Pres Johnson's aide John P Roche to elicit popular support for Johnson's policy
of gradually increasing mil pressure on N Vietnam and Viet Cong.  Johnson
reptdly approved com formation if his involvement was kept secret.  SE Asia
affairs specialist Gareth Porter reptdly found memos on subject while examining
Johnson papers in Johnson library in Austin, Tex (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 300-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 30, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 24

LENGTH: 35 words

Pan Amer jetliner flies over Vietnam and Laos, en route from New Delhi to Hong
Kong, marking 1st time since end of Indochina War in '75 that Amer airliner has
been allowed to use airspace of both nations (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 303-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 1, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 91

LENGTH: 121 words

Lawyer Jonathan Lubell, speaking to Sup Ct on behalf of former Army Lt Col
Anthony Herbert, contends public figures should be allowed to probe reporter's
state of mind and process of developing news repts because forbidding such
queries 'completely unbalances' libel law fairness.  Herbert is suing CBS News
and others for $44.7 Million based on 60 Minutes TV sgement in which producer
questioned truth of Herbert's charges against superiors in covering up war
crimes in S Vietnam.  Sup Ct is being asked to determine whether Herbert
producer must answer certain pre-trail questions asked by Herbert.  Under '54
Sup Ct decision, public figures who sue for libel must prove 'actual malice'
before they can be successful (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 305-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 3, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 19

LENGTH: 84 words

Vietnam says its mil forces have repulsed 2 separate attacks by hundreds of
Chinese troops who crossed into northen border area and killed or wounded many
Vietnamese soldiers.  Voice of Vietnam broadcast describes situation as
'critical'.Quarrel was sparked earlier in yr by Cinese accusations that Vietnam
was mistreating ethnic Chinese population and China's apparent anger at
Vietnam's close ties to USSR.  Negotiations to end border incidents have been
suspended and frontier has been closed (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 307-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 4, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 18

LENGTH: 62 words

Chinese official news agency Hsinhua says USSR is sending arms and mil personnel
to Vietnam to help Vietnamese prepare for 'large-scale aggression' against
Cambodia.  Claims Vietnamese deployment and Soviet aid are in line with
Vietnamese Communist Party circular issued in Aug calling on army and people to
'seize victory in war on southwest border' with Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 308-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 4, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 16

LENGTH: 72 words

USSR and Vietnam sign treaty of friendship and cooperation that USSR Pres Leonid
Brezhnev calls of 'special significance' because of difficulties created by
Chinese.  Agreement resulted from talks between Vietnamese Communist Party chief
Le Duan and Premier Pham Van Dong and Brezhnev and Premier A Kosygin.  State Sec
Cyrus Vance says Hanoi appears willing to normalize relations with US without
prior commitment of US aid (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 308-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY BILL KOVACH

SECTION: Page 53, Column 5

LENGTH: 29 words

Former Amb to Vietnam Graham A Martin is under investigation by Justice Dept for
allegedly keeping top-secret Govt papers in his personal possession after
retirement (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 310-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 50, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Assessment of Vietnamese-Cambodian border conflict notes war continues, with
Vietnam apparently holding upper hand, which has resulted in wider conflict
between Vietnam and China.  Notes Nov 3 signing by Vietnam of friendship and
cooperation treaty with USSR and overtures made to US, W Eur and anti-Communist
states in SE Asia.  Recalls Prime Min Pham Van Dong's ASEAN tour (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 310-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 1

LENGTH: 17 words

Unidentified war-crippled Vietnam veteran robbed of $840 and assaulted by 2 men,
Stamford, Conn (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 310-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Chinese Govt delegation flies to Phnom Penh 2 days after signing of
Soviet-Vietnamese friendship treaty which Chinese officials believe has mil
overtones.  China has accused Vietnam of sending troops southward to prepare for
offensive against Cambodia.  Vietnamese have denied charges (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 310-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 173 words

US, in lr to UN Security Council members, calls upon council to seek ways to
ease intensifying border conflict between Cambodia and Vietnam.  Effort is
viewed as warning to USSR against encouraging Vietnamese to embark on enlarged
mil campaign against Chinese-backed Cambodians.  Vietnamese offensive reptdly
would be challenge to China to respond in kind or risk appearing to have backed
down before USSR.  Number of Asian countries reptdly fear that successful
Vietnamese invasion could upset balance of power in region in USSR's favor.Lr
points to increase in tension between both countries and urges members to
consider 'appropriate' measures to deal with problem.  Lr reptdly has created
'complication' for Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim, who was invited to visit Cambodia by
Foreign Min Ieng Sary.  Waldheim accepted invitation 'in principle' but at same
time told Vietnamese he was ready to accept longstanding invitation for visit.
Visits to both would give Waldheim opportunity for diplomatic efforts to help
ease border problem (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 310-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 93 words

Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping arrives in Bangkok (Thailand) on 1st
leg of tour that also includes stops in Malaysia and Singapore.  Tour is viewed
as major Chinese effort to counter Soviet and Vietnamese influence in Southeast
Asia, and follows by 2 days signing of USSR-Vietnam treaty calling for immediate
consultation in case either is attacked or threatened with attack 'with a view
to eliminate that threat'.  Teng is met at airport by Thai Prime Min Kriangsak
Chamanand, and is received shortly therafter by King Phumiphol Aduldet (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 310-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 7, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

Assessment of stand taken by Singapore on 'courting' visits by Vietnamese,
Soviet and Chinese officials in light of Vietnamese-Cambodian border conflict
and possibility of escalation.  Foreign Min S Rajaratnam notes that contrarary
to popular thought, 'dominoes' have not fallen, and situation is turning other
way, in which Thailand is not threatened, but rather Cambodia and Vietnam.
Notes ASEAN is proving to be consolidating rather than disintegrating force in
SE Asian area.  Confidence shown by Singapore noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 311-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 7, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 111 words

Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping, attending state dinner hosted by Thai
Prime Min Kriangsak Chamanand, warns Thailand tonight, obliquely, against Soviet
'expansionist activities' in SE Asia.  Alludes to increasingly close
relationship between USSR and Vietnam, who recently signed friendship and
cooperation treaty that contains mil assistance clause.  Warmly endorses ASEAN.
Praises Thailand for opposing 'attempt of other countries to issue commands, to
interfere and to establish spheres of influence'.  Statement is apparent
allusion to US and USSR.  Kriangsak limits himself to warm but strictly
bilateral remarks praising Thai-Chinese friendship (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 311-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 8, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID K SHIPLER

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 90 words

Soviet Defense Min Marshal Dmitri F Ustinov, apparently alluding to Vietnam
during celebration of anniversary of Bolshevik Revolution, accuses China of
damaging revolutionary and natl liberation movement in developing countries.
Remarks are made with Le Duan, Hanoi's visiting party leader, who attended
ceremony.  Parade banners acclaimed Soviet solidarity with Vietnamese and
underscored increasingly close ties between USSR and Vietnam at time of growing
Chinese-Vietnamese friction.  Mil parade, smaller than in '77, described (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 312-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 8, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 18 words

Official Cambodian radio accuses Vietnam of using poison gas bombs 4 times in
recent border fighting (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 312-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 8, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

China lodges strong protest note with Vietnam over Nov 1 border incident in
which it claims 6 Chinese died after being kidnapped.  Vietnamese lodged similar
protest recently, which was rejected by Peking.  Incident took place in border
area of Kwangsi Chuang Autonomous Region (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 312-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 8, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

China lodges strong protest note with Vietnam over Nov 1 border incident in
which they claim 6 Chinese died after being kidnapped.  Vietnamese lodged
similar protest recently, which was rejected by Peking.  Incident took place in
border area of Kwangsi Chuang Autonomous Region (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 312-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 8, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 90 words

D Middleton assessment of impact treaty of friendship and cooperation between
USSR and Vietnam will have on E Asian countries and sea strategies deployed in
that area by US, China and N and S Korea.  Notes treaty was concluded when
intelligence from Far East reptd steady expansion of Soviet mil power in area.
Soviet Pacific fleet reptdly will be reinforced by aircraft carrier and USSR
divs in Siberia and maritime prov are being expanded.  Amer, Chinese and
Japanese concern about treaty focuses on future of Cam Ranh Bay.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 31

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 8, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 112 words

Officials concerned with refugee problems in Thailand and Malaysia fear that
dramatically heightened number of refugees leaving Vietnam on small fishing
boats is vastly exceeding present willingness of countries of asylum to accept
them and result may be much greater loss of life.  In 1st 25 days of Oct, 8,720
Vietnamese refugees reached Malaysian transit camps, bringing total number of
refugees there to more than 20,000.  Asst Sec of State for E Asian and Pacific
Affairs Richard Holbrooke comments on seriousness of situation.  US decided in
Mar to admit 25,000 Indochinese refugees in following 12 mos and set quota of
'boat people' under program at 12,500 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 312-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 9, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 4

LENGTH: 20 words

Vietnam rejects Chinese protest over border incident in which China says 6
villagers were kidnapped and murdered (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 313-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 9, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping says Soviet-Vietnamese friendship is
threat to world security and peace, Bangkok, Thailand, news conf.  Contends
treaty is 'worldwide Soviet scheme'.  Accuses Vietnam of invading Cambodia.
Says Vietnam has become 'Cuba of the Orient,' suggesting USSR is using Vietnam
to carry out Soviet expansionism goals (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 313-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 9, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping says Soviet-Vietnamese friendship is
threat to world security and peace, Bangkok, Thailand, news conf.  Contends
treaty is 'worldwide Soviet scheme'.  Accuses Vietnam of invading Cambodia.
Says Vietnam has become 'Cuba of the Orient,' suggesting USSR is using Vietnam
to carry out Soviet expansionism goals (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 313-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 10, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT SHEVLIN

SECTION: Page 30, Column 5

LENGTH: 54 words

Robert Shevlin lr questions US position in warning USSR to restrain Vietnam from
invading Cambodia for fear that Vietnamese victory could strengthen strategic
position of USSR and Vietnam while weakening Chinese position while at same time
not taking strong stand against human rights violations by Cambodian Govt (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 31

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 67 words

Vietnam accuses China of conducting 'foul slander campaign' against Hanoi as
pretext to send more mil forces into Cambodia.  Vietnamese Army newspaper Quan
Doi Nhan Dan rejects Cambodian charges that Vietnam is preparing major offensive
and accuses Cambodian Prime Min Pol Pot and Deputy Prime Min Ieng Sary of having
killed thousands of Cambodians and contends China tried to cover up crimes (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 315-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 115 words

UN High Comr for Refugees Poul Hartling reptdly will ask countries where
Indochinese refugees end up to meet to discuss fate of those seeking asylum from
Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.  Says 30 or more delegations are expected to attend
Dec 11-12 meeting.  UN tallies indicate that record 12,186 'boat people' reached
S China Sea ports and further during Oct.  Hartling's deputy Dale S De Haan says
75% of boats land successfully, 25% of refugees are rescued at sea and number of
refugees who perish in escape attempts is not known.  Office says 71,379
Vietnamese made successful sea escapes in last 4 yrs, 37,176 have been resettled
abroad and 34,203 are living in temporary asylum (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 315-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 12, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY MARRO

SECTION: Page 32, Column 1

LENGTH: 164 words

Pres Carter, as part of his efforts to fight inflation, vetoes 3 bills he
considers inflationary or serious limits on his ability to deal with inflation.
Carter calls vetoes of bills that would have prevented him from negotiating
reductions in tariffs on imported textiles, authorized more than $400 million in
next 2 fiscal yrs for Fed support of nurses training programs and provision of
Meat Import Act of '78 limiting Pres's discretionary authority to expand meat
imports,part of his commitment to restrain inflation and implement fair but
tough anti-inflation program.  Critical of Carter's action are Amer Textile Mfrs
Inst pres Robert S Small, Sen Ernest F Hollings, Natl Cattlemen's Assn pres
Richard A McDougal and Amer Nurses Assn pres Barbara Nichols.  Pres press sec
Jody Powell and Pres aide Stuart Eizenstat comment.  Carter's action follows
visit by himself and staff to Arlington Natl Cemetery, where Carter participates
in ceremony hon Vietnam War veterans (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 316-5

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 12, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 6

LENGTH: 21 words

Pres Carter unveils plaque on Veteran's Day at Tomb of Unknowns in Arlington
National Cemetery to honor Vietnam veterans (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 316-4

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 12, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Vietnam says rebel Cambodian troops and civilians attacked and occupied 2 mil
bases, killed nearly 200 Govt troops and seized arms, ammunition and supplies
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 316-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 12, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 102 words

More than 2,500 refugees from Vietnam, crowded aboard freighter that has been at
anchor for 3 days outside port near Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, are reportedly
fearful and demoralized.  Have been refused entry to Indonesia and Malaysia, and
are now running out of food and drinking water.  Malaysia has already accepted
largest number of boat people into its overcrowded country, and officials report
they do not have facilities to accept more refugees.  Expect to send provisions
to ship and then drive it from Malaysian waters.  Plight of refugees cited.  Map
of Indonesia, Malaysia and location of ship (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 316-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 13, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY SEYMOUR M HERSH

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 153 words

CIA strategic analyst David S Sullivan was forced to resign in summer of '78
after admitting that he supplied copies of top-secret agency repts on SALT to
key staff aide of Sen Henry M Jackson, a leading Sen critic of current arms
negotiations.  CIA Dir Turner is said to have been outraged, but unable to do
more than dismiss Sullivan because no Fed law was violated.  Jackson's aide is
Richard Perle.  Friends of Sullivan say he was convinced that materials he
passed on contained proof that Soviet Union deceived US during '72 arms
negotiations and is continuing its deception in current talks.  Some see
Sullivan's action as harbinger of actions that will be taken over pending SALT
treaty ratification.  Some who recall Govt's suit against another former CIA
employee, Frank Snepp, for writing book about his Vietnam experiences, accuse
Carter Adm of employing double standard in 'whistle-blowing' cases.  (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 317-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 15, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Council of Vietnam Veterans executive director Robert Muller comments on plight
of Vietnam veterans.  Expresses bitterness over inaction of Congress and empty
promises of Carter Administration to Vietnam veterans, describing veterans as
virtually neglected.  Reports council seeks extension of GI bill beyond '83, tax
credit for employers who hire Vietnam veterans and increase in funds for health
and psychological needs of veterans.  Muller photo (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 319-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 15, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 125 words

Increased flow of Vietnamese boat people is forcing Carter Adm to re-examine
refugee program, which earlier in '78 seemed sufficient to absorb them.  State
Dept officials say that in last 6 wks more than 20,000 Vietnamese nationals,
about 75% of whom are ethnic Chinese, have fled southern Vietnam, sometimes
paying as much as $2,000 in gold to leave.  As many as 90,000 'boat people' may
leave country in '78, more than 5 times earlier estimate.  Officials say they
had not reckoned on series of events in Indochina that have upset previous
predictions and caused new proposals to circulate within Adm to allow more than
25,000 planned for annually.  Current plight of 2,500 refugees aboard freighter
off Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, noted.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 319-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 15, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 110 words

Treasury Dept proposes that banks and other financial institutions should pay
interest on frozen foreign assets.  Proposal affects assets frozen since World
War II which belong to individuals, companies and government entities in China,
Vietnam, Cambodia, North Korea, Cuba and elsewhere.  State Dept describes action
as step toward resolving disputes over financial claims between US and other
nations which act as trade impediment.  Blocked assets cover wide range of
investments by foreign nationals in US.  Treasury Dept indicates that one
purpose of new interest-payment plan is to obtain better information on size and
disposition of the assets (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 319-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 16, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 58 words

Malaysian Government says it believes Vietnamese refugees hovering in ship off
Malaysian coast paid $5 million in gold and US currency to Hong Kong syndicate
to provide ship and transport from Vietnam and, as such, do not qualify as
refugees.  Refuses personal appeal by UN High Commissioner for Refugees Poul
Harting to accept Vietnamese (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 320-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 17, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5

LENGTH: 31 words

Carter Administration rebukes Government of Vietnam for forcing tens of
thousands of nationals, mostly ethnic Chinese, to flee country and for requiring
many to buy their way out (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 321-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 18, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 82 words

Fox Butterfield, assessing just-concluded tour by Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng
Hsiao-ping through Southeast Asia, argues that China's conflict with Vietnam
over Cambodia is sour spot in year when China has made major advances abroad
with new and potentially vital links with US and Japan.  Compares Chinese
predicament in Vietnam with that of US before it.  Holds that Chinese
involvement in Indochina has had negative effect on relations with rest of
Southeast Asia.  Photo of Teng (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 32

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 18, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 71 words

Carter Administration offers to admit up to 2,500 additional boat refugees from
Vietnam stranded in Malaysia, but not including those aboard refugee ship Hai
Hong.  Justice Dept spokesman Terry Adamson explains that Atty Gen Griffin Bell
has been reluctant to admit additional Vietnamese without consulting Congress,
because he had told them earlier in '79 that present quota of 25,000 was
sufficient for present year (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 322-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 19, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MALCOLM W BROWNE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9

LENGTH: 12 words

Prof Guenter Lewy book America in Vietnam revd by Malcolm W Browne (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 32

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 19, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 5

LENGTH: 64 words

Vietnam charges that Chinese Deputy Prime Min Teng Hsiao-ping discussed
conditions for return of former Cambodian Pres Lon Nol to Cambodia during Teng's
recent visit to Bangkok (Thailand).  Asserts discussions indicate China lacks
confidence in Cambodia's Government.  Also claims Lon Nol, now in exile in US,
has been Peking's favorite Cambodian because he is of Chinese origin (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 323-6

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Walter Goodman comments on recent Dissent article dealing with reevaluation of
liberals' opposition to Vietnam war in light of events in Cambodia.  Cites
comments by Noam Chomsky, Hans Morgenthau and Michael Walzer.  Says continued
allocation of blame only serves current political purposes and is not guide for
future foreign policy (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 32

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

Vietnam accuses China of trying to start new mass exodus of ethnic Chinese from
Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 324-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 23, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

About 200 refugees from Vietnam drown when fishing boat in which they had been
traveling capsizes off Kuala Trengganu (Malaysia).  More than 50 survive.
Fishing boat had met hostile reception by local residents and police had towed
boat to mouth of Trengganu River, feared for its treacherous currents.  Incident
comes at time when Malaysia, concerned about record number of Vietnamese
reaching its shores, has named Maj Gen Ghazali Che Mat to head task force to
stop refugee flow.  Highly placed source asserts that Malaysia plans no change
in its asylum policy and will take any refugee that reaches its shore.  Photo of
residents wading into river to push boat away (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 327-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

Vietnamese ground and air forces are reported stepping up attacks into Cambodia.
Air strikes are said to be made with Soviet as well as American planes captured
after fall of South Vietnam in '75 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 329-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 26, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY IRA GLASSER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 57 words

American Civil Liberties Union official Ira Glasser criticizes recommendation by
Joint Chiefs of Staff to revive draft.  Calls move example of danger posed by
permanent standing army.  Holds that Vietnam is logical outcome of 'militarized'
democracy and warns of 'reflexive imposition' of military solutions upon
political problems (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 33

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 26, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 35 words

Vietnam's official press agency reports uprisings by Cambodian guerrilla forces
opposed to government of Prime Min Pol Pot have spread to many Cambodian
districts and villages since beginning of November (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 330-5

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 27, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY FRANK BAXTER

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 65 words

Frank Baxter letter disagrees with Nov 13 editorial contention that Nguyen Ngoc
Loan's shooting of Viet Cong suspect during Vietnam war is 'morally
indefensible'.  Argues that it is both morally defensible and 'laudatory' in
'unhappy' context that to win Vietnam War required extermination of large
numbers of civilians for no reason beyond 'suspicion of sympathy' with
Communists (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 33

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 28, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 2

LENGTH: 12 words

Joseph Marie Cardinal Trin Nhu Khue, dies in Vietnam at age 78 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 33

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 30, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY CRAIG R WHITNEY

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 120 words

Craig R Whitney analyzes Soviet Union's response to China's 're-emergence' in
world affairs after years of preoccupation with domestic affairs.  Finds most
far-reaching consequence of Soviet response is Soviet desire for better
relations with US.  Notes more direct Soviet response has been Soviet wooing of
Vietnam and doubts about '75 Communist victory in Cambodia, which has become
China's ally.  Notes that Soviet accounts belabor concentration-camp atmosphere
in Cambodia and blame China for atrocities.  Suggests that criticism of Cambodia
is being used to draw Vietnam closer to USSR.  Mentions recent friendship treaty
concluded with several Vietnamese leaders, including Chief of Staff Gen Van Tien
Dung (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 33

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 1, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY RACHELLE MARSHALL

SECTION: Page 26, Column 6

LENGTH: 82 words

Rachelle Marshall letter scores US policy in Southeast Asia.  Asserts State Dept
has rebuked Vietnam for accepting payment from Chinese refugees, but has failed
to rebuke China for its support of Cambodia.  Also points out that Vietnam,
threatened by both China and Cambodia, has been forced to turn to USSR because
of US refusal to conduct normal trade relations.  Thinks that since Vietnam War
was fought to keep Indochina out of USSR orbit, present policy makes no
strategic sense (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 33

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 1, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 61 words

Civil Liberties Union (Philippines) asserts it has solid evidence of nuclear
weapons being stored in US military bases in central Philippines.  Urges Pres
Ferdinand E Marcos to demand that US withdraw those weapons immediately.  US
Embassy is silent on protest.  US denied presence of nuclear materials when
question was raised previously during Vietnam War (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 335-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 2, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

Justice Dept official holds that Carter Adm has no intention of deporting former
South Vietnamese General Nguyen Ngoc Loan, whose summary execution of a Vietcong
prisoner in '68 was shown on American television.  Attorney Gen Griffin B Bell
is expected to halt proceedings by US Immigration and Naturalization Service
that are being held to rescind the permanent residency status of Loan.  Loan had
been chief of South Vietnam's national police force when he put a bullet through
the head of a Vietcong prisoner whose hands had been tied behind his back.
Photograph and TV footage of incident produced vocal criticism in US and fueled
opposition against the Vietnam War (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 336-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 3, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

Administration sources report that Vietnamese troops dispersed a Cambodian Army
division in worst setback the Phnom Penh Government has suffered in the
18-month-old conflict.  Hold that Vietnam appears to be using an increased
number of Cambodian refugees to serve as resistance forces and to provide cover
for the Vietnamese drive into Cambodia.  Point out that aims of Vietnamese
offensive are to push back as many Cambodian troops as possible from the border,
to prepare and spur insurgencies within Cambodia and to attack and destroy
Cambodian units (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 337-4

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 91 words

Vietnam's Hanoi radio announces formation of Kampuchean United Front for
National Salvation in Cambodia to overthrow Prime Min Pol Pot and Deputy Prime
Min Ieng Sary.  Claims that over 200 Cambodians from all walks of life attended
founding conference.  Reports without disclosing details that an 11-point
statement of 'tasks and goals' was established.  Foreign diplomats see action as
a decisive step in Vietnamese war against Cambodia.  Believe Vietnam will launch
full-scale military and political campaign to overthrow Pol Pot regime (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 6, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 103 words

Carter Administration announces it is seriously concerned about growing conflict
between Cambodia, which is backed by China, and Vietnam, which is backed by
USSR.  Warns Vietnam that possibility of normal US-Vietnamese relations could be
set back by Vietnam's growing ties with USSR.  State Dept official notes
privately that although US professes to be neutral in conflict, there is clear
pro-China bias in Administration due to White House belief that USSR is trying
to win 'proxy' war against China.  Issue is complicated, however, by widely-held
view that Cambodia is world's worst violator of human rights (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 340-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 7, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 94 words

Vietnamese troops are reported to be advancing northward from rubber-plantation
region northeast of Phnom Penh toward the Mekong River town of Kratie,
headquarters of Cambodia's eastern administrative region.  Drive puts Vietnamese
units about 10 miles north of Snoul, which has been in Vietnamese hands for
several months.  Vietnamese column is also advancing in the same direction from
the area of Mimot, another plantation center south-east of Snuol.  No
information is available on the intensity of Cambodian resistance.  Map of
Vietnam and Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 341-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 7, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Australia plans to admit 2,000 more Vietnamese refugees for permanent settlement
in year ending June '79.  Will seek, however, to apply diplomatic pressure on
Vietnam to cut back on number of people fleeing abroad (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 341-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 8, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY NOAM CHOMSKY

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 31 words

Noam Chomsky letter refutes Nov 20 article by Walter Goodman on Chomsky comments
in Dissent magazine discussing US involvement in Vietnam in light of recent
events in Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 34

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 8, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

Malaysian Home Min Muhammad Ghazali Bin Shafie suggests to Deputy Sec of State
for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Robert B Oakley that US and other Western
nations give shelter to boat people fleeing Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 342-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 8, 1978, Friday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 147 words

David Binder comments on Rumanian resistance to Soviet-bloc military policy, on
eve of visit by Treasury Sec Michael Blumenthal to Rumania for talks with Pres
Nicolae Ceausescu.  Notes Rumania's opposition, expressed at Moscow meeting of
Warsaw Pact nations on Nov 22 and 23, to further integration of its armed forces
into Warsaw alliance.  Observes that Rumania has, in defiance of USSR policy,
maintained close relations with China and Israel and has been neutral toward
conflict between Vietnam and Cambodia.  Notes Pres Ceausescu's declarations on
Nov 25 that Rumanian army will not surrender its military authority outside the
Rumanian state.  Notes some American officials believe Ceausescu is using
military bloc issue as political move to assert independent foreign policy,
while others think Ceausescu is 'treading very close to the edge' in defying
Moscow's demands (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 34

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 9, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 98 words

Editorial comments on international relations between Hanoi and US in light of
new Indochina war, which involves Vietnam, backed by USSR, against Cambodia,
backed by China.  Points out that US and Vietnam have important issues to
settle, including problems of Vietnamese refugees, Vietnam's relations with its
neighbors and its demands for American reparations.  Notes that Carter Adm has
warned both Hanoi and Moscow that fighting in Cambodia, coupled with Vietnam's
increasingly pro-Soviet course, could imperil prospects for normalization of
relations between US and Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 34

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 9, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 21, Column 5

LENGTH: 80 words

Vietnamese forces continue their advance northeastward from the border and are
reported to be within 25 miles of Mekong River town of Kratie.  Analysts of
Indochinese affairs believe that capture of Kratie, headquarters of Cambodian
northeastern region, is Vietnam's immediate objective.  Vietnamese possession of
river town would make it extremely difficult for Cambodian Government to supply
its forces in sparsely populated region.  Map of Vietnamese drive toward Kratie
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 343-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 9, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Vietnam announces it will attend international meeting called by UN High
Commissioner for Refugees to consider action to help refugees from Vietnam, Laos
and Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 343-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 10, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DANIEL YERGIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 2

LENGTH: 66 words

Daniel Yergin contends US should take lead in helping Vietnamese refugees,
so-called 'boat people,' since US contributed to problem with its involvement in
Vietnam War.  Urges US to open its doors to refugees on scale commensurate with
problem.  Notes that 175,000 refugees are encamped in non-Communist states of
Southeast Asia and that as many as 40% of boat people may be drowning at sea
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 34

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 10, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 89 words

Henry Kamm discusses implications of continuing conflict between Vietnam and
Cambodia.  Contends Vietnam, an ally of USSR, would be eventual victor in
full-scale war with Cambodia, which is ally of China.  Notes, however, that
Vietnam may be unwilling to incur international outcry that would result from
full-scale aggression.  Points out that US is in position of supporting
Cambodia, despite its terrible human rights record, or being faced with
possibility of Soviet influence over Vietnam and Cambodia.  Map and drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 34

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 10, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT REINHOLD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 88 words

Vietnam veteran Douglas Schwinn recalls evacuation of Vietnam and discusses his
rehabilitation after receiving serious wound in war.  Contrasts his success at
overcoming physical impairments during past decade with despair over his drug
addiction, broken marriage, drug arrests and felony convictions.  Reports slow,
but apparently now successful, adjustment to civilian life and new marriage.
Photo of Schwinn, wife Marlou and stepson, '68 photo of Schwinn in hospital and
illustration, evacuation of wounded soldiers (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 34

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 11, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 5

LENGTH: 41 words

Bangkok Post reports Vietnam has moved most of 40,000 troops it has based in
Laos to Laotian border, raising speculation that Vietnam might be planning to
send troops into Cambodia from north, opening new front in Vietnam-Cambodian
conflict (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 345-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 12, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 24 words

Vietnam accuses Chinese vessels of intruding into its waters and opening fire on
Vietnamese fishermen.  Makes no report of casualties (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 346-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 12, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 76 words

International conference on flow of refugees from Indochina opens in Geneva
(Switzerland).  Vietnam attends conference, which was convened by UN High
Commissioner for Refugees, despite earlier doubt about its appearance.
Australian delegate Michael J R Mackellar charges that exodus of refugees is
officially encouraged, while Malaysian delegate Muhammad Ghazali bin Shafie
calls for establishment of international processing centers for refugees (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 346-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 13, 1978, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 124 words

Vo Van Sung, Vietnamese delgate to UN international conference in Geneva on flow
of refugees from Indochina, denies that Vietnam is fostering exodus of its
citizens in fishing boats in return for payments.  Contends that 'escape of
certain number of Vietnamese of Chinese origin is linked to activities of
foreign power and is part of attempt of foreign power to aggravate difficulties
of Vietnam in order to sabotage its stability'.  Renews appeal for economic aid
for Vietnam.In related item, Adm officials report legislation is being drafted
that would allow 50,000 refugees to enter US each year, instead of present
17,400.  Cite exodus from Indochina and planned release of Cuban political
prisoners.  Photo of Vietnamese refugees (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 347-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 14, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

Chinese Government issues strong protest to Vietnam over further clashes on
their border and in Gulf of Tonkin.  Contends that recent series of alleged
Vietnamese attacks on Chinese fishing boats were obviously connected with
Vietnam's 'current massive aggression' against Cambodia.  Adds that if Vietnam
should persist in this course of action then it must be held responsible for
consequences.  Map of China and Indochina (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 348-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 14, 1978, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 81 words

State and Commerce Depts are investigating reports that 11 US-designed
helicopters were recently delivered to Rhodesia, despite UN arms embargo against
Rhodesia.  Helicopters are believed to be Bell 205's, commercial version of Bell
UH-1 helicopter that was used extensively in Vietnam War, which are manufactured
both in US and abroad under US license.  State and Commerce Dept spokesmen
refuse to comment on Washington Post report that helicopters were converted to
military use (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 348-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 15, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 25 words

Floods in Vietnam during October reportedly caused loss of three million tons of
rice.  Supply problems are expected as result in early '79 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 34

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 16, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT D MCFADDEN

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 40 words

Chronology of US-China ties since '49 shows normalization of relations was
barred at various times by hostility and mistrust, wars in Korea and Vietnam,
political considerations in both countries, issue of Taiwan and Watergate
scandal (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Chronology 35

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 16, 1978, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 6

LENGTH: 39 words

UN Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim is said to be weighing trip to Cambodia in near future.
Visit is known to be favored by US and China, who feel that such visit would
have restraining effect on Vietnam's military actions toward Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 350-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 16, 1978, Saturday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 108 words

Fox Butterfield analyzes major obstacles that had to be resolved to allow US and
China to normalize diplomatic relations.  Points out normalization comes nearly
7 years after former Pres Nixon pledged to work toward that goal in Shanghai
Communique of '72.  Cites US military and diplomatic commitment to Taiwan,
Watergate scandal, collapse of Vietnam, Panama Canal negotiations, Middle East
problems and arms limitation talks as issues that hampered progress.  Thinks
factors that caused rapid improvement in relations involved China's increased
fears over alliance between USSR and Vietnam, and its desire for expanded trade
and technology (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 35

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 19, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4, Column 2

LENGTH: 53 words

Hampshire College (Amherst, Mass) begins fund-raising drive aimed at providing
Vietnam's National Center for Scientific Research with $22,000 IBM computer.
Center's director Nguyen Van Hieu reportedly mentioned need for computer when he
visited college during tour of US research and educational institutions (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 353-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 19, 1978, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section 2; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Family and friends of Vietnam veteran Paul Reutershan, who died of cancer Dec
14, vow at his funeral to continue his fight against Veterans Administration and
suit against Dow Chemical Co.  Suit relates to use of herbicide Agent Orange in
Vietnam and exposure of servicemen to chemical.  Reutershan is buried in
Peekskill (NY).  Photo of family and friends at funeral (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 353-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 19, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 6

LENGTH: 43 words

Vietnamese Foreign Min Nguyen Duy Trinh, on official visit to Japan, warns China
that its foreign policy toward Vietnam and USSR will fail if new US-China
diplomatic relations are meant to strengthen China's diplomatic position against
USSR and Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 353-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 19, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Vietnam announces that all forms of 'capitalist exploitation' will end in June
'79.  Land and tractors and farm equipment used to make profit will be
'requisition purchased' by state.  Nationalization measures are reported in
preparation (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 353-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 20, 1978, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Vietnamese Foreign Min Nguyen Duy Trinh, at news conference ending official
7-day visit to Japan, declares that Vietnam wants to establish diplomatic
relations with US, but charges that US is stalling by questioning Vietnam
-Cambodia border problem (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 354-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 21, 1978, Thursday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

Vietnam agrees to a visit by UN Sec Gen Kurt Waldheim in Feb.  Waldheim plans to
talk about Vietnam's reconstruction needs.  Diplomatic sources believe that
Waldheim is hoping to exercise a restraining influence on the conflict between
Vietnam and Cambodia.  Waldheim is also expected to look into the plight of
thousands of refugees from Indochina.  Neighboring countries are finding
refugees a burden they cannot carry (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 355-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 24, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ANDREAS FREUND

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 97 words

Andreas Freund details France's difficulty in reconciling past sympathy for
Vietnam's cause with present humanitarian concern for refugees from its rule.
Notes more than 50,000 refugees have arrived in France since '75, and in last 10
months, monthly quota of 1,000 per month has been exceeded to accommodate
increasing number of emergency cases.  Reports France gives preference to
refugees who speak French, have relatives living in France or have served in
French colonial administrations.  Details private and public efforts to help
refugees.  Photo of Vietnamese refugee (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 35

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 24, 1978, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 68 words

Normalization of relations between US and China has resulted in realignment of
power in Asia into two blocs, consisting of US, China and Japan on one side and
USSR and Vietnam on other.  Five non-Communist nations composing Assn of
Southeast Asian Nations, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and
Philippines, are seen as largely supportive of US decision to break its treaty
with Taiwan.  Cartoon (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 358-2

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 24, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 2

LENGTH: 105 words

HR Armed Services Investigations subcommittee questions use of luxury Hale Koa
Hotel on Waikiki Beach (Hawaii), which is getting $1 million yearly Government
subsidy, as lodge for retired military personnel.  Hotel offers rooms at 40%
lower rates than other hotels in area and has had 98% occupancy since opening
late in '75.  Hotel opened too late for use by Vietnam-based soldiers on leave.
Hotel, which pays no rent or taxes, has reported losses over 3 years despite
subsidy and high occupancy.  Committee chmn Repr Samuel S Stratton warns of
subsidy end unless hotel raises rates or takes other steps to cut losses (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 358-2

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 24, 1978, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 6

LENGTH: 20 words

Vietnam suspends rr service to China, reptdly in retaliation for similar action
taken by Chinese earlier this wk (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 358-2

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 25, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 19, Column 6

LENGTH: 48 words

Anthony Lewis suggests Dec '72 US bombing of North Vietnam, as well as entire
Vietnam war, should serve as reminder that despite grave foreign policy problems
facing US, particularly in Iran today, US strength should not be wasted on
foreign wars remote from American interests (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 35

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 25, 1978, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 70 words

Cambodian officials hold that terrorist-style attack that killed Briton Malcolm
Caldwell in Phnom Penh was motivated politically to show that Government could
not protect its friends.  Suggest that attack that killed Caldwell, a university
lecturer who had been called 'a friend of Cambodia,' might have been staged by
members of an insurgency movement that has become active in Cambodia and is
linked to Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 359-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 25, 1978, Monday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 119 words

High-level State Department officials express concern over increased fighting
between Cambodia and Vietnam involving support by China and USSR.  Report China
has supplied Cambodia with 99% of its current war material and USSR has been
principle weapons supplier for Vietnam.  Observe Vietnam has begun offensive to
establish permanently occupied area along 750-mile frontier with Cambodia and
has set up opposition political organization called Kampuchean National United
Front for National Salvation.  Diplomats in Peking suggest Dec 23 attack on
Western visitors in Phnom Penh, in which British scholar Malcolm Caldwell was
killed, may have been work of the new insurgency organization.  Photo of
Caldwell (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 359-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 26, 1978, Tuesday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

Author Eugene Ionesco, on returning to France after visit to US, comments on
'anti-American Americans' who are obsessed with guilt over Vietnam, Watergate,
Indian affairs and numerous aspects of America's past.  Photo of Ionesco (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 360-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 29, 1978, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

Hsinhua, official Chinese news agency, reports that about 20 Vietnamese soldiers
crossed China's southern border, attacked commune and occupied nearby hill.
Does not disclose if Vietnamese still hold area.  Reaffirms China's claim to
Spratly Islands, which have also been claimed by Vietnam and Philippines (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 363-7

              Copyright 1978 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
