
                               1 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 20 words

New Mobilization Com to End The War in Vietnam sets May 9 for demonstration to
protest expansion of war into Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 119 words

US sends troops and B-52 bombers inside Cambodia in 1st strike of attempt to
crush enemy sanctuaries; about 2,000 Amer air cavalrymen take part in action;
target is Communist high command hq 20 mi inside Cambodia; allied troops
encounter only minor resistance; push within 10 mi of provincial capital of
Svayrieng by nightfall; S Vietnamese mil spokesmen estimate 375 enemy soldiers
have been killed thus far; 6,000 S Vietnamese said to be involved in operation;
details on mil action; Cambodian sources say there is no time limit on operation
and that Cambodia consents to let allied forces operate on her territory until
completion of mission; no Cambodian forces are reptd to be engaged in operation;
illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 56 words

65th session; Pham Dang Lam says enemy forces in Cambodian frontier area prepare
for new offensive; says S Vietnamese incursion into Cambodia is self-defense
measure; N Vietnamese spokesman accuses S Vietnam of 'executing' US orders to
expand war; scores Pres Nixon; each side accuses the other of aggression;
Habib's comments noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Communist China's major role at recent conf of Cambodian, Laotian and Vietnamese
Communists revealed in official repts from Peking and Hanoi; conf took place in
China; Chou En-lai and his wife held banquet for guests; Norodom Sihanouk
laudatory lr to Chou reveals other details of conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 49 words

Legal basis for Pres commitment of forces abroad brought into question by Pres
Nixon ordering into Cambodia US forces now in S Vietnam; excerpts from relevant
documents, including US Const, Tonkin Gulf Resolution, Southeast Asia Treaty and
Sen Mathias Resolution to repeal Tonkin Gulf Resolution

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 93 words

Thousands of S Vietnamese soldiers, with Amer advisers and support, sweep
westward, push to within 10 mi of Svayriend, 2d day of operation to destroy
enemy base camps in Parrot's Beak sec of Cambodia; encounter only minor
resistance; 2 Amer mil advisers reptd wounded; 375 enemy soldiers reptd killed;
Communist Vietnamese believed to have fled just before start of operation;
Cambodia reptdly has placed no time limit on operations in Parrot's Beak area;
no Cambodian troops are directly engaged in mission; S Vietnamese personnel
carriers in area illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

USSR press agency, before Pres Nixon s, scores US-supported incursion by S
Vietnam into Cambodia; calls move 'direct aggression' and says it violates
Cambodian neutrality; USSR attitude on SE Asian situation said to be ambiguous
and flexible

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 311 words

Pres Nixon announces he is sending US combat troops into Cambodia for 1st time
to destroy enemy sanctuaries and supplies, TV s; says purpose is not to occupy
areas; describes action as necessary extension of war intended to protect lives
of Amer troops and shorten war; describes action as 'indispensable' for success
of Vietnamization program; says US troops enter areas that are hq for entire
Communist mil operation in S Vietnam; Washington sources say action will take
place in Fishhook area; White House sources say they expect operation to be
concluded in 6 to 8 wks; Nixon uses map to point out sanctuaries; says US troops
will be withdrawn once US objectives have been accomplished; says 'I would
rather be a 1-term Pres and do what I believe is right than to be a 2-term Pres
at the cost of seeing Amer become a 2d-rate power and to see this nation accept
the 1st defeat in its proud 190-yr history'; says US will try to provide small
arms and equipment to Cambodian army; portrays his decision as difficult one
taken without regard for his pol future; says he regards recent N Vietnamese
actions as test of US credibility requiring firm response; sets forth no legal
basis for his action; does not seek to explain how action is consistent with
doctrine he enunciated at Guam in '69 that in future he will rely on Asians to
fight their own wars; White House sources express hope US action will hasten
beginning of serious negotiations; details on s and mil activity in Cambodia;
informed sources rept White House received more than 1,200 telegrams after
announcing US supports S Vietnamese offensive into Cambodia; Nixon gives advance
briefing on s to Cong leaders and Cabinet members; Adm officials say Nixon
widens conflict to bring it to end more quickly; Under Sec Richardson and Deputy
Sec Packard brief Repub Sens on Nixon's reasoning; Nixon illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Prof E Widmer humorous article describes fictional historical Chinese mil
involvement in and subsequent extrication from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 52 words

A Lewis comments on Pres Nixon action in sending troops to Cambodia and reaction
of students to it; says Nixon, 'in a maudlin personalization and simplification
of complex issues, makes war a test of his own and the nation's manhood'; urges
US to get out of Indochina; says Nixon has chosen to make divisive move

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 49 words

Sr US mil planners back Pres Nixon decision as sound; observers in S Vietnam
puzzled by Nixon statement that enemy action within Cambodia has endangered Amer
troops near Cambodian border; were unaware of any such threat; high Pentagon
officers see pol risk for Nixon; details on their views

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 34 words

M Frankel analysis of Pres Nixon's Cambodian decision; speculates that something
must have taken place between Apr 20 and 27 to change his mood from confidence
on outlook for Vietnamese war to anxiety

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 2

LENGTH: 150 words

Demonstrators demand end to US action in Cambodia, May Day rally, Union Sq, NYC;
10 members of Neo-Nazi Natl Renaissance party picket at rally; Prof C Frankel
heads group of profs that drafts statement to be sent to NYS politicians asking
them to take action to reverse Nixon course; Dem Natl Chmn L F O'Brien deplores
use of violence to express opposition to Pres Nixon; scores Nixon action; Mayor
Daley says he thinks Nixon should be supported; Young Democratic Club (NYC) pres
R Saginaw and Young Republican Club (NYC) pres J L Forstadt announce formation
of bipartisan group with goal of convincing Cong to repudiate Nixon's
'escalation of the war into Cambodia'; Student Mobilization Com says plans are
being made for mass protests next wk in several cities; group leader says she
expects campuses will be closed down around the country; New Mobilization Com
announces rallies in several cities

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 96 words

Pres Nixon decision to send US troops to Cambodia is approved by US's Asian
allies, but encounters varying degrees of criticism in other Asian countries;
Thailand, S Korea and Nationalist China give move strong support; Japan's
backing is milder in tone; Philippines shows reserve; Laos praises move; Nguyen
Van Thieu issues statement supporting move; some factions in S Vietnam approve
move, others oppose it; India issues statement disapproving of move; N Vietnam
scores move; Indonesian Min Malik expresses disappointment and regret over move;
some other reaction noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 14 words

Saigon field comdrs call allied offensive in Fishhook area Operation Ultimate
Victory

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 87 words

Allied landing force including 5,000 Amers sweeps into Cambodia and forms arc
around suspected enemy hq in Fishhook area 5 mi inside Cambodia and 70 mi NW of
Saigon; 10,000 men are involved in action; another drive is under way in
Parrot's Beak sec 35 mi W of Saigon; mil spokesmen rept 194 enemy killed in
Fishhook operation; operation is largest allied war effort in last 2 yrs; allied
troops meet no substantial resistance; details on ground action, troop movements
and air strikes; some US mil men comment; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 52 words

S Vietnamese comdr of allied thrust Lt Gen Do Cao Tri drives into Svayrieng,
embraces comdr of Cambodian soldiers defending town and pronounces residents
safe from Vietcong; S Vietnamese troops reptdly killed 61 enemy soldiers who
attempted to ambush armored cars; details on mil situation in Parrot's Beak sec

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 17 words

Sen Mansfield deplores Nixon Adm decision to send US troops in Vietnam into
Cambodia, s, Sen; excerpts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3; (AFP)

LENGTH: 93 words

Vietcong and N Vietnamese at Paris peace talks score 'open and impudent Amer
aggression' in Cambodia; appeal for support of Amer pub opinion and of foreign
govts to halt Nixon Adm; N Vietnamese spokesman warns Pres Nixon's action will
have 'bad influence' on talks; Hanoi spokesman Nguyen Than Le warns on
incursion; Vietcong repr Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh and Chinese Communist Amb Huang
Chen conf with French Min Schumann; Mrs Nugyen Thi Binh scores Nixon move;
Communist Chinese press agency Hsinhua attacks Amer intervention in Cambodia as
'new monstrous crime'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 117 words

Pres Nixon sets natl day of prayer for all Amer POWs and missing servicemen;
Nixon refers to some campus radicals who oppose his Vietnam policies as 'bums',
in contrast to Amer soldiers who are 'the greatest', remarks to group of
civilian employes who greet him at Pentagon, where he gets mil briefing on
Cambodian operation; Nixon said to be cheered by pub response to his s; White
House press sec says messages received are 'positive' in ratio of 6 to 1; Nixon
is accompanied by Kissinger and is briefed by Laird and high mil officials;
White House press sec says Nixon gets information that operations in Cambodia
are 'going well'; Nixon, family and friends fly by helicopter to Camp David for
wk-end

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 209 words

Sen Foreign Relations Com, moving with intended restraint to challenge Nixon Adm
policy on Cambodia, takes unusual step of requesting conf with Pres Nixon to
discuss Amer mil involvement there; Nixon invites com jointly with House Foreign
Affairs Com to meeting Tuesday evening; if meeting is held, it will be 1st time
Foreign Relations Com has met with Pres as group since '19; also invites Sen and
House Armed Services Coms to meet Tuesday morning; Sen Foreign Relations Com
sources indicate com may not be interested in joint meeting since it would not
reflect Sens' special responsibility under Const; com sends to Nixon lr
requesting conf at his earliest possible convenience; lr is signed by Fulbright;
com approves legis to repeal Tonkin Resolution; Sen Gore refers to 'impending
const crisis'; Fulbright, reflecting nearly unanimous view of com, makes it
clear he emphatically disagrees with Nixon decision on Cambodia, which he says
will result in 'major enlargement' of war in SE Asia; questions whether Nixon
has legal authority to send troops; Mansfield breaks with Nixon policy; says
what confronts US in Indochina is not saving face but saving lives, Sen s; Sen
Scott defends and lauds Nixon; Fulbright and Cooper comment on conf with Nixon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 52 words

Former Pres Johnson makes 1st pub s since leaving office (at Chicago Dem
dinner); appeals to all Amers to support Pres Nixon; does not take specific
position on Nixon decision to send troops into Cambodia; says Nixon has his
support; says he listened to Nixon s and that US problem is getting N Vietnam to
listen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 2, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 135 words

Premier Lon Nol says Cambodia was not consulted in advance about allied mil
operations, int; notes Pres Nixon s; says operation is violation of Cambodian
neutrality; says his Govt weighs protest; some of his staff are enthusiastic
about Amer intervention; Lon Nol says both sides have violated Cambodia's
frontiers over the yrs, but Vietcong were 1st cause; says what Amers have done
is 'a little like the Vietcong'; laughs as he says it; does not directly
criticize Amer action; US aide gives Lon Nol advance summary of Nixon s; none of
Lon Nol's staff hear s; Cambodian sources confirm neither Lon Nol nor any other
Cambodian official was informed in advance about use of Amer troops, although
Cambodians were told in advance about operation in Parrot's Beak sec; other
statements by Lon Nol noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 53, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

2 US airmen say they have named Vietnam Moratorium Com as beneficiary of their
GI life ins policies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 92, Column 1

LENGTH: 101 words

NYC Loyalty Day parade held; illus; Mayor Lindsay scored by sponsors; most of
city's leading politicians and pol candidates do not attend; few who do include
Controller Beame, Atty Gen Lefkowitz, Dem Gov aspirant Morgenthau; latter
comments on reasons for attending; parade grand marshal M M Rothstein says
Lindsay was not invited because of his gen conduct, not because of statement at
Penna U concerning draft resisters as being heroes; NYS Gov candidate R M
Morgenthau says he disagrees with Amer presence in Vietnam but does not
subscribe to Lindsay's statements; is only candidate to attend parade

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 44 words

Comment on allied foray into Cambodia; says qualified sources hold move is
unlikely to have more than transitory effect on course of war; hold enemy may
now either retreat further into Cambodia or move closer to Saigon; discusses
Pres Nixon's s and mil situation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

Ed holding that Pres Nixon action breaks long-standing policy of restraint
designed to confine war within Vietnam's boundaries; says move into Cambodia
appears to be defensive; warns of possible reaction from USSR or Communist
China; holding use of USSR pilots to defend UAR increases danger of US-USSR
conflict and calling on USSR and US to withhold participation in Arab-Israeli
dispute

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 98 words

J Reston queries whether Pres Nixon statement that he expands war into Cambodia
to go to 'heart of the trouble' is true; says heart of trouble is not in
Cambodia, but in N Vietnam and beyond that, in USSR and Communist China; says
there is good case to be made for attacking enemy bases in Cambodia but asks why
tactical battlefield case cannot be made honestly; says unless US keeps its
troops in Cambodia, enemy will come back or move to other sanctuaries; says
geography, history and time are on side of enemy; says what divides US is that
Nixon pretends Cambodian invasion will end war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Profs A L George and J W Lewis lr says spreading war highlights flaw in
Vietnamization program of failing to facilitate compromise settlement; says
further entanglement in Cambodian crisis will be ineffectual; Prof Mercurio lr
backs Pres Nixon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 2

LENGTH: 9 words

Lr on disbanding of Vietnam Moratorium Com; lauds com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 54 words

T Wicker holds escalation of war in Vietnam proves Pres Nixon does not have and
never did have 'plan to end war' in Vietnam; sees no justification for
expansion; accuses Nixon of relying heavily on his appearance on TV; charges him
with 'deception, demagoguery and chauvinism' in s to nation; cartoon on Nixon's
'low profile'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 0

LENGTH: 39 words

H Meyerson book Vinh Long, which tells story of 2 1/2 yr campaign by US troops
to clear Viet Cong from banks of Mangthit Canal in order to reopen it to barges
carrying rice to Saigon, revd; Repr John Tunney writes introduction to book

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 31 words

Maj Gen Nguyen Viet Thanh killed when his helicopter and US helicopter collide
over Cambodia during observation mission; illus; 6 other S Vietnamese killed in
crash, 2 Amers killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 43 words

Fighting in Vietnam has raged for 3 days in northernmost zone; upsurge has been
focused on town of Hiepduc, 40 mi S of Danang; N Vietnamese troops hold firm
control of 3 hamlets; S Vietnamese soldiers have killed 143 enemy; enemy
activity in other areas reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

Analysts in Saigon of Communist affairs will be very surprised if allied troops
catch top Vietcong leaders at Cambodian hq; 1 analyst says Vietcong Central
Office is not in any fixed location; Vietcong leaders said to enjoy elaborate
security provisions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Saigon police use tear gas to disperse students demonstrating aginst treatment
of Vietnamese in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 3 words

Vietcong POWs illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnamese troops, 19 mi inside Cambodia, stop at Prasaut, town where
Cambodian soldiers killed 89 Vietnamese civilians on Apr 10; their reactions
described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 301 words

Nixon Adm sources say US has carried out heavy bombing raid against supply dumps
and other targets in N Vietnam; Pres Nixon is said to have authorized at least 1
such raid after his s; raid said to be different in scope and character from any
conducted since Nov '68; Hanoi radio broadcast charges more than 100 US planes
struck in 2 provs, killing or wounding many civilians, including 20 children; US
spokesmen acknowledge there has been such a raid; describe it as reinforced
mission of 'protective reaction' against AA guns to protect unarmed
reconnaissance aircraft; refuse to discuss number of planes involved, say they
know nothing of civilian casualties; contend there has been no policy change on
bombing of N Vietnam; other officials portray raid as significant departure from
past practice; refuse to say whether similar raids are planned; Defense Sec
Laird warns he will urge resumption of bombing of N Vietnam if N Vietnam reacts
to attacks on Cambodian sanctuaries by moving troops across buffer zone, news
briefing; declares, in effect, the end of Cambodian havens; says besides ground
attacks being carried out against 2 enemy sanctuaries, air raids are being
conducted against 3 such areas and ground attacks may be ordered 'from time to
time' any place along border; gives no hint that some kind of bombing has been
resumed; suggests cross-border operations are designed in part to buy time; says
next 6 mos are 'crucial' to effort of turning over responsibility of war to S
Vietnamese; says he does not expect raids on sanctuaries will prevent US from
removing 150,000 more troops by May '71; says effort should help and even permit
larger withdrawal; Sen Scott, shortly after briefing, says Laird does not
necessarily state Adm policy with regard to resumption of bombing; Laird illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 96 words

Allied soldiers have begun painstaking search of Fishhook area of Cambodia amid
increasing signs many enemy troops fled in advance of allied arrival; have
discovered several recently evacuated enemy base areas but no significant number
of troops; enemy resistance to allied sweep remains light and scattered; US
command repts 8 Amers have been killed, 32 wounded; enemy losses listed as 476
killed; reconnaissance area extended 20 mi deeper into Cambodia; details on mil
activity; sporadic fighting continues in Parrot's Beak area as S Vietnamese
troops begin new drive; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 178 words

New Haven, Conn, rally supporting Black Panthers ends in call for nationwide
student strike to demand that US end 'aggression' in Indochina and withdraw its
forces from Cambodia; attendance on 2d day of rally is down by more than 50%
leading to cancellation of scheduled 3d day activities; illus; ebbing of spirits
of youths attending and concern among rally sponsors over ability of small
minority of white radicals to provoke incidents are main reasons for abrupt
adjournment; 'Chicago 7' defendant T Hayden calls for nationwide student strike
partly to force US to end its 'systematic oppression' of pol dissidents, such as
Seale and all other Panthers; holds univs must end their 'complicity' in war by
ending war-related research and ROTC activities; s; police use tear gas for 2d
time to disperse group of rock-throwing radicals after most other youths had
left city; observers agree disorders day previous were result of false rept of
arrest of blacks and not result of s by Rubin; FBI probes explosion on Yale
campus, 3d suspicious fire reptd at Law School

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 117 words

Ed says tragic errors of escalation are being repeated with terrifying speed;
cites large-scale US air attack on N Vietnam coming just 2 days after dispatch
of US troops to Cambodia; says Pres actions stiffen Communist will to resist;
says Pres Nixon gambles with human destiny; says panicky pace of current
escalation makes it doubly dismaying; contrasts recent Nixon s with 1 he made
April 20; says making war bigger is formula for calamity, not extrication; fears
Yarborough defeat will be interpreted by Nixon Adm as support for new mil
expansion in SE Asia; links Nixon's sudden militancy in Vietnam to his desire to
divert attention from domestic troubles as Cong elections 'move into high gear'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 2

LENGTH: 64 words

In Texas, Yarborough says he lost because of voter apathy, weariness with
Vietnam war issue and last-min campaign introduction of his vote against school
prayer, charge he did not have time to counter; Repr Eckhardt, studying results,
suggests Yarborough did not get labor vote he needed; Bentsen victory seen
personal triumph for ex-Gov Connally, bitter Yarborough foe; Bentsen illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

S Vietnam will declare 1-day truce May 19 for anniv of Buddha's birthday

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 74 words

75 persons, including Dr Spock, arrested near White House during peaceful
outdoor prayer service to protest war and US involvement in Cambodia; several
other prominent antiwar spokesmen, including S Brown, also arrested; Revs J C
Bennett, D R Hunter and R Fernandez are among group; most of demonstrators
released after posting bond; demonstration sponsored by Fellowship of
Reconciliation and Clergy and Laymen Concerned About War in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 30 words

ADA conv approves resolution calling for amnesty for men who have gone abroad or
to prison to escape draft or given dishonorable discharge because of oppossition
to Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

Sen Proxmire says he will offer resolution calling for all-volunteer force in
Vietnam and immediate end to sending draftees to fight there

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 14 words

N Vietnam implies US bombings in N Vietnam may disrupt Paris talks; protests
bombings

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 44 words

UN Sec Gen Thant says Vietnam war threatens to engulf Indochina and he will
present 'some ideas' to prevent that from happening, statement to newsmen;
before, addresses League of Women Voters on war; Brit Amb Lord Caradon says it
is impossible for UN to intervene

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Allied comdrs bar air strikes and arty support during drive to force enemy
troops out of Hiepduc in order not to destroy town; 5 Amers killed in enemy
attack on base 100 mi NE of Saigon; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 127 words

Allied sweep in Fishhook area yields enemy supplies from several countries;
casualties for both sides are relatively low; 8 Amers have been killed, 32
wounded; 2 US planes collide over Fishhook area, US helicopter downed by
gunfire; US lists 519 enemy killed, 118 detained; allied troops find no
significant number of enemy troops; US command repts finding 400 cases of med
supplies; details on mil activity; S Vietnamese troops in Parrot's Beak sec said
to be sweeping back in semicircle towards S Vietnamese border; other S
Vietnamese troops are moving into area; over 13,000 S Vietnamese troops are
involved in Parrot's Beak operations; mil spokesman says 572 enemy have been
killed in sweep, 124 detained; Lt Gen Do Cao Tri comments on action; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 154 words

Nixon Adm describes raid against N Vietnam as only continuation of long-standing
self-defense policy; Agnew and Rogers, in separate TV ints, describe air attack
as 'protective reaction' to suppress enemy ground fire and destroy missile
sites; Rogers says large complex was attacked; other officials say more bombing
raids can be expected; Adm sources disclose 128 fighter-bombers struck targets
just N of buffer zone in raid considerably larger than any others since bombing
halt; official Adm spokesmen refuse to confirm or deny number of aircraft
involved, or confirm targets; 1 White House official acknowledges raid is
'upgraded reaction'; Rogers stresses raid does not represent policy shift;
Rogers and Agnew describe bombing in N Vietnam and activity in Cambodia as
limited in time and space; O'Brien issues statement saying US actions mean
policy of disengagement has ended; other statements by Agnew and Rogers noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (TLN)

LENGTH: 54 words

Over 2,000 well-armed Cambodians serving in Amer-operated units in S Vietnam,
arrive, Pnompenh, to reinforce Cambodian Army; arrival kept secret; men are
Khmer Kampuchea Krom, lower delta Cambodians who are part of the 2 1/2-million
ethnic Cambodians living in S Vietnam; Lon Nol's request for their use, on Apr
20, noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 155 words

Calls for ending classes to allow students to protest widening US involvement in
SE Asia echoed on campuses in many parts of country; eds of 11 major Eastern
coll student newspapers agree to run common editorial calling for entire
academic community to engage in nationwide univ strike; say they call for action
because of Nixon decisions concerning Cambodia and bombing of N Vietnam; strikes
have been called at Princeton, Penna U, Sarah Lawrence and other schools; strike
plans are being formulated at Va U, Notre Dame, Brandeis and Stanford; natl
strike com in Washington is being convened from delegates of striking schools;
New Mobilization Com calls for massive rally in Washington; coll eds come from
Columbia, Cornell, Rutgers, Bryn Mawr, Sarah Lawrence, Penna U, Harvard,
Princeton, Dartmouth, Brown and Haverford; excerpts from ed; Columbia U pres
Cordier says he will speak at Columbia rally; makes other statements

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 3

LENGTH: 46 words

T Wicker comments on what Cong can do in face of Nixon's actions expanding war;
says Cong must make some effort to check and balance Pres power; suggests
resolution declaring war on N Vietnam and driving issue to ultimate question of
pub and pol legitimacy may be best way

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 2

LENGTH: 22 words

About 500 students in Dacca, Pakistan, protest against US expansion of war into
Cambodia and resumption of bombing against N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 51, Column 4

LENGTH: 10 words

'Tell-it-to-Hanoi' Com ad backs Pres Nixon action in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 67, Column 6

LENGTH: 92 words

New AT&T 8 3/4% debentures, offered to shareholders Apr 13, trade to yield up to
9.19%, record for Aaa bond; fear that Indochina war will end downward trend in
arms spending seen key factor in drop in bond prices; drop raises spector of
credit controls; Treas begins $16.6-billion refunding; sharp drop in bond prices
seen raising spector of credit controls; E Janeway sees sending of US troops to
Cambodia forcing belated recognition that wartime financing methods have been
needed all along to avoid crisis; has long been advocated credit controls

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 7

LENGTH: 93 words

Communist forces cut Pnompenh-Saigon hwy at point 29 mi from capital; arrival of
2,000 Cambodian mercenaries of US Special Forces in S Vietnam cheers Cambodian
mil; Cambodian Govt scores French Min Schumann's praise of Norodom Sinhanouk in
Natl Assembly debate and French Govt aide J de Broglie statement attacking
Cambodia for 'widening war'; Lon Nol issues statement saying his Govt 'respects
sentiments of Pres Nixon in Apr 30 message on sending troops into Cambodia';
stresses fact that Amer intervention is consequence of Vietnamese Communists
invasion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 6

LENGTH: 41 words

Saigon police clear Vietnam Natl Pagoda and Cambodian mission which has been
occupied for several days by students protesting killings of Vietnamese
residents of Cambodia; several Buddhist monks and young people wounded during
attack on pagoda

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

N Vietnamese spokesman in Paris makes vague threat that N Vietnam will walk out
of peace talks as result of Amer mil actions in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 21 words

US says Nixon Adm is eager to continue talks with USSR and other Communist
nations despite tensions in Mideast and Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 135 words

USSR Premier Kosygin scores Pres Nixon for sending Amer troops into Cambodia,
news conf; warns action may lead to further complications in internatl scene and
worsening of Soviet-Amer relations; says Amer intervention raises doubts about
Nixon's sincerity in seeking an 'era of negotiation'; charges Amers are
'resorting to scorched-earth tactics in Cambodia'; rejects idea of reconvening
Geneva conf on Indochina or any other internatl meeting; accuses Nixon of using
'trumped-up pretexts' as rationale for intervention in Cambodia; Western
diplomats surprised that Soviet statement was delivered by Kosygin who had held
no news confs in 5 yrs, shocked by his personal attack on Nixon; US State Dept
officials say Adm is eager to continue negotiations with USSR and other
Communist nations despite tensions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 90 words

US troops reach site of what is believed to be largest Vietnamese base area
discovered in operation about 20 mi N of Fishhook area; base is referred to as
'The City'; contact with enemy soldiers reptd extremely light in Fishhook area;
S Vietnamese soldiers also have little contact with enemy in Parrot's beak area;
part of rubber planation near town of Memot has been destroyed by aerial
bombings; Saigon repts 641 enemy soldiers killed in Fishhook operation, 118
detained; Amer losses put at 10 killed, 38 wounded; details on action; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 121 words

Defense Dept announces it has 'terminated' large-scale air raids against N
Vietnam; Pentagon officials stress smaller air strikes may be conducted in
future if Amer reconnaissance planes are attacked; Pentagon acknowledges for 1st
time that recent raids were larger in scope than any since '68 bombing halt and
that 'logistics support' facilities were struck in addition to AA and missile
sites; official statements leave unresolved whether supply depots were also
targets; Asst Sec Henkin characterizes raids as 'reinforced protective reaction
strikes', news briefing; Defense Sec Laird explains US policy; Henkin concedes
air raids were authorized by Washington; insists raids mean no change in policy;
details on raids; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 148 words

Sen Foreign Relations Com complains that Nixon Adm, by sending troops into
Cambodia, usurps war-making powers of Cong; charges that over yrs exec branch
has been 'conducting a constitutionally unauthorized, Pres war in Indochina';
White House rejects charge; com reluctantly agrees to attend White House
briefing along with other Cong groups; com members still seek separate meeting
with Nixon; com's complaint, combined with difficulties in arranging White House
meeting, reflect seriousness of const controversy developing between com and
White House as result of mil operations in Cambodia; com's complaint is
contained in rept urging passage of Mathias legis to repeal Tonkin Resolution;
Fulbright makes clear 'briefing' with Nixon is not regarded by com as substitute
for separate conf it requested; Repr Morgan welcomes Nixon invitation; Sen com
discusses Cooper-Church amendment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 143 words

US officials in Saigon are beginning to scale down their definitions of success
for allied sweep in Fishhook area; 1 of their preliminary conclusions is that
success will have to be measured in terms of supplies captured and facilities
destroyed, since top enemy command and vast majority of enemy soldiers appear to
have fled; another preliminary conclusion is that other forays into other parts
of Cambodia are virtually inevitable if lasting damage is to be inflicted on
enemy supply system; officials consider substantial withdrawals of US combat
troops will almost certainly have to be deferred to last 6 mos of time span set
by Pres Nixon; assume Communist forces are temporarily off balance because of
raids; few officials expect sweep in Fishhook area will yield enemy hq; say they
will be content if sufficient amounts of enemy supplies are found

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 307 words

Presidents of 37 colls and univs urge Pres Nixon to clearly show his
determination to end US mil involvement in SE Asia, lr to Nixon; say US invasion
of Cambodia and bombing of N Vietnam have generated 'severe and widespread
apprehensions' on campuses; say they share apprehensions; urgently request
meeting with Nixon; lr is drafted by NYU pres Dr J M Hester and bears signatures
of R F Goheen (Princeton), Cordier (Columbia), G P Harnell (Penna U), T H
Hesburgh (Notre Dame), J Kemeny (Dartmouth), L Gordon (Johns Hopkins); other
signers listed; Natl Student Assn and former Vietnam Moratorium Com leaders call
for natl univ strike of indefinite duration, starting now, to protest war and
mobilize pub opinion for withdrawal of US forces; antiwar groups at dozens of
colls and univs begin protest demonstrations and rallies; at least 100 colls
pledge to strike; strike begins at some schools; support for strike is expressed
in eds of many campus newspapers along with condemnation of Nixon decision to
send troops into Cambodia; many school adms approve strikes; most campus
demonstrations peaceful, with some exceptions; policemen use tear gas to quell
disorders at Md U campus; Gov Mandel declares state of emergency on campus;
Stanford U is on strike; strikes are also under way at Princeton, Notre Dame,
Rutgers and other schools; some other schools planning strikes, including Penna
U, Brandeis, Sarah Lawrence and Harvard, listed; demonstrations staged at Calif
U (Berkeley), Tex U and Wis U; leaders of student movements say 'univ strike' is
scheduled to begin tomorrow; scene at Rutgers illus; about 1,000 Univ of
Maryland students block hwy US 1 for 6 hrs before police use tear gas to
disperse them; 4 injuries and 100 arrests reptd; Mandel declares campus in state
of emergency, imposes curfew and moves Natl guard into area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 96 words

Stock and bond prices drop sharply because of investor uneasiness over US
involvement in Cambodia, bombing of N Vietnam and continuing uncertainty about
business outlook; Dow-Jones indus avg drops 19.07 points, worst drop since Nov
'63; Adm official expresses concern that emotional reaction triggered by slide
might mislead people about basic strength of econ; selling generally is not
panicky, with NYSE trading vol only slightly above normal; brokers believe
'selling climax', large price slide in heavy trading would be good sign,
squeezing last of weakness out of mkt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 3

LENGTH: 67 words

C L Sulzberger says French Govt is convinced US entry into Cambodia has
completely changed internatl situation and has set back progress toward pol
settlement; says France feels US's failure to consult it about move violates
spirit of US-French accord; says French are sad and worried; France seen
believing that USSR creates diversion in Mideast to draw US attention away from
Vietnam and Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Amer troops battle N Vietnamese soldiers, Snoul, largest battle in 5-day
campaign; action described; 5 Amers reptd injured; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

S Vietnamese Pres Thieu orders all schools in Saigon area closed because of
student unrest; police clear about 100 students from Cambodian Embassy, which
they had occupied for 12 days to protest alleged persecution of Vietnamese
nationals in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

Vietnamese Communist forces push to within 27 mi of Pnompenh; Govt appeals to
its troops to hold out 10 more days; pressure on capital seen more psychological
than mil since no sizable enemy forces appear to be involved; munic govt extends
curfew for Vietnamese residents; links threat of attacks by Communists;
Cambodian soldiers continue to arrive from Saigon; Govt claims mass enlistments
in Lower Cambodia; Cambodian high command issues communique stressing usefulness
of US-S Vietnamese forces, 1st open and direct Cambodian endorsement of Amer mil
operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 13 words

League of Red Cross Societies sec gen Beer leaves for 10-day visit to Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

Sec Gen Thant makes worldwide appeal for internatl meeting to seek peace, s, UN;
recalls he has consistently said no peace can come to Indochina through mil
actions; says UN has not been in position so far to play decisive role in
bringing end to conflict; US makes pub text of lr to Security Council repting US
action in Cambodia and reasons for it; US repr Yost calls for circulation of lr,
met with Thant yesterday on lr; details on lr and Thant s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

S Vietnamese Sup Ct rules Tran Ngoc Chau was convicted unconstitutionally by mil
ct; ruling apparently clears way for his release

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 31 words

S Vietnamese soldiers burst into pagoda and open fire on about 600 monks, nuns
and students occupying bldg; evict militant anti-Govt buddhists; monks rept 10
persons killed, 20 wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 119 words

Brit Prime Min Wilson expresses 'apprehension and anxiety' that US intervention
in Cambodia may go beyond limits declared by Pres Nixon and bring change in his
troop withdrawal policy, s, House of Commons emergency debate; refrains from
direct criticism of Amer action; says there is specific worry in GB that
Cambodian action could lead to resumption of bombing of N Vietnam; MP E Powell
calls for end of US mil involvement in Indochina; comments on US student unrest;
Brit Govt wins vote, 280-to-70, in support of its policy; French Min Schumann
says s made by former Pres de Gaulle in '66 contains advance reply to Nixon s;
scores mil escalation; Prime Min Gorton announces Australia backs US action in
Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 73 words

Henkin says 4th area in N Vietnam was also attacked, news briefing; says he does
not know why it was not announced earlier; says Defense Sec Laird did not know
about raid; says US raids have been terminated; says 4th raid was against
targets in Mugia pass; White House press sec says Pres Nixon gave over-all
authorization for raids; Henkin disputes N Vietnamese rept that 13 US planes
were lost in raids; N Vietnam repts new raids; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 6, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 90 words

US troops open 4th front, thrusting across border 60 mi NW of Saigon; about
5,000 men attack what intelligence officers believe is series of enemy
sanctuaries near village of Kompong Trach; new operation comes less than 24 hrs
after combined allied unit is airlifted into northeastern corner of Cambodia to
strike at enemy targets in San River valley; US command said to appear to want
to open up fronts up and down 600-mi length of Cambodian border as quickly as
possible in effort to cut off enemy supplies; details on operations; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 7, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 3

LENGTH: 61 words

R Baker comments on Pres Nixon's decision concerning Cambodia; discusses views
of students; article notes Nixon, in '54, while serving as Vice Pres, suggested
US send in Amer soldiers; stresses fact that current student rage probably stems
from fact that today's youths have lived an entire lifetime of engagement with
Indochina and that war has become a curse

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 7, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

NYC Mayor Lindsay assails Pres Nixon's Cambodian policy and calls for new
'not-so-silent majority' of dissenters to move US to end war in Indochina, s,
NYC; speaks of 'dreadful miscalculation, even misrepresentation' in official
policy; cautions process of dissent must be 'peaceful, orderly and reasonable';
urges Cong to invoke 'power of the purse' to reverse Nixon Adm policy; visits
antiwar rally at NYU; Amer Soc of Magazine Eds awards, funded by Magazine
Publishers Assn and administered by Columbia Univ Grad School of Journalism,
presented to Life, New Yorker, Philadelphia Magazine, Look and Redbook

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 7, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

NYU Law School is focusing on unifying nationwide protest; Dean R B McKay sends
telegrams to deans of 150 law schools to describe NYU's position against war;
invites them to meeting in Washington; antiwar activities of law students and
profs noted; NYU pres Hester supports law school's action; Law School cancels
all exams and classes to allow for unified action to oppose Vietnam war and US
mil presence in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 7, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 0

LENGTH: 25 words

Ad sponsored by B Graham and Fillmore East and West Families cites casualty
figures in Vietnam, Cambodia and Kent State; pleads for peace and sanity

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 7, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 93 words

Pres Nixon confs with 6 Kent State students; orders full rept from Justice Dept
and White House staff analysis of rept; students say they listed causes of
conflict to Pres and that he listened to their suggestions on ways to minimize
dissent, news conf; pres asst Ehrlichman reptdly will prepare rept; 15 students
and faculty from Stanford U confer with Pres aides Ehrlichman and Kissenger on
link between student unrest and Vietnam war and action in Cambodia; Sen Griffin
says Nixon was only referring to revolutionary student when he called students
bums

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 7, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 43 words

N Vietnam and Vietcong call off 66th session of Paris talks in 'pol decision' to
protest renewed US bombing of N Vietnam; session postponed until next wk; Habib
comments on US policy regarding bombing of N Vietnam; Pres Pompidou reacts
critically to US move

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 7, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 71 words

Communist China, N Vietnam and N Korea break diplomatic relations with Cambodia;
Cambodian Govt agrees to establishment of relations with S Vietnam, prepares to
abandon recognition of Vietcong; reptdly considers delaying departure of Chinese
diplomatic personnel and Chinese experts active in Cambodia until it is certain
that Cambodian diplomats in China will be permitted to leave; Thailand reptdly
weighs resumption of ties

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 7, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 132 words

HR, in confused climax to emotional 5-hr debate, refuses to either sanction Pres
Nixon's intervention in Cambodia or to curb his authority to undertake mil
operations in SE Asia; debate concerned amendments to mil authorization bill for
fiscal '71; HR, 221-32, rejected Repr Findley amendment authorizing Pres to send
ground combat troops into Indochina states after tentatively approving it
earlier by 171-144 vote; Repr Rivers, in prior debate, succeeded in imposing
time limit of 45 seconds for each speaker; curb protested by Repr O'Neill who,
through parliamentary maneuver, arranged to get 5 minutes; Nixon backs Findley
amendment as 'splendid'; Findley amendment had been offered as substitute for
Reid amendment that would have barred use of funds for introduction of ground
troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 7, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 153 words

Amer combat troops push into Cambodia at 2 new locations, widen operations to 6
fronts and bring total number of allied troops committed to Cambodian forays to
50,000; US mil command repts sqdn of tanks and armored personnel carriers moving
eastward from Snoul; repts over 2,600 enemy troops have been killed in wk-old
campaign; puts Amer casualties at 22 dead, 58 wounded; S Vietnam losses put at
168 killed, 651 wounded; reporters rept reluctance of some Amers in S Vietnam to
go to Cambodia; allied mil operations detailed; Cambodian Army moves about 2,000
soldiers into position near ferry crossing on Mekong River held by enemy; action
is at relatively low level; enemy soldiers intensify action in north; Hiepduc
reptdly is recaptured after being overrun recently by enemy troops; town of
Queson comes under heavy attack; 29 Amers killed in attack on fire base near
buffer zone; Cambodian refugees illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 3

LENGTH: 42 words

Lr from Sens McGovern, Hatfield, Goodell, Cranston and Hughes lauds May 5 ed
noting Cong has fallen into habit of approving White House decisions; note their
amendment to Defense Authorization Bill to cut off funds for Amer mil operations
in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 4

LENGTH: 258 words

US Budget Dir Mayo hints fiscal '71 budget will slip into deficit and that
higher taxes and spending cut could be required to restore it to balance, press
conf and s, NICB econ conf, NYC; says fiscal '70 spending can still be held
around $198-billion despite Indochina war escalation; says effect of Govt pay
rise will be at least as large in '71 as in '70; says fiscal policy must remain
firm; says he knows of no inhibition on part of Adm to ask for more taxes;
comments on Prof H C Wallich statement that tax rise is highly probable as soon
as slack now developing in econ abates; says stock mkt seems to be stressing bad
econ news and ignoring good news; says history may show that this was good time
to buy stocks; sees econ going through difficult period of transition, welcomes
Fed Reserve's recent move toward easier credit policy; Prof Hymans says all econ
bets are off if extension of Vietnam war into Cambodia 'develops consequences
commensurate with its conception'; H Jones (St Louis Fed Reserve Bank) urges
restraining rate of growth in money supply to get inflation under control and
get interest rates down for more than short period, s, conf; W H Chartener
(Goldman, Sachs) cites factors that he says will continue to exert upward
pressures on interest rates; Asst Sec Passer predicts disposable personal income
will rise $50-billion in '70; predicts personal savings rate will rise to 6.8%,
'70, from 6% in '69; predicts consumer spending will rise by $41-billion in '70,
accounting for large part of probable gain in GNP; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 48, Column 7

LENGTH: 92 words

Argus Research Corp economist Nakagama says Pres Nixon's program of budget
restraint depends heavily on steady decline in mil spending; says if Vietnam
spending does not continue to drop in coming mos, budget will rapidly run out of
control; says now that war has become politically unpopular, Adm will find it
difficult to get Cong to raise taxes or cut spending in order to keep budget
close to balance; says there is good reason to expect Cambodian 'episode' will
remain limited because widespread extension of war could be financially
disastrous

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 62, Column 2

LENGTH: 35 words

Former Army officer L Rottman says he saw lethal nerve gas stored at US base in
Bienhoa, S Vietnam while he was on duty there in '67 and '68, but he never saw
it used, testimony to citizens com on US war crimes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 5

LENGTH: 77 words

Track and field captains from 10 Heptagonal colls (8 Ivy League schools and Army
and Navy) asked to attend meeting at Yale to consider adoption of unified
symbols of protest at outdoor championships tomorrow in New Haven; 16 Princeton
athletes withdraw from meet; cancellation of some sporting events noted; 7 crews
withdraw from Eastern Assn of Rowing Colls regatta to protest expansion of
Vietnam war and Natl Guard killing of 4 Kent State U, Ohio, students

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 20 words

Description of Svayrieng, Cambodia prov capital in Parrot's Beak, from which 1/2
of population, Vietnamese, is missing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

Sen Dem leadership moves toward confrontation with Nixon by pressing for action
on legis to cut off funds for future mil activities in Cambodia; HR, 163-to-94,
rejects Repr Boland amendment providing that after July 1 no funds can be used
for maintaining combat ground troops in Cambodia; Mansfield announces Sen coms
are being urged to give priority to legis dealing with Vietnam and Cambodia; Sen
Scott agrees to support move to bring legis issue before Sen as soon as
possible; Mansfield and Aiken support Cooper-Church amendment to mil sales bill

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 3

LENGTH: 68 words

Citizens Com for Peace With Freedom in Vietnam, headed by former Amb E A
Gullion, meets with Pres Nixon and gives him rept concluding Vietnamization
program is working well but warning that withdrawals of Amer troops must be
'prudent and flexible' and closely geared to improvement of S Vietnamese
capability; Gullion says rept was concluded before present Cambodian operation;
other members of group listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

GB backs UN Sec Gen Thant's call for conf on Indochina; Lord Caradon meets with
Thant; Sec of State Rogers issues statement announcing Nixon Adm welcomes
Thant's suggestion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 23 words

Saigon feels war's strain and chaos; closing of schools discussed; Govt has
imposed stricter curfew; details on student struggle; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 336 words

Pres Nixon moves to repair his lines of communication with campuses amid fresh
evidence of revolt against his policies within Adm and among his acad advisers;
promises heads of 8 major univs that he will stop hostile comments about
students from high Adm officials, including Vice Pres Agnew; summons Govs of all
50 states to meeting; A Klebanoff, Moynihan's top aide, to resign; HEW Dept
student liaison dir A J Moffett Jr resigns; Nixon dispatches aide J C Whitaker
to conf with Hickel; Interior Dept sources rept Hickel's office is deluged with
phone calls and memos from dept employes backing his stand; White House gloom
noted; Nixon's reprs have been insisting for 17 mos that Nixon makes no effort
to control Agnew and welcomes 'free expression' and divergent points of view';
Nixon reptd upset by tone of Agnew's attack on coll radicals several hrs after
fatal shooting of Kent State U students; Minn U pres Moos says univ pres
stressed to Nixon that student concerns go well beyond Vietnam war or derisive
remarks by Adm officials; says even when war ends students will continue to care
deeply about pol issues; moderate Nixon staff aides feel events of last few days
may have made Nixon's sr and more conservative advisers more actuely aware of
gulf between Adm and acad community; group of prominent Harvard profs, including
E O Reischauer, A Yarmolinsky, R E Neustadt, G B Kistiakowsky, and F Bator, who
says Cambodian move pushed Adm policy 'beyond the pale' will conf with Nixon
aide Dr Kissinger and publicly announce their break with Adm policies on SE
Asia; disclosures reveal that Repubs had set up special telephone system to
encourage calls to White House backing Nixon's policy; White House denies it; A
J Moffett Jr resigns as student liaison staff dir to protest Adm policies; univ
pres illus; McGovern announces quick campaign to raise funds for TV attack on
Nixon policy; there are disclosures that Repubs set up special telephone system
to encourage calls to White House in support of Nixon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 241 words

Article on reasons why Interior Sec Hickel, self-made millionaire and regarded
by some as 'square,' came to be the 1 Cabinet member to write lr to Pres Nixon
despite risk to his pol career; Hickel aide says lr 'came right from heart and
was meant for Pres'; regrets lr was leaked to press; says however White House
might be angered by leak and however much pressure is put on Hickel, he will not
recant or retreat from his conviction that nation's leaders have obligation to
communicate with youth; view that lr was stage-managed by White House in effort
to establish belated Pres liaison with youth dispelled; genesis of lr as given
by close assoc of Hickel detailed; assoc cites Hickel's opposition to Vietnam
war, influence on him of young aides M Roberts, M Levett and P Ryan, impact on
Hickel of talks with large number of coll students, Nixon's decision to escalate
war in Cambodia, his statement in Cambodian s about great univs being destroyed
and his characterization of student dissenters as 'bums'; says Hickel, after
phone calls to 2 eldest sons, tried to set up apptmt with Nixon but was turned
down; says he tried next to see Ehrlichman but he was out of town; says Hickel
then met with Sec Rogers, who backed his views; White House seen aware of lr's
impact and is trying to convert Hickel's new popularity into line of
communication between Nixon and young; aide explains reference to Thomas
Jefferson and others mentioned in lr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 155 words

Official sources say flotilla of S Vietnamese gunboats, many of them with Amer
advisers aboard, is scheduled to begin assault up Mekong River to Pnompenh;
flotilla's mission is to neutralize enemy sanctuaries along 45-mi stretch of
river between border and Pnompenh, and to carry med and other relief supplies to
thousands of Vietnamese refugees in Pnompenh; Comdr J M White says no Amer craft
will be involved; allied forces continue sweep operations in 6 areas; only
scattered fighting reptd as units push to link up with one another; S Vietnamese
announce withdrawal of 10,000-man task force operating in Parrot's Beak; rept
having killed 1,197 enemy in operation, rept 66 of their own killed; Min Tran
Van Lam comments on flotilla move; details on mil action; White House announces
US troops have penetrated to 'most sophisticated base complex' yet uncovered in
Cambodian operation; location is in Fishhook area; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 9, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 8

LENGTH: 19 words

Pres Nixon indicates his willingness to accept coalition govt if it is chosen by
S Vietnamese people, news conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 9, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 7

LENGTH: 49 words

Group called Vietnam War Veterans Against the War plan to file suit against
admrs of VA Hosp in NYC for allegedly forbidding patients from signing antiwar
petition; D Jiminez, patient who circulated petition, says hosp dir destroyed
petitions, threatened to discharge patients who signed them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 9, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Min Nae Hyuk Chung will visit Saigon to discuss with allied officials what role
S Korea can play in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 9, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Min Grechko denounces US and holds that if there is 3d world war 'imperialism
would be crushed as a world system,' s, Moscow, marking V-E Day; assailing US
moves in Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam, calls US 'main stronghold of internatl
reaction'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 9, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

S Vietnamese Navy flotilla gunboats bound for Pnompenh are reptd to have crossed
border into Cambodia on Mekong River; bulk of fleet of about 60 river craft
reptdly masses inside S Vietnam; flotilla described by S Vietnam as relief
mission to Vietnamese residents in Cambodia; allied forces continue to meet only
scattered enemy resistance; US mil command announces 8 US helicopters and 1
observation plane have been downed since May 2; S Vietnamese troops rept killing
215 enemy in battle 17 mi S of buffer zone; US troops illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 9, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 108 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says he and Premier Lon Nol have worked out
'agreements in principle' for S Vietnamese troops to conduct continuing mil
operations in eastern Cambodia; says S Vietnam and Cambodia have also discussed
feasibility of S Vietnamese naval blockade of Cambodian coastline and principal
port of Kompong Son (formerly Sihanoukville); makes clear S Vietnamese troops
will not be bound by restrictions Pres Nixon has placed on US troops; says there
is no deadline or limits to S Vietnamese operations in Cambodia; makes other
comments; repts their accord includes direct S Vietnamese mil aid and training
of Cambodian army

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 9, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 76 words

Cambodian officials say they would welcome large-scale S Vietnamese Navy effort
up Mekong River to evacuate Vietnamese residents of Pnompenh; Communist threat
to city leads to stepped-up arrests of Vietnamese residents; over 20,000 are now
under house arrest; airline flights evacuating Vietnamese increased, panic
selling is underway at stores owned by Vietnamese; enemy troops reptd to be
within 20 mi of Pnompenh; mil clashes in other areas described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 9, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 8

LENGTH: 10 words

Intruders ransack offices of NY Student Mobilization Com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 9, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 125 words

Composition of Norodom Sihanouk's govt in exile seen as confirmation of repts
that Cambodian Communist movement has been reactivated with China's help; Khieu
Samphan, Hu Nim and Hou Yuon, key mins, are known as major leaders of Khmer
Rouge movement, guerrilla group comparable to Vietcong in S Vietnam; Communist
Chinese mil men and civilians hold rallies throughout China hailing new
Cambodian Govt; Hsinhau repts new Premier Penn Nouth has sent message to Sen
Mansfield voicing thanks for his and others opposition to Pres Nixon's move into
Cambodia; repts from Taipei say Chinese Communist mil mission, headed by
prominent Communist party leader, has been organizing ways to give material
assistance to anti-US and anti-Pnompenh forces in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 9, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 311 words

Pres Nixon defends US troop movement into Cambodia, news conf; says operation
will win 6 to 8 mos time for further training of S Vietnamese forces and thus
shorten war for Amers; says most Amer troops will be out of Cambodia by middle
of June, and that 1st units will leave by middle of next wk; says he shares
objectives of his critics and that time will prove him to have served cause of
peace; expresses understanding of protesters and asks their understanding in
return; says he is not surprised by intensity of protest, places blame on
misunderstanding of his intentions; disclaims responsibility for war and
reiterates he has no intention of expanding it; says Cambodian operation
proceeds well ahead of schedule, denying munitions to enemy; promises withdrawal
of 150,000 Amer soldiers by next spring will thus be achieved, and if various
attempts at negotiation are fruitful, pullout may even be faster; offers,
somewhat tentatively, to receive some of the demonstrators who are massing in
Washington; says he has not given up hope for negotiated settlement; reiterates
his willingness to accept any outcome, even a coalition govt if it is choice of
S Vietnamese people; says it was his decision to send troops to Cambodia and he
will accept responsibility for it; other points made noted; says he sees neither
revolt nor repression in US, citing his tolerance of dissent and efforts to
communicate with youth as necessary 'safety valve'; says US may be forced to
re-evaluate its decision on jets if repts of USSR pilots role in UAR defense are
true and that role 'continues to escalate', because of shifts in power balance;
holds US and USSR retain common interest in limiting strategic weapons and
predicts 'there will be an agreement in that field'; Nixon closes press conf in
memory of M Smith, newsman who closed confs before his death; transcript; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 9, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 110 words

Over 250 State Dept and foreign-aid employes sign lr to Sec Rogers criticizing
US involvement in Cambodia; Rogers reptdly urged there be no pub dissent among
career diplomats that might embarrass Adm; about 1 doz antiwar demonstrators
occupy part of Peace Corps hq bldg, hang out Vietcong flag; others picket in
front of bldg; Peace Corps Dir Blatchford repts he refused to have
demonstrators, some of whom were former Peace Corps members, evicted and that
Secs Rogers and Interior Sec Hickel backed his decision, news conf; Rogers
reptdly is annoyed at pub repts suggesting he opposed Cambodian operation, has
requested officials not to discuss matter publicly

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 9, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 132 words

Allied Chem bd chmn J T Connor says Pres Nixon's decision concerning Cambodia
'shakes the confidence of many Amers in his judgments and intentions', s,
Business Council meeting, Va; says decision will result in widespread dissension
in US; says he is shocked and stunned at Cambodian move and new bombing raids in
N Vietnam; ints with Business Council members indicate Connor's views are shared
by small minority; Sec Stans also s and asks Nixon be supported; Connor says he
speaks out because he was asked to deliver paper on econ consequences of ending
war; predicts pullout will have relatively little effect on econ; US Steel chmn
Gott holds 'indus is doing more than anyone else' to combat pollution, Boise
Cascade pres Hansberger urges that schools offer environmental protection
courses

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 69, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 22 words

S Vietnamese Govt spokesman announces 71 civilians have been killed and 78
wounded in Vietcong attacks in northern areas recently

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 86, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 39 words

Army, admitting tech error, gives hon discharge to Lt H Bernt, who had been
court-martialed for refusing to go to Vietnam; acts after rev bd finds he should
have been tried at 6th Army Presidio in San Francisco rather than at Ft Ord

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Prof Toynbee article on frightening transformation of US image abroad stemming
from interventions, such as in Vietnam, activities of CIA and domestic discord;
offering view that US now appears to most Eurs to be most dangerous country in
world

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Comment on uncertain results of allied sweep into Cambodia after 8th day; sweep
seen not going as well as mil officers hoped it would; US officers, in Saigon,
formerly enthusiastic about sweep, are now defensive about it; map of allied
troop and naval moves

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

Ed on V-E Day 25th anniv notes lack of peace since World War II but holds spirit
of better future that existed briefly 25 yrs ago can yet be relit; says Vietnam
has especially given war a bad name

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 101 words

Lr by Profs F Gilbert, R Hofstadter, H S Hughes, L Krieger, W E Leuchtenburg, F
Stern, C V Woodward and G Wright says Pres Nixon actions in Indochina constitute
disastrous and indefensible re-escalation of war; urges massive outpouring of
responsible opposition; lr by A M Schlesinger Jr says argument voiced by Nixon
and Sulzberger that world will conclude US will not fight where its vital
interests are concerned if it does not fight to end in Vietnam is 'patently
absurd'; scores Cambodian move; Washington U Chancellor T H Eliot lr scores
Cambodian move; other lrs on Cambodian move and related events

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 5

LENGTH: 53 words

5,000 demonstrators in London protesting US involvement in Vietnam march on US
Embassy, struggle with police and cause some damage; 60 demonstrators arrested;
several demonstrators and policemen injured; 3 persons wounded by police in W
Berlin; some 5,000 policemen battle thousands of leftist radicals for several
hrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 17 words

Communist China and N Korea charge their embassy staffs in Pnompenh are being
prevented from leaving

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

Saigon police arrest 76 hs and coll students who tried to occupy Educ Min bldg;
to protest closing of schools

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 199 words

Between 75,000 and 100,000 youths, mostly from troubled coll campuses across US,
demonstrate peaceably at rear of barricaded White House, demanding withdrawal of
US mil forces from Vietnam and other SE Asian nations; illus; afterwards, a few
hundred militants in small groups spread through surrounding sts, cause some
damage; police break up most threatening crowds with tear gas; bomb blows out
glass facade of Natl Guard bldg; about 300 persons arrested in disturbances;
police use tear gas to break up rally of militant s ufents at G Washington U; 59
parked city buses separate protesters from White House and Pres Nixon, who
remains inside after making an early morning trip to Lincoln Memorial and
talking to a group of youths; members of White House staff mingle with
demonstrators at White House; several hundred demonstrators treated for heat
prostration; other details on demonstration; Mayor Washington comments; actress
J Fonda is among speakers at rally; Natl Welfare Rights Orgn vp Mrs B Sanders,
as Washington rally urging US withdrawal from Indochina, urges young men burn
draft cards; over 400 cards collected to be used as part of nationwide antidraft
strike; some reptd burned

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 137 words

White House says success in 1st 9 days of allied sweep into Cambodia exceeds all
expectations; says allies captured more enemy ammunition than enemy had fired in
Vietnam in 1st 4 mos of '70; admits failure to discover or capture main enemy hq
originally believed to be in invaded Fishhook area; repts captured equipment
includes over 6-million rounds of ammunition; says lack of enemy resistance and
allied success in capturing materiel will probably cut period of US stay in
Cambodia; doubts N Vietnamese retaliation; says prospects for negotiatiation
with N Vietnam and USSR may be enhanced by Cambodian action; lists casualties
after 9 days as 60 Amer, 184 S Vietnamese and 3,740 enemy killed; repts 1,041
enemy POWs taken; White House aides suggest prospects of negotiations with USSR
may be improved by Cambodian move

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 10, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 123 words

US mil command, Saigon, repts 30 US gunboats join with S Vietnamese flotilla in
thrust into Cambodia on Mekong River NE of Chaudoc; repts action is augmented by
US helicopters and thousands of S Vietnamese ground troops; says US forces are
not authorized to go beyond 21.7 mi that Nixon said is limit of current US
operations; says Amers are not going to Pnompenh; S Vietnamese say operation is
aimed at destroying N Vietnamese and Vietcong base areas 18 mi NE of Chaudoc;
new thrust opens 4th major frontier region to allied operations; US command also
announces 2 new ground operations across border; in other operations US forces
operating NE of Fishhook area rept finding enemy munitions cache larger than
cache captured earlier; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 3

LENGTH: 29 words

Large group of Parisians, sponsored by Socialist and Communist groups, stages
anti-Amer protest, Vincennes Pk; N Vietnamese, Vietcong and pro-Norodom Sihanouk
reprs attend

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 2

LENGTH: 30 words

Ed on closing of Saigon's schools in effort by S Vietnamese Govt to cope with
rising tide of student protest; comparing S Vietnamese students' protest against
war to protest here

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

Plans are being made in Washington and elsewhere for further acts of protest in
aftermath of Washington demonstration; New Mobilization Com plans no further
mass demonstrations in forseeable future; details on antiwar plans for wks
ahead; further details on Washington demonstration; youths walking past White
House illus; servicemen at number of bases organizing demonstrations against
Indochina war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 2

LENGTH: 27 words

US adviser and S Vietnamese gens establish 1st contacts W of Mekong River
between S Vietnamese and Cambodian troops driving toward river from opposite
direction

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 39 words

Amer news correspondents R Dudman (St Louis Post-Dispatch), E Pond (Christian
Science Monitor) and M Morrow (Dispatch News Service) reptd missing after
failure to return from trip across Cambodian border near Svayrieng from Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

Article discusses plight of Vietnamese refugees; 16,800 reptdly have arrived in
S Vietnam since Mar 18; some illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 16 words

Xuan Thuy will leave Paris for Hanoi; N Vietnamese delegation does not say
whether he will return

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 108 words

Under Sec Richardson says that when Nixon Adm decided to send US troops into
Cambodia, it believed possibility of Chinese Communist intervention in Indochina
was remote enough to constitute an 'acceptable risk'; says USSR has maintained
'rather restrained posture'; says he doubts whether USSR can make any moves
toward internatl conf while Cambodian sweep is going on; gives views in radio
and TV int; is said to be considered less than enthusiastic about Cambodian
venture; Bunker also comments on Cambodian venture, radio and TV int; says he
doubts US troops will have to make repeated raids to keep enemy from rebldg base
areas; Amb Bunker illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 18 words

US mil command repts 33 Amers killed, 30 injured and 21 helicopters lost in last
wk in Indochina warfare

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 200 words

Capt Nguyen Thanh Chau, comdr of S Vietnamese gunboat flotilla, says boats will
sail up Mekong River as much as 55 mi past S Vietnam border to Kompong Cham;
Amer advisers aboard reptdly will make trip with them; decision to expand
incursion linked to plan to counter threat of Vietnamese Communist movement
south along strategic river border; mil and rescue operations reptdly were
combined only after secret of mil mission was revealed accidentally by S
Vietnamese min; river assault reptdly had been planned for wks; mil sources say
30 Amer gunboats in 140-boat flotilla have not sailed beyond 21.7-mi limit set
for penetration by Pres Nixon; other sources say Amer advisers will stay with
those craft that do go beyond Pnompenh; allied ground forces continue operations
from Mekong Delta to Central Highlands against light scattered opposition; S
Vietnamese helicopter carrying 2 gens and an Amer col lands near village of Koki
Thom, makes 1st contact west of Mekong between S Vietnamese and Cambodian
troops; Cambodian Govt announces it will take over houses of all Vietnamese who
are repatriated and do not sell them, will distribute them to needy Cambodian
families; map tracing flotilla route

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 42 words

Saigon naval craft go and up and down Mekong River picking up Vietnamese
refugees and assuring their security in transit; illus; allied ground troops
sweep towards Neak Luong along Hwy 1; refugees describe days of terror since
Norodom Sihanouk ouster

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 12, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 65 words

T Wicker refutes Pres Nixon argument that 'bloodbath' would ensue if US were to
abandon S Vietnam to 'N Vietnamese invaders'; says only events resembling mass
pol reprisals after '54 armistice occurred in S Vietnam, not N Vietnam; says it
seems Nixon 'wills' possibility of bloodbath to be true to justify war, his
policy and to confirm anti-Communism on which so much of his pub life rests

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 12, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 8

LENGTH: 29 words

Allied operations reptdly unearth more enemy supply caches; US Adm spokesmen
insist US personnel with S Vietnamese flotilla did not go beyond 21.7-mi limit
set by Pres Nixon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 12, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 112 words

Many colls and univs reopen for classes, but students at 158 insts are reptd
still on strike 'indefinitely'; regular academic programs on many campuses
modified to take account of student protests; tear gas is used on some campuses
to control protests; activities at Brandeis, Calif U, S Carolina U, American U,
S Calif U, New Mex U, Harvard, Md U, Missouri U, Marquette U and other schools
noted; youth from Calif U who set himself on fire in calling for end of war
dies; Natl Econ Boycott Com, a student group, plans to organize student boycotts
of specific products with aim of inducing large cos to commit themselves to
goals of student strike against war in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 12, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 7 words

Enemy gunners fire 3 rockets into Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 12, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Xuan Thuy leaves for Hanoi; says settlement cannot be reached until Pres Nixon
abandons policy 'based on strength'; says Communists will attend next session of
talks; has not attended session since departure of Harriman

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 12, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Defense Sec Laird says US troops withdrawal from Cambodia will follow Pres
Nixon's schedule despite complaints from field officers that all occupied
territory may not be searched in time, news conf, Detroit; says rainy season
begins soon in Indochina and US troops will not be bogged down in Cambodia; S
Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says Cambodia has set no time or geog limits on
allied offensive operations; says, if asked by Cambodia, S Vietnamese forces can
go farther into Cambodia and there is no deadline yet for getting out

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 12, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 80 words

N Vietnam Communist party chief Le Duan arrives in Peking from Moscow, reptdly
to seek to promote Sino-USSR unity of action on Indochina; his prospects do not
seem good in view of USSR's apparently reserved attitude toward recent Chinese
activities in support of Norodom Sihanouk; Peking Hsinhua says Norodom Sihanouk
govt in exile sends troops into Cambodia to fight Lon Nol Govt; US officials
show interest in new hint from Polish Min Jedrychowski on reconvening Geneva
conf; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 12, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 230 words

Pres Nixon confs with 45 state and territorial Govs to press his search for ways
of improving communications with acad community and to explain Cambodian
decision; throws meeting open to discussion of student unrest and then wins from
Govs pledge that they will help him in his efforts to close gap between Govt
officials at all levels and acad community; NY Gov Rockefeller says long
involvement in Indochina has caused 'devasting repercussions' throughout nation,
including polarization of Amer people; Govs Love, Dempsey, Shafer comment; there
is disagreement among Govs over whether Vice Pres Agnew clashed with Dem Gov
Licht over campus radicalism; various Govs offer different assessments over role
played by Agnew at meeting; several Govs agree Agnew took his hard line toward
campus radicals; White House says he merely made point that anti-intellectual
attitude barred Govt officials from visiting campuses and denies Agnew argued
with Licht; Licht says he cannot remember any sharp exch; repts many moderate
students in RI told him they were not fully radicalized by Kent or Cambodia but
would be 'lost to system' if Adm fails to open lines of communication with
campuses; most Govs back view; further signs of unrest within Nixon Adm noted;
meeting illus; M H Halpern resigns as consultant to protest Nixon's decision to
expand war into Cambodia and to bomb N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 12, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 124 words

47 S Vietnamese Navy ships move up Mekong River and reach Pnompenh; greeted by
Cambodians; 20,000 Vietnamese held in Cambodian camps see hope of delivery in
ships; main objective of river operation is to pick up Vietnamese residents and
transport them to S Vietnam; several hundred Amers connected with operation stay
40 mi downstream at Neak Luong; J P Vann, chief US civilian official in Mekong
Delta, flies to Neak Luong to study refugee situation; some ships have already
returned to S Vietnam with refugees; Vann repts 3,000 repatriated so far;
Cambodia reverses itself on issue involving Vietnamese minority; withdraws order
that properties of Vietnamese leaving Cambodia be distributed to Cambodians
without compensation to owners; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 13, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 1

LENGTH: 70 words

NYS Gov Rockefeller, asked about Indochina war as election issue, says natl
questions may well be involved in campaign because they infringe on life of
state, news conf, NYC; earlier, had issued statement warning war is causing
'devastating repercussions' in US, such as alienation of the young and diversion
of vital funds needed for domestic programs; was briefed by Nixon with other
Govs on Cambodia invasion; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 13, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 2

LENGTH: 150 words

Antiwar demonstrators battle police and Natl Guard at SC Univ and several other
colls; many schools return to near-normalcy; tear gas used at SC Univ;
activities and conditions at Brandeis, Ohio U, Denver U and other schools noted;
Mt Holyoke Coll spokesman denies rept faculty members call for Pres Nixon and
Vice Pres Agnew impeachment; group of Mass coll students plan mass withdrawals
of funds from 3 banks to protest war in Indochina; mail deliveries in Albany,
NY, halted nearly 6 hrs by State Univ students who blocked main PO entrances
protesting war in Cambodia; Univ of Wisconsin students and faculty cash in
$19,000 worth of US savings bonds in day; say action is response to use of tear
gas during demonstrations; Oberlin (Ohio) Police Chief Ferber and aide suspended
after complaints by students and residents of police brutality; 4 other
policemen resigned earlier under like criticism

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 13, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 109 words

Ousted Cambodian leader Norodom Sihanouk repts forces backing his cause were
about to take Pnompenh when US and S Vietnamese troops began their offensive,
rept by Hsinhau; says his 'liberation army' had scored brilliant victories prior
to that time; repts 'people's adms' have been set up in many Cambodian provs;
says forces loyal to him have been dealing 'severe blows' to US 'invaders'; says
resistance forces are being led by Mins Khieu Samphan, Hu Nim and Hou Yuon; mins
reptdly issued statement from Hanoi calling upon Cambodians to resist Amers and
S Vietnamese; US skeptical that Norodom Sihanouk's mins operate from 'liberated'
areas in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 13, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 86 words

Pres Nixon gives sympathetic audience of labor leaders fresh rept on what he
calls 'enormous success' of Cambodian venture; makes surprise visit to AFL-CIO
hq; White House press sec says Nixon repts 5,000 enemy killed and capture of
more enemy ammunition than was expended by enemy in last 5 or 6 mos in S
Vietnam; AFL-CIO pres Meany reaffirms his support of Cambodian venture; Ford
recounts same repts at businessmen's luncheon; Nixon and Meany illus; tribute to
late W P Reuther; delegation to attend his funeral

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 13, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 57 words

Allied officials say Cambodian operation has fragmented enemy mil and pushed its
major fighting units off balance; say allied troops have captured enough
munitions for 5-mo enemy attack in S Vietnam; say only tiny fraction of
sanctuaries has been searched; say field repts indicate 2,037 enemy have been
killed in operation; other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 13, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 181 words

Defense Sec Laird says several thousand Amer troops have already been withdrawn
from Cambodia and that more will be withdrawn this wk, testimony to Sen Armed
Services Com; predicts all ground combat in Vietnam will be taken over by S
Vietnamese forces by July '71; says some US ground forces would remain, but they
would be assigned to non-combat missions; says 'major portion' of US forces in
Cambodia will be withdrawn by June 15; reiterates Pres Nixon's pledge that all
Amer troops will leave Cambodia by end of June; does not rule out further use of
Amer air power in Cambodia; refuses to exclude possibility of S Vietnamese
operations in Cambodia after US forces leave; says Cambodian Govt was consulted
and approved US actions; says Nixon made decision in interest of protecting
Amers; illus; Laird holds stopping work on Safeguard and MIRVs would be
inconsistent with purpose of arms talks in Vienna; says Amer restraint in
weapons deployments over last 5 yrs, coupled with Soviet buildup, has led to
'crossover point in strategic balance'; details USSR 'accelerated momentum'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 13, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 101 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky repts allied ships begin blockade of 100-mi
stretch of Cambodian coastline to prevent enemy from resupplying their troops by
sea; in helicopter, visits S Vietnamese units at Neak Luong, operating with US
aid and air support; says S Vietnan plans mil operations in E and central
Cambodia after US troops leave by end of June; says he is in Cambodia to conf
with S Vietnamese comdrs on mil operations after Amers leave; says Cambodia
asked for S Vietnamese aid in fighting N Vietnamese and Vietcong; US command in
Saigon repts USN ships participate in blockade; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 14, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Ed holds Cooper-Church amendment represents Sen determination to reassert Cong
prerogatives in foreign policy; backs amendment as strengthening Amer position
in world; holds Vietnam war undermines Amer credibility abroad

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 14, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 51 words

21 welfare mothers, Natl Welfare Rights Orgn members, and student supporters
arrested after staging 8-hr sit-in at Sec Finch's office, Washington; mothers
meet twice with Finch; demand $5,500 guaranteed annual income for family of 4
and massive transfer of Fed funds from Vietnam war to welfare program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 14, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 1

LENGTH: 104 words

NY Dem gubernatorial candidate Goldberg says he opposed move within Johnson Adm
to invade Cambodia in '66; discloses former Amb H C Lodge urged sending of
troops into Cambodia and used arguments similar to those that impelled Pres
Nixon to act; signs Columbia U petition asking Cong to halt financing of mil
operations in Vietnam and other SE Asian countries; details on Goldberg's
account of his opposition to move; former US foreign policy officials confirm
idea of sending troops into Cambodia was raised frequently and rejected each
time; Samuels charges Goldberg with ambiguity in his statments on current
situation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 14, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 3

LENGTH: 39 words

Bipartisan group of young liberal pol activists, headed by M Brewer and S Brown,
form orgn called Project Pursestrings to coordinate lobbying effort for
Hatfield-McGovern amendment to withhold funds for mil operations in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 14, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 105 words

Sen Stennis says there will be 'great jubilation' in Moscow, Peking and Hanoi if
Sen restricts Pres Nixon's authority to conduct war, news conf; Amer Legion natl
comdr J M Patrick and Veterans of Foreign Wars natl comdr R Gallagher tell
reporters in Sen Press Gallery that proposed amendments would amount to
'declaration of surrender' and 'stab in the back for our boys'; their appearance
is arranged at request of White House; are escorted by Scott to gallery;
specifically criticize Church, Cooper, Fulbright and McGovern; White House
disavows any assn with statements; Stennis's particular target is Cooper-Church
amendment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 14, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

Comment on problem of Cambodia pullout; S Vietnam's determination to continue
and expand mil operations inside Cambodia seen causing possible complication to
Nixon Adm announced goal of withdrawing all Amer troops by end of June; many
experienced observers and senior mil officers in Saigon doubt it will be
militarily feasible for Amers to quit Cambodia by that time if S Vietnamese
insist on operating across border; linkage of Amer and S Vietnamese mil machines
and other factors in problem discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 14, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 6

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnamese rescue fleet leaves Pnompenh carrying 9,000 Vietnamese to S
Vietnam; 8,000 more refugees wait for a boat; conditions among refugees
described; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 14, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 185 words

Sec of State Rogers says US will not become 'militarily involved' with troop or
air support to defend Cambodian Govt, but encourages S Vietnam and Thailand to
cooperate with Cambodia in meeting Communist threats, State Dept briefing;
comments on meetings with students and faculty members on Cambodia venture;
expresses confidence their anxieties will dissipate as Cambodian operation is
terminated; says initial 'reserved' and 'negative' foreign reaction is changing
as limits of operation become clear; says all Amer troops and personnel will be
withdrawn from Cambodia by end of June; leaves way open for continuation of
patrolling internatl waters to prevent supplies from reaching Communists and for
air activity over jungle border area; makes clear he includes mil advisers in
speaking of limitations on engaging Amer troops; reiterates Defense Sec Laird
pledge that all Amer troops will be out of combat in S Vietnam by middle of '71;
explains his controversial testimony on Cambodia given April 23; confirms he
discussed Nixon Adm's problem relating to youth with Interior Sec Hickel prior
to Hickel lr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 14, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 26 words

Veterans orgns are attracting large numbers of veterans of Vietnam war;
recruiting aided by Defense Dept; described; 3 major groups have enrolled
550,000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 14, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 141 words

Several cos of Amer troops withdraw from Cambodia after only partial search of
suspected N Vietnamese base area in Sesan region of Central Highlands; pullout
raises total number of troops withdrawn in past 2 days to 1,000; field comdrs
privately express need for more Amer and S Vietnamese forces to search occupied
areas and defend captured enemy supplies; new large quantities of supplies
reptdly uncovered; US soldiers fight off small group of enemy defenders of cache
site, discover large stocks of arms and ammunition; most fighting reptd light
and scattered; N Vietnamese saboteurs slip through barbed wire protecting Amer
arty base, Fire Base Brown, 3 mi inside Cambodia; rush inner defenses; 59 enemy
soldiers killed; 1 Amer killed, 8 injured; Pentagon source suggests Sesan area
had produced fewer caches of supplies than some others; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 7

LENGTH: 86 words

NYS Dem gov aspirant Goldberg charges Gov Rockefeller with inaction and silence
on civil disorders in state, ss, Buffalo, Syracuse, Utica and Rochester; lauds
Syracuse Mayor Alexander for remaining at post during racial unrest instead of
greeting him at airport; sees Vietnam war as root of natl discord; will urge all
Govs and Gov candidates support Cooper-Church amendment to cut off funds for
Cambodia operation; Paterson campaigns with Goldberg in Upstate cities; holds
state mature enough to elect Negro Lt Gov

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 3

LENGTH: 54 words

Armed Forces Day ceremonies at bases across country either canceled or revised
for fear of campus-style antiwar demonstrations by off-duty troops and
civilians; protests set by New Mobilization Com to End War in Vietnam as part of
'M-16 Day' activities; 'M-16' taken from date of Day, May 16, and from M-16
automatic rifle

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 51, Column 3

LENGTH: 46 words

Comment on decline in Wall St stock prices stresses analysts concern over how
Nixon Adm can reduce Amer commitments in Indochina and bolster confidence; fear
that US will be drawn into confrontation with USSR over Israeli conflict seen
factor in US stock and bond mkt slide

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 5

LENGTH: 134 words

More than 1,000 NYC lawyers announce they will stop work next Wednesday to meet
legis and adm officials in Washington to urge 'immediate withdrawal' from
Indochina; NY Bar Assn pres F T Plimpton and former Atty Gen Clark speak at news
conf at which plans for Washington trip are announced; R J Dryfoos, spokesman
for Joint Project of the Lawyers Convocation on Vietnam and the Lawyers Com for
Effective Action to End the War, announces former US Chief Justice Warren has
agreed to speak to lawyers on eve of trip; Plimpton comments on construction
workers, hopes Appeals Ct decision on Bar exam will be changed; will make it
possible for law students, whose law schools have canceled exams, to take bar
exams; lawyers listed as sponsoring trip include NYC Mayor Lindsay, Goldberg,
O'Dwyer and T C Sorensen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 114 words

Pres Nixon confers medal on 5 soldiers, 3 USN men, 2 Marines and 2 USAF men,
White House ceremony, for action in Vietnam; Nixon says war in SE Asia is often
'not understood and not supported in this country' but that eventually Amers
will join him in hon soldiers' valor, talk with group of Medal of Hon winners;
confs with VFW leader Gallagher to accept his expression of support from orgn;
Gallagher comments on talks; Sec Romney says he told Nixon young people are
concerned that they have not been able to influence Govt decision-making as much
as they want, press conf; says Nixon took immediate steps to improve
communications as soon as Interior Sec Hickel made his views known

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

S Vietnamese mil spokesmen disclose their troops, with Amer advisers, conducted
4 operations in Cambodia before large-scale allied campaign that began April 29;
S Vietnamese forces launch new offensive

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 2

LENGTH: 64 words

Concern over possible Communist attempt to install hq of exile regime of Norodom
Sihanouk in Cambodia after departure of Amer troops reptd to be 1 reason for
growing expectation in Washington that S Vietnamese forces will stay in
Cambodia; State Dept spokesman says there is 'no understanding or agreement'
between US and S Vietnam on how long S Vietnamese will remain in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 105 words

S Vietnam and Cambodia reptdly have de facto alliance providing for S Vietnamese
troops to fight in Cambodia until Vietnamese Communists are defeated; operations
to be conducted with minimal coordination because of Cambodia's ltd forces; de
facto alliance said to have quietly taken shape in which S Vietnamese forces,
with solid Amer air and logistical support, extend their operations into
Cambodia with consent of Pnompenh Govt but with only minimal coordination; S
Vietnamese marines occupy market town of Banam; occupation is primarily designed
to help Lon Nol re-establish govt authority in key region of Mekong River; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 63 words

Saigon mil officials rept 863 S Vietnamese soldiers killed in battles in
Cambodia and in Vietnam in past wk; announce 168 Amers killed, 1,001 wounded,
5,898 enemy killed; fighting intensifies; 2 sharp battles reptd; 60 Amers
reptdly have died in Cambodian incursion; S Vietnamese forces launch new
offensive into Cambodia from Central Highlands; scene at Fire Base Brown illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 239 words

H Ford 2d says Ford has rejected Soviet proposal that co build trucks in USSR,
s, co annual meeting; cites pub criticism, particularly by Defense Sec Laird,
and expresses annoyance with Govt action that helped kill proposal; says co
accepted Soviet inv because it is express policy of US to encourage increased
trade with E Eur nations; holds US was advised in advance of visit and did not
discourage it; charges Laird made 'gratuitous attack on my common sense and
patriotism' when he scored proposed truck deal on ground that USSR is sending
trucks to N Vietnam; Laird, in magazine article, stressed that Amer pilots were
prisoners in N Vietnam, shot down while attacking Soviet-made trucks; H Ford 2d
sees 8.4- to 8.8-million cars sold, '70, possibly less if there are strikes;
warns only realistic alternative to wage and price controls would be tightening
of monetary policy or imposition of credit controls if runaway wage increases
continue; says all Amers have obligation to exercise restraint, patience and
tolerance in all dealings with people with different views; asks for restraint
from segments of US soc and individual Amers in response to war; says he
believes key to solving many urgent problems is early end to war; holds
complaints of massive defects in autos 'highly exaggerated'; holds car prices
will rise again in fall, partly because of Govt safety and anti-pollution rules
'that sometimes don't make sense'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 255 words

Nixon Adm sends Defense Sec Laird, Sec of State Rogers and Dr Kissinger to
capitol to warn Repub Sens that proposed legis cutting off funds for future mil
involvement in Cambodia could impair Pres Nixon's credibility abroad; 3 meet for
2 hrs with Repub Sens amid increasingly testly debate in Sen over Cooper-Church
amendment; Adm prefers no amendment but would be open to one protecting Pres
rights as Comdr in Chief to take steps to protect Amer troops; Sen Gore, in move
to point up Nixon's interpretation of his powers under Const to justify
Cambodian incursion, offers amendment barring Pres from using any funds to
invade or bomb Communist China without Cong's approval; Scott calls meeting to
see if amendment acceptable to Adm and Repub Sens can be drafted; Mansfield says
US will still be indirectly involved in Cambodia if S Vietnamese remain; Amb
Bunker, after testifying before Sen Foreign Relations Com, says he does not know
if S Vietnamese troops will be withdrawn; says question of US support for S
Vietnamese will have to be dealt with; Laird forecasts limited S Vietnamese
attacks into Cambodia after current operations have been concluded; says he
would urge continued US bombing of Communist areas in Cambodia even if Communist
forces take over Cambodian Govt and demand end to US activity; Fulbright repts
on Bunker testimony; W A Harriman says only way to compel Nguyen Van Thieu Govt
to undertake serious negotiations is to set 'fixed schedule' for US withdrawals,
testimony to joint Cong com; Harriman por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 3

LENGTH: 99 words

Anthony Lewis on growing feeling among many Amers that nothing they say can
effect course of US policy; says dem theory of free s as corrective for official
error and safety valve for pub resentment cannot work when people get idea that
no one is listening; notes that S Vietnamese generals who 'have drawn us into
endless war on their behalf' now talk about indefinite operations in Cambodia
and expect US support there; significance of Cooper-Church amendment as lying
not so much in const question of Pres power as in offering critics of Indochina
war some hope of change through pol process

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 255 words

White House press sec Ziegler says Nixon Adm views any move to cut off funds for
future mil involvement in Cambodia as infringement of President's const powers
as Comdr in Chief; says Adm feels there should be no restraint and can not
accept language of Cooper-Church amendment to foreign mil sales bill even though
amendment is in keeping with Nixon pledge to have US forces out of Cambodia by
June 30; says its opposition to amendment does not indicate any intention of
keeping US forces in Cambodia beyond June 30 or any plans for another incursion
into Cambodia; Adm view seen as assertion that real issue is one of const
conflict; not question of impairing Pres Nixon credibility abroad; Sen Repub
leadership seeks compromise on amendment that could win over uncommitted Sens;
Repub leader Sen Scott repts 12 to 15 Sens undecided or uncommitted with
committed Sens about evenly divided; Repub leaders conf with White House, State
Dept and Defense Dept aides to consider substitute amendments, all designed to
make clear that no restrictions laid down by Sen will prevent Pres from taking
steps in Cambodia to protect US troops in S Vietnam; Scott suggests substitute
amendment that no funds authorized by bill could be used to introduce US troops
into Cambodia, Laos or Thailand without consent of Cong, unless Pres determines
that such a step was necessary to protect lives of US troops in S Vietnam; says
there are 12 to 15 Sens who are uncommitted, with committed Sens evenly divided;
Nixon meets with aides at his Fla home

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 49 words

Nixon Adm sources indicate US reserves right to veto S Vietnamese-Camb odian
joint defense plan for Lon Nol regime if plan threatens conduct of Vietnam war;
some US officials express concern that US may be trapped in Cambodian venture to
extend that it could affect Pres Nixon's withdrawal plans

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 3

LENGTH: 191 words

2500 to 5000 construction workers, longshoremen and white-collar workers march
through NYC financial dist in demonstration against NYC Mayor Lindsay anti-war
stand; shout threats at long-haired youths; invade bldgs failing to show US
flag; raise their own Amer flags on some bldgs; were angered by his castigation
of workers who assaulted peace demonstrators in earlier incident; Lindsay calls
workers 'tough and organized mob'; meets with Leary and other police officials
to discuss Police Dept's investigation of what Lindsay called 'police failure'
in recent demonstrations; Lindsay spokesman says Lindsay is satisfied with
inquiry; details on demonstrations in financial dist and midtown area;
Councilman A Arculeo accuses Lindsay of making 'seditious statements'; City 1
Coalition holds demonstration against war; 200 CUNY students march, 47th St and
1st Av, in support of free tuition; NYC City Councilman Arculeo accuses Lindsay
of having made 'seditious statements,' says he alludes to Lindsay s at Penna U
in which he was reptd to have expressed 'unending admiration' for men who obey
their consciences and refuse to serve in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

Meeting between Gov Cahill and 200 student leaders from NJ campuses turns into
shouting match as several students press Cahill for answers to questions on
Vietnam; Cahill terms exch 'educational'; 1 student reads statement calling for
state bill barring NJ draftees from serving in undeclared war; protest
activities involving students at CCNY, US Merchant Marine Acad and Wagner Coll
noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 133 words

12-nation conf on Cambodia set to open, Jakarta; called by Indonesia;
participants listed; Cambodia to attend as 'special invitee'; Min Malik seems to
have persuaded most reprs to adopt moderate stand and to seek limited goals at
conf; Indonesia and Japan express hope there will be no condemnation of either
side but instead consensus on following: 1) Cambodian neutrality and
independence should be protected on basis of '54 Geneva conf; 2) all foreign
troops should be withdrawn in near future; 3) Internatl Control Comm should be
reactivated, or, failing this, new inspection comm should be formed by Asian
nations; speculation on stand of various nations; conf on Cambodia said to be
destined to be neither success nor failure because conf is in no position to
take action to stop Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 39 words

Press credentials of missing correspondents R B Dudman (St Louis Post-Dispatch),
E A Pond (Christian Science Monitor) and M D Morrow (Dispatch News Service)
found in house in which 3 N Vietnamese soldiers were killed in gun battle

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 92 words

About 200 N Vietnamese attack US base inside Cambodia, killing 5 Amers, wounding
14; 58 enemy bodies found; fighting flares in 2 strategic Mekong River towns;
Stung Treng and around Toule Bet; US mil spokesman says capture of Vietcong arms
caches forces guerrillas to scale down their activity; S Vietnamese Army
newspaper says aim of new allied thrust is to relieve hard-pressed Cambodian
troops 22 mi W of border; US spokesman says no Amer ground troops are involved
in operation, but Amers provide considerable air, arty and other support; illus;
map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Illus of US 25th Inf Div troops at Tayninh, S Vietnam, ready to board
helicopters for Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Defense Dept extends number of mil bases to be closed to avoid confrontations
with antiwar protesters; Armed Forces Day ceremonies; partial list; New
Mobilization Com to End War in Vietnam aide J Susarrey says there will be
confrontations anyway

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 86 words

Laotian Defense Dept aide Col Thongphank Knosky says N Vietnamese on May 9
seized Tang Vay and are now encircling Nong Boua, news conf; suggests S
Vietnamese mil intervention is needed; Govt arty fires at N Vietnamese advancing
on Saravane; residents appeal to visitors to help them get evacuated; Govt seeks
Internatl Control Comm aid to prevent N Vietnamese attack; refugee problem
described; US provides planes for evacuations and refugee operations; US aid
plays major role in feeding and sheltering evacuees

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 41 words

Vice Adm J H King Jr assumes command of USN forces in Vietnam from Vice Adm E R
Zumwalt Jr, who will become Chief of Naval Operations; Gen Abrams presents Vice
Adm E R Zumwalt Jr with Navy Distinguished Service Medal and Navy Unit
Commendation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 16, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 84 words

Howard J Samuels, aspirant for Dem nomination for NYS Gov, charges Goldberg is
not involved in current issues and is candidate of old pol leaders, news conf,
SUNY, Buffalo; stresses own involvement in soc protest; again calls for end to
US mil activity in Indochina; s, Rochester hs, scoring war and auto indus
pollution; pledges, if elected, that no new cars will be sold in state after '73
of '74 without efficient antipollution devices; vows to give mfrs who pollute
fines of $100,000 or $1-million

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 62, Column 8

LENGTH: 49 words

Antiwar protesters demonstrating at Fort Dix, NJ, harass NY News photographer L
Detrich, denouncing paper's coverage of Vietnam war and its opponents; disable
his car by pouring sand into gas tank; brief but nonviolent confrontation takes
place between them and mil policemen with fixed bayonets

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 71, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 16 words

Col Carrol E Adams Jr, Maj Gen John A Dillard and others killed in helicopter
crash in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 88, Column 5

LENGTH: 65 words

Swiss novelist M Frisch believes vitality of Amer pol will surmount polarization
caused by Indochina war, int, NYC; cites Hickel lr; disputes view of Eur
intellectuals who have likened tensions created by war and racial problems to
conditions that led to downfall of Weimar Repub in Ger; takes apprehensive look
at growing US involvement in SE Asia and right-wing reaction to student dissent

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 18 words

Comment on US mil campaign and materiel seizures; illus; map shows US and S
Vietnamese mil moves; Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 27 words

Article on Le Duan's visit to Communist China and USSR and roles of both
countries in Indochinese situation; Communist China support of Norodom Sihanouk
discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Comment on disparity between warmth of feeling toward US on part of Russian
people and official anti-US campaign following extension of Vietnam war into
Cambodia; on Kosygin attack on US policy and Pres Nixon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 0

LENGTH: 37 words

Ad by Lawyers Com for Effective Action to End the War and the Lawyers
Convocation on Vietnam announces action program by lawyers including lobbying
trip to Washington and convocation at NYC Bar Assn to hear noted speakers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 117 words

J Reston on deep divisions and pessimism that pervade Washington since Cambodian
incursion; notes Nixon pub and private reaction to protest movement; says he is
in deep trouble and is increasingly up against dilemma of getting out of Vietnam
faster than he planned, or not being able to govern country; says Washington is
more divided and pessimistic now than at any time since beginning of war; says
Cambodian invasion has transformed pol problem in US; on US Cambodian venture
resulting in closing of more and more univs, increasing opposition to mil draft;
challenging of the Presidents authority as Comdr in Chief; quotes ex-Sec Rusk on
isolationist and 'Oxford peace movement' tendencies in country

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 2

LENGTH: 29 words

Prof Lyman H Butterfield lr on Pres Nixon's concern with image and unwillingness
to try to understand concerns of youth; scores Nixon reaction to Nov '69 antiwar
moratorium

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 4

LENGTH: 83 words

T Wicker comments on student response to Cambodian invasion; discusses actions
and plans within 'the system' that astonish many politicians; says what is to be
determined in present situation is whether, in nuclear age, Cong and people have
let war-making power slip beyond any feasible dem control, and whether pol and
propagandistic powers of Presidency and mil make Indochina war basically
invulnerable even to massive popular opposition; says that only in latter case
has 'system' truly failed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 193 words

Prof Neustadt, expert on Presidency, views Nixon Presidency with distress and
apprehension, int; says 'great question about Nixon, through yrs, has been his
temperamental capacity to cope with strain'; says '4 strains have now come to
conjunction'; lists strains as: 'war and credibility gap' which Neustadt says he
inherited from Johnson; 'unassimilated character' of Johnson's program against
background of domestic need; 'reach for Repub voting majority'; Neustadt says
4th strain is 'having ultimate responsibility far greater than immediate usable
authority'; says much time was spent during transition avoiding 'errors of
activism,' of 'half-informed, half-organized people attempting to find Nirvana';
says 'external evidence of decision-making machinery after these 15 mos of
tidying is deeply disappointing'; sees Pres Nixon actions in Cambodia as example
of a narrow Pres-decision-making process in which field comdrs and S Vietnamese
Govt, through US Saigon mission, operated directly on White House with limited
consultation of civilian staffs and the exec branch; is concerned about danger
of Nixon talk about no defeat and no humiliation; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 15 words

Police use tear gas to disperse students, Saigon, protesting war and closing of
schools

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

15 newsmen have so far been captured by N Vietnamese or Vietcong, 4 have been
wounded; 18 newsmen narrowly escape capture outside Kompong Cham; mil action in
Cambodia is less fierce than in Vietnam but getting to it by newsmen is twice as
hard; news coverage problems discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Article on French involvement in Chad Govt's fight against rebellious Moslem
tribesmen; French soldiers take part in fighting, advisers direct Chadian
troops; parallels with Vietnam situation noted; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

US pol analyst D Pike study says killing of Hue citizens by Vietcong in '68 was
planned and systematic, rather than random slaughter; says killing occurred in 3
stages

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

Vietnamese Communist hopes of regaining former position in Cambodia said to lie
in quickly stepping up Cambodian insurrection for which Norodom Sihanouk is
serving as leader in Peking; Peking seen emerging as big power champion of
Cambodian revolt and a new Indochina 'people's front' seeking to coordinate
Communist and Communist-front forces in Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos; USSR now
appears to be outsider in Indochina; Communist China's adroit exploitation of
new circumstances said to have strengthened Hanoi-Peking ties

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

Former Sec Clifford accuses Pres Nixon of 'reckless action' in sending combat
troops into Cambodia and of continuing to give priority to Indochina policies
while ignoring consequences in US, article in Life (pub); predicts Cambodian
operation will gain little; calls for negotiated pol settlement of war; offers
plan for complete US disengagement from Indochina; says Nixon draws US deeper
into Vietnam rather than taking it out

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 58 words

US mil command announces end of operation on river Se San and return to S
Vietnam of final elements of troops involved; operation yielded fewer enemy
supply caches than was expected, enemy resistance was stiffer than expected; US
troops continue operations in Fishhook area and fight several clashes with enemy
troops; details on mil action; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 279 words

White House says it has every reason to believe S Vietnam will withdraw its
combat units from Cambodia around July 1; Nixon Adm officials express hope that
allied mil thrust will demonstrate to enemy wisdom of bargaining seriously at
talks; White House concedes Cambodian venture might have had unsettling effects
temporarily on internatl relations, but says it could prove in long run to be
positive contribution toward easing East-West tensions; officials deny
speculation that Cambodian operation was mounted in part as means of
demonstrating firmness to USSR; these attitudes and other information emerge
from briefing for reporters who accompanied Pres Nixon to his Fla home for
weekend; officials stipulate they cannot be quoted directly; White House
emphasizes US does not raise terms for negotiated settlement, has no intention
of humiliating Communists and recognizes enemy forces have fought for long
period of time for their convictions; speak in terms of US willingness to engage
in generous negotiations; White House tone is more conciliatory than that of
Nixon Apr 30 s; no explanation offered for contradiction between assurance of a
S Vietnamese pullout and State Dept pub encouragement of Cambodian-S Vietnamese
joint defense plan against Communists; White House repts mil gains and capture
of mil caches; details; stresses US has no intention of sending US troops back
into Cambodia after completion of current border offensive; says unforeseen, but
fortuitous, result of US incursion may be to set tone for serious peace talks on
Vietnam war; details on explanations and assessments of Cambodian venture;
antiwar demonstrators gather near Nixon home; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 184 words

12-nation Asian conf on Cambodia opens, Jakarta; conf agrees on need for Asian
initiative to control war and agrees on gen principles for ending hostilities
but wide differences appear in attitudes toward war; will prevent conf from
taking concrete action to end fighting there; some reprs take militant,
anti-Communist stand and attack Vietcong and N Vietnamese as aggressors in
Cambodia; Thai Min Thanat Khoman takes strong-anti-Communist stand; other reprs
avoid condemning anyone for war; Japan opposes call for conf to appt permanent
body to seek solution to war; also opposes suggestion conf send inspection team
to Cambodia; Japanese view is that conf should not seek short-term solution but
should work for a broader conf including Communist and nonaligned countries;
Cambodian Min Yem Sambaur charges aggression by N Vietnam and Vietcong against
Cambodia; urges aid in all forms from friendly countries; no countries respond
to request, several specifically say they will not give arms; Indonesian Pres
Suharto scores big powers for failing to prevent Indochina war from spreading to
Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 17, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 61 words

Communist forces enter Kompong Cham; Cambodian planes bomb city; its capture
will be threat to Pnompenh; pressure on Kompong Cham linked to Vietcong troops
retreating from Fishhook region under pressure of US advance; US mil announces
end of operation in a loop of the Se San River and return to S Vietnam of final
elements of 5,500 troops involved; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 18, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 59, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 18 words

Repr Stafford calls for withdrawal of US troops from Vietnam by end of '71 at
commencement, Univ of Vermt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 18, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 24 words

H Kahn, in lr on May 5 ed holding present conditions not comparable to those of
'29, lays present stock mkt decline to impact of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 18, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 37 words

Over 400 Conn U students and some faculty members organize to restore and
repaint ROTC bldg, damaged during recent protests against extension of Vietnam
war into Cambodia and killing of 4 Kent State U students by Natl Guard

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 18, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

Bills have been introduced into 8 state legislatures this yr challenging
legality of Vietnam war; in 4 legislatures, bills have died in com, in 4 others,
prospects for passage range from extremely bleak to doubtful; situation has led
some observers to regard Mass act barring state draftees from serving in war as
fluke

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 18, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 161 words

About 10,000 S Vietnamese troops, aided by US mil elements, reptdly launch
another thrust into Cambodia across Vinhte Canal in Mekong Delta; seek hq of N
Vietnamese div; operation may relieve pressure against Lon Nol Govt in Takeo
Prov; S Vietnamese Cambodian operations not affected by 24-hr cease-fire to be
observed in S Vietnam on Buddha's birthday; US command lists materiel captured
in US and S Vietnamese operations; S Vietnamese Min Tran Van says S Vietnam
could not rule out possibility of strikes against enemy sanctuaries in Laos but
that large-scale intervention would depend on deterioration of mil situation in
Laos and request from Laotian Govt, int, Jakarta, Indonesia; says S Vietnamese
troops have occasionally crossed Laotian border in pursuit of enemy; says
distance of penetration has been limited to perhaps 1 or 2 mi; denies S
Vietnamese troops have attacked targets on Ho Chi Minh Trail, which he says is
target for bombing attacks; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 18, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 6

LENGTH: 141 words

Samuels, candidate for Dem nomination for NYS Gov, charges Gov Rockefeller with
hypocrisy on Vietnam war issue if he does not take action to back his proposal
to become link between students and Pres Nixon; demands he take specified steps
to publicly announce opposition to Nixon Adm policies, news conf; suggests Gov
Rockefeller reconvene Legis and support Steinbill to test legality of Vietnam
war; A J Goldberg, Dem aspirant for NYS Gov, urges multi-million dollar program
to increase educ on dangers of drug abuse at state and local levels; O'Dwyer and
Sorensen, in seperate TV ints, score Ottinger's costly campaign; all 3 score
Liberal party nomination of Goodell, see patronage implications; charge he is
'overnight liberal'; Goodell defends change in views, TV int; cites war as
biggest thing responsible for change in his pol views

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 18, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 82 words

Cambodian forces reptdly regain control of Kompong Cham; S Vietnamese planes,
during assault, mistakenly attack Cambodian soldiers; kill 10; Lt Gen M S
Davison repts US forces seized part of Communist command sup hq between May 11
and 13, 4 mi NW of Memot; Vietcong overruns Cambodians at Stung Treng, gains
control of E bank of Mekong; B-52s raid; allies rept 7,556 enemy dead in
operations inside Cambodia; rept 142 Amers killed, 561 wounded, 542 S Vietnamese
killed, 1,841 wounded; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 19, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 55, Column 6

LENGTH: 214 words

Repr Reuss charges Adm anti-inflation policies produce only stagnation and
unemployment and add up to 'disaster,' s, Mortgage Bankers Assn of Amer; holds
policies actually add to inflation; charges Adm ignores effects on econ of
several factors, including Indochina war and wasteful mil spending; makes
specific recommendations , including withdrawal from SE Asia, return to
wage-price guideposts, and quantitative ceilings on bank lending for such
purposes as unnecessary plant expansion or conglomerate take-overs; other
speakers stress importance of anti-inflation fight but spread blame more
liberally; J Wetmore suggests forgetting about abandoning 5% income tax
surcharge; Reuss scores Nixon Adm's econ policy as ruining homebldg indus and
mortgage indus by high interest rates; Natl Assn of Mutual Savings Banks
economists Klaman observes that housing starts have dropped sharply in Apr and
that rate of single-family housing starts are presently running even lower than
in deep slump of '66; several mortgage bankers express hope that pension and
welfare fund admrs can be persuaded to pump significant amounts of money into
housing; assn research dir J Wetmore and S B Klaman agree pressure on interest
rates is still high and that there is no present sign of drop in rates

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 19, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 109 words

Pope Paul VI appeals for negotiated Indochina and Middle East settlements, s to
episc consistory, Rome; holds increased mil commitments by great powers have
brought about threats of 'unforeseeable broader developments'; repts he will
proclaim sainthood of 40 16th and 17th century English and Welsh martyrs Oct 25,
episc consistory; decision to proceed with canonization despite recent
interfaith talks between Caths and Anglicans has caused controversy in GB; Pope
stresses that he does not want to stir mutual attacks and recriminations;
Anglican Abps of Canterbury, York and Wales urge Christians not to look back too
much on 16th century conflicts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 19, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

Coll students aid bid by Penna ind peace candidate N D Reece for Dem US Sen
nomination, against party choice state Sen Sesler; both oppose Indochina war but
Reece, longtime Phila liberal, questions Sesler credibility and role in
traditional pol orgn; is backed by Mayor Flaherty and, tacitly, by Shapp; winner
will oppose Sen Scott; US action in Cambodia seen enhancing prospects of victory
for Reece

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 19, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

Lon Nol aide says Communist China was prepared to recognize Lon Nol Govt but
changed its mind when he refused to let Chinese use Cambodian territory to
supply N Vietnam and Vietcong troops in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 19, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 56 words

N Vietnamese troops reptdly ambush US troops at 4 points in Cambodia and battle
S Vietnamese forces at 6 other locations; 4 Amers killed, 14 wounded; total of
150 Amers killed, 598 wounded in 19 days; total of 7,843 enemy reptd killed;
details on arms captured by allies; enemy resistance termed heaviest thus far in
Cambodian operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 19, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 119 words

Cambodia reptdly asked Asian and Pacific Ocean countries to send troops to help
repel N Vietnamese and Vietcong attackers but initial reaction was negative;
believed to be motivated largely by realization that withdrawal of Amer air and
logistic support by June 30 will drastically reduce S Vietnamese operations in
Cambodia and once more leave weak Cambodian Army on its own; request reptdly was
sent to Jakarta conf of Asian nations; details on Cambodian mil manpower;
Cambodia reptdly continues pleas to all countries for mil equipment; may ask US
and S Vietnam to leave behind bulk of their equipment when they end their
offensives; reptdly asks help in training her soldiers; Cambodian mercenary
troops illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 19, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 133 words

USSR, in sharp attack on Communist China, replying to Chinese attack on USSR
leaders on occasion of Lenin's 100th birth anniv, accuses Mao Tse-tung
leadership of rejecting calls for concerted action in Indochina, Pravda ed;
statement seen ambiguous but suggests USSR may have asked China for joint action
in Cambodia; charges China is creating an anti-Soviet war psychosis within
China, makes unfounded terriorial claims and has provoked border conflicts,
attack indicates border talks have not improved relations; charges Mao Tse-tung
leadership seeks domination in Asia; says launching of Chinese satellite
recently is being used to heat up nationalist passions and as threat to USSR;
includes among charges asserted rejection of concerted actions with USSR against
'imperial aggression'; excerpts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 19, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 91 words

China cancels scheduled May 20 meeting of envoys in Warsaw; cites 'grave
situation' created by US extension of Vietnam war into Cambodia; says resumption
of talks will be decided later; State Dept repts Chinese reprs in Warsaw rept
they will probably be willing to set new date in 'several wks'; US officials
satisfied that Chinese make clear their intention is to keep talks going after
certain interval; Communist leadership in China and N Vietnam reiterate hard
line on Indochina in statements marking 80th birth anniv of late pres Ho Chi
Minh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 19, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 130 words

N Vietnamese and Vietcong troops reptdly attack key hwy junction S of Pnompenh
and encircle Tram Khnar, which was reached by task force of 10,000 S Vietnamese
troops and 200 US advisers; Kompong Cham reptdly under full control of Cambodian
troops but enemy still threatens it; US field comdrs express doubt they can
complete their Cambodian operation by June 30; rept only 30 of operations area
covered; says enemy resistance and bad weather slow down drive; 211 enemy
reptdly killed in drive by S Vietnamese soldiers to Takeo; US phases of
Cambodian operation rept no significant action; S Vietnamese forces observe
cease-fire to mark Buddha's birthday; S Vietnamese spokesman accuses enemy of
violating cease-fire, although enemy command did not say it would observe it;
map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 19, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 170 words

Def Sec Laird says allied troops have made brief incursions into Laos on
specific, limited missions in past; insists no Amers are engaged in ground
combat on Laotian territory now, testimony to Sen subcom; comes under
questioning about statement attributed to Min Tran Van Lam in int with Los
Angeles Times that S Vietnamese troops have struck at Ho Chi Minh Trail and that
operations are continuing; White House and State Dept spokesmen refuse to
discuss statement; S Vietnamese Foreign Min says Tran Van Lam was misquoted and
denies statement; Tran Van Lam says allies have been crossing Laotian border in
'hot pursuit' of enemy for several yrs, int; Laird says as far as he knows
allies confine forays into Laos to 'hot pursuit', 'protective reaction' and
rescue missions; makes other comments; statements of other US officials noted;
details on Tran Van Lam int; S Vietnamese officials deny repts that S Vietnamese
ground forces have struck in Laos; State Dept says it can not speak for S
Vietnamese Govt; Laird illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 20, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

Ex-Chief Justice Warren says Indochina war brings US crisis to 'fever pitch', s
to lawyers convocation planning to lobby in Washington; scores war; lauds
lawyers' effort; comments on antiwar protests; Lindsay tells lawyers war has
turned US into 'battlefield'; comments on demonstrations by construction
workers; calls for end to controversy over US flag; Plimpton and others s;
details on meeting; NYC Mayor Lindsay says war has turned US into battleground,
s; urges end to controversy over Amer flag; says it must not be issue between
Amers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 20, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

Prof N Chomsly, US antiwar activist, returns from 8-day visit to Laos; tells of
his visit to N Vietnam, which was made last mo, int; says univ people talked
about linguistics, not about war; was accompanied by Prof D Dowd and Rev R
Fernandez; Chomsky says he was surprised to find on recent trip to Hanoi that N
Vietnanese scholars were more interested in discussing linguistics than Vietnam
war; Chomsky holds that language is more innate biological system than habit and
learning system; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 20, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 28 words

Many Nationalist China coll girls work at Taipei bars, night clubs and
restaurants that cater to US soldiers on leave from Vietnam to get money to
continue their educ

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 20, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

Article on allied activity up to 21.7-mi limit set by Nixon on US advance into
Cambodia; line on map marking limit called White House 'red line'; US advisers
turn back when S Vietnamese troops cross 'red line' limit (21.7 mi) details on
allied thrust near Takeo; US officer talking to Cambodian officer illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 20, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 102 words

24-hr allied cease-fire for Buddah's birthday ends; enemy forces shell more than
60 allied positions on 80th anniv of Ho Chi Minh's birthday; Vietcong broadcasts
have been calling for stepped-up attacks to mark anniv; details, enemy troops
reptd moving on Lomphat; Tram Khnor reptd encircled by enemy; fighting reptd at
Doum Roka; S Vietnamese troops reptdly kill 240 N Vietnamese and Vietcong in 2
clashes in SE Cambodia with aid of US air support; US troops uncover rice caches
in Fishhook region; US casualties in 19-day offense are 155 killed, 632 wounded;
details on other allied and enemy casualties; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 20, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 188 words

White House works behind scenes in attempt to reach accommodation with Sens who
back Cooper-Church amendment, which is co-sponsored by Mansfield and Aiken;
White House began talks several days ago with principal sponsors; sponsors
reptdly emphasized to White House they will accept no weakening of provisions;
are said to be open to changes in amendment's preamble that would give
recognition to Nixon's authority as Comdr in Chief; Cooper meets with White
House reprs in attempt to reach some understanding on preamble; White House
encourages opposition to amendment at wkly Repub meeting; Sen Allott says Pres
Nixon cautions against amendment that would 'signal' to N Vietnam that US would
not take certain steps; Mansfield expresses hope accommodation can be reached
with White House; charges Nixon Adm, by sending US advisers with S Vietnamese
units on periodic raids in Laos, violates Cong injunction in this yr's Defense
Appropriations Act; Allott hints Repubs, through extended debate, may seek to
delay vote on amendment; Sen Stevens charges partisanship underlies amendment;
former Atty Gen Katzenbach endorses amendment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 21, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 3

LENGTH: 41 words

P Cross, 9-yr-old Dixon, Calif, student, gets lr from Educ Comr Allen expressing
gratitude for her concern for nation after girl recd critical reply from Educ
Office official to her lr scoring Pres Nixon's spending funds on Vietnam war;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 21, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 85 words

US State Dept spokesman, in shift in Nixon Adm position, publicly acknowledges
possibility that S Vietnamese troops may remain in Cambodia after US troops are
withdrawn; foreign policy officials say expectation of enemy attacks may require
indefinite presence of S Vietnamese troops; Adm officials describe recent
remarks by White House as effort to calm opinion in US and that of Sens seeking
to limit Pres Nixon's war-making powers; degree of US support to remaining S
Vietnamese troops is unresolved question

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 21, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 104 words

Ex-Vice Pres Humphrey says he privately warned Pres Nixon in fall of '69 any
step enlarging war would be disaster for US, int; says he offered Nixon active
support if Nixon continued Vietnamization program; says Nixon raised possibility
of escalating war as means of getting N Vietnam to bargain in talks; says Nixon
decision sending troops into Cambodia undid support for his program to end war;
says he heard when he was Vice Pres every argument Nixon uses to justify move;
predicts Nixon will declare Cambodian operation a success this fall and will
announce increased troop withdrawals as a result; makes other comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 21, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Pres Nixon reptdly faced with possibility of revolt by some moderate and liberal
Repub Sens if he fails to agree to Cooper-Church amendment; many Sens reptdly
threaten to accept far more restrictive amendment offered by Sens McGovern and
Hatfield; Sen Scott joins with Sen Mansfield in stressing that Cooper-Church
amendment is designed to work in concert with Nixon's withdrawal plans; Sens
Griffin, Goldwater, Bennett and Fong complain amendments would tie Pres hands,
endanger Amer troops in Vietnam, Sen ss

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 21, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 39 words

Lt Gen Do Cao Tri hints S Vietnamese troops will stay in Cambodia until enemy is
driven back to N Vietnam; says he does not think guerrillas will be able to
rebuild supply areas that have been destroyed by allies; makes other comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 21, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 85 words

Mao Tse-tung voices Chinese people's support for Indochina struggle against 'US
imperialism', Peking rally attended by Norodom Sihanouk; Mao issues personal
statement denouncing US 'imperialism' and pledging Chinese support for struggles
against US everywhere; calls US 'paper tiger'; pledges Chinese backing for
'revolutionary struggle of Amer people' against authorities in Washington;
statement backed at mass rally, Peking; supported by Lin Piao, s, scores Jakarta
conf as interference in Cambodian affairs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 21, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

About 2,500 S Vietnamese soldiers supported by US air power and advisers, thrust
across border, open new front in Cambodia near Special Forces camp at Duclap;
Amer troops rept finding bodies of 33 Cambodian civilians apparently killed by
earlier Amer B-52 bombing strike; 9 other civilians injured; Amer casualties in
Cambodian operations to date put at 162 killed, 664 wounded; S Vietnamese troops
link up with Cambodian soldiers in small town near Takeo after cross-country
drive from S Vietnam in which they reptd killing more than 400 enemy; make vital
Route 2 from Pnompenh to Takeo safe for traffic; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 7

LENGTH: 72 words

Sen, by voice vote, approves bill to increase Travel Service yrly budget from
$4.7- to $15-million for next 3 yrs to expand efforts to attract foreign
tourists; Sen approves bill to increase yrly budget from $4.7- to $15-million
for next 3 yrs; Sen approves 3-yr $180-million appropriation for arts; NJ group
presents Pres Nixon with petition bearing 10,000 signatures supporting his
Vietnam policy; Miller's apptmt to NLRB confirmed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 6

LENGTH: 61 words

Poll of 394 Amer Pol Science Assn members shows 2/3 fear struggle between Pres
Nixon and Cong over whose decision on foreign policy will prevail if Amer
involvement in Indochina continues at its present level; Profs R Lane, K
Deutsch, D A Rustow and A H Barton are among sponsors of poll; more than 73% of
those polled say US should have not sent troops into Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 3

LENGTH: 17 words

Lr from Rev Russell J Clinchy says Pres Nixon deserves trust and support on his
Vietnam-Cambodia policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

NYS Gov Rockefeller makes appearances, Watertown, Massena and SUNY at Potsdam;
says he supports Pres Nixon's policy illus with students; is endorsed for
re-election by 30 labor leaders, most Dems, in Massena, group spokesman noting
Gov's 'edifice complex' has provided bldg jobs; faces student antiwar
protesters, is unable to complete meeting with group when most walk out;
explains stand on Indochina war in s to mass meeting; calls for understanding
between generations, later s to students after C of C s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 3

LENGTH: 121 words

CBS News re-runs film of war atrocity which US Govt contended had been 'faked';
film's authenticity supported in re-run by int with S Vietnamese soldier who
admitted stabbing prisoner in film, which CBS charges has been target of White
House effort to discredit network; commentator W Cronkite, noting that film was
first broadcast to point out nature of Vietnam war, holds subsequent events have
revealed how Govt reacts to media which present news Govt does not like; charges
White House convinced 'receptive' reporters to write articles indicating that
Nixon Adm and Pentagon were investigating repts that film had been rigged by
network; White House spokesman denies investigation, Pentagon spokesman refuses
to comment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 127 words

Prais Peace Talks, 67th session; produces only agreement to meet again next wk;
Habib says there is no purpose talking about Cambodia without referring to N
Vietnamese mil presence there; Communists again charge US with intervening in
Cambodia and that action proves Pres Nixon's insincerity in talking about peace;
Vietcong spokesman reiterates that if US withdraws its troops in 6 mos and
abandons S Vietnmamese regime, all other questions can be negotiated; S
Vietnamese repr, Phan Dang Lam, charges Chinese, in Mao declaration, issued
appeal for war and revolution; quotes an article in Pravda blaming Chinese for
costly defeats of guerrilla movements; S Vietnamese spokesman repts N Vietnamese
reaction was 'emotional' and 'stormy'; other details on session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

S Vietnamese Vice Presguyen Cao Ky says 'we will not let our hands be bound by
anyone anymore,' s to Natl Defense Coll, Saigon; S Vietnamese Min Tran Van Lam
says S Vietnam has no timetable for withdrawal of their troops; Pres Nguyen Van
Thieu's office makes no comment; Cambodian mil spokesman says Cambodians would
rather die than live under domination of either S Vietnamese or Vietnamese
Communists; posters in Pnompenh dept store demand withdrawal of S Vietnamese,
charge them with misdeeds against Cambodian populace

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 74 words

US Defense Dept statement gives preliminary assessment of allied drive in
Cambodia; says enemy hq units suffered 'serious disruption' and had been forced
to go deeper into interior; says enemy mil and intelligence units are 'on the
run'; avoids predictions on long-range effect of drive; some Washington sources
say chief result of drive may be 'psychological boost' given S Vietnamese
troops; statement detailed; map shows progress of drive

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 10 words

Saigon (S Vietnam) re-opens schools, but univs remain shut

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 151 words

Nixon Adm sources disclose Amb Bunker and Gen Abrams were instructed to discuss
with S Vietnamese Govt problem of future status of S Vietnamese troops in
Cambodia; say Adm seeks to resolve differences within its own ranks over wisdom
of trying to force S Vietnamese troops to withdraw at about same time US units
withdraw; White House and State Dept officials said to favor withdrawal of S
Vietnamese forces along with Amers; defense and intelligence officials said to
argue mil factors require that some S Vietnamese units stay in Cambodia for
indefinite time; Bunker and Abrams are sent new instructions after US official
in Washington reads statement by S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky saying S
Vietnamese troops will remain in Cambodia as long as Communists fight there;
White House and State Dept refuse to comment on statement and decline to discuss
when S Vietnamese troops may leave Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

Educ Comr Allen, saying he disagrees with Pres Nixon's Indochina policy, holds
war is having 'disastrous effect' on young people, statement at meeting of Educ
Office employes; asked why he has not repudiated attacks on dissident students
by Nixon and Vice Pres Agnew, he says he does not 'get the attention some
Cabinet members get'; while acknowledging differences of opinion with Nixon Adm
on desegregation, says he intends to push desegregation as forcefully as
possible, s to Educ Office employes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 131 words

77 Amers reptd killed, Cambodia, 199 wounded, wk; since May 1, 166 Amers reptd
killed, 677 wounded; 591 S Vietnames reptd killed, 2,042 wounded; 8,433 enemy
reptd killed; details on arms seizures by allies; no major mil action involving
US troops reptd; enemy cuts rd from Pnompenh to Kompong Som in several places; 2
acts of insurgency involving rr line and bridge reptd in 2 regions considered
secure by Cambodia until now; not determined if sabotage is work of Vietcong or
Cambodian guerrillas; US command repts 217 Amers were killed in SE Asia last wk,
highest wkly toll since last Aus 217 Amers were killed in SE Asia last wk,
highest wkly toll since last August; 77 were killed in Cambodia, 140 were killed
in S Vietnam; other US, S Vietnamese and enemy casualty figures noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 23, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 65 words

A Lewis article on Saigon officials plans to remain in Cambodia after US
withdrawal, queries why they are entitled to automatic US support and why they
seem to wield so much influence with US Adm; urges Pres Nixon to reassert his
authority; comments on influence of S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu and Vice
Pres Nguyen Cao Ky on Nixon decision concerning Cambodia and on US policy in gen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 23, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 90 words

O'Dwyer, referring to 20-yr seniority he has over opponents, says he would be
valuable Sen because he would not be considering re-election or pol advancement
in taking stands, int with NY Times newsmen and editors; holds identification
with peace movement aids bid, urges Vietnam unilateral ceasefire now, deplores
protest violence; has no disagreement with Goodell on war but questions his
position as liberal on other issues; holds Dem state com designation does not
help Sorensen; notes differences between present and '68 campaign; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 23, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 2

LENGTH: 51 words

Fulbright says Sen com has received sworn testimony from Army sgt that mil TV
team has staged several combat incidents by S Vietnamese troops for films that
are supplied to commercial TV stations and networks; protests such 'fakery and
propaganda'; sends lr to Laird recommending Army TV teams be abolished

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 23, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

Vietnam war veterans take 1st of planned series of Potomac River cruises on Pres
yacht Sequoia; accompanied by Pres Nixon's daughter and son-in-law Julie and
David Eisenhower

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 23, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 61 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu asks Natl Assembly to let him impose by
decree temporary equalization tax until permanent legis can be passed to replace
austerity tax declared unconst by Sup Ct; tax would have same net effect as
austerity tax, which drastically raised levies on over 1,000 luxury items; Govt
holds revenues are needed to balance budget for '70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 23, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7

LENGTH: 48 words

Vietnamese Communist forces on Cambodian border sweep northward to within 2 1/2
mi of Laos; offensive, aimed largely at Boloven Plateau, viewed as reaction to
US-S Vietnamese thrust into Cambodia and an attempt to establish new sanctuary
areas in Laos to replace those lost in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 23, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 114 words

White House press sec indicates US is prepared to continue air cover, if needed,
for S Vietnamese forces that are considered almost certain to remain in Cambodia
after US troops are withdrawn; other high officials say air cover cannot be
denied if it is required; note Cooper-Church amendment does not bar air cover;
say actual decisions will be made in light of specific combat situations;
readiness of US to give air support said to represent major departure from
Nixon's stated policy; Laird confirms Adm has decided to accept S Vietnam's
argument concerning its remaining in or returning to Cambodia, TV int;
emphasizes there will be no Amer advisers in Cambodia after June 30

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 23, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 138 words

Cambodian Govt decides to halt mass evacuation of refugees by boat down Mekong
River to Vietnam; decision leaves about 70,000 Vietnamese stranded in assembly
camps in Pnompenh; most Vietnamese have sold their belongings, spent their money
on food for trip and have lost their jobs; Lon Nol issues 1st stern warning
against any person doing harm to Vietnamese minority; announces martial law will
be imposed as of June 1; Pham Huy Ty, head of Saigon's repatriation program,
says S Vietnam considers emergency phase of program has ended, that Vietnamese,
in 10-day trial, will be allowed to return to their homes and resume their
normal lives; Gen Do Cao Tri warns on Cambodians mistreating Vietnamese
residents; Dr Phan Quang Dan, S Vietnamese Min, suggests S Vietnam help move
Vietnamese refugees to secure areas in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 23, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 91 words

S Vietnam has doubled size of its forces operating within Cambodia in last wk;
40,000 troops are now involved; S Vietnamese Govt officials say troops will
remain as long as necessary; Amb Bunker meets with S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van
Thieu; light and scattered fighting reptd; troops continue to find enemy supply
caches; B-52s stage heavy raids in Fishhook area; official sources say 12,000
Amer troops are in Cambodia; details on mil action; 9 S Vietnamese marines
killed, 15 wounded in accidental shooting by US helicopter gunship; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              260 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 48, Column 5

LENGTH: 55 words

AFTRA split over referendum on US involvement in Indochina; group opposing
referendum feels broadcasters, correspondents and reporters should not be
labeled with 'preconceived pol decision'; position underscores div in union,
which includes TV and radio newsmen and entertainers; many in AFTRA feel union
should not include newsmen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              261 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 60, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 22 words

Hofstra U students, faculty members and admrs contribute 275 pints of blood to
US forces in Indochina; despite opposing views on war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              262 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 70, Column 3

LENGTH: 9 words

NY Daily News employees' ad condemning Indochina war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              263 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 86 words

Jack Gould, noting 5 Sens had to pay $70,000 for 1/2 hr to be heard on 1 network
speaking in support of antiwar amendment while Pres Nixon gets free time any
time he wants to announce and explain his Vietnam policy, urges TV coverage of
events such as war be expanded and questions role of TV in a democracy in which
supporters of war get free time while their opponents do not; says TV has not
bestirred itself to gravity of moment and its fixed ways can make it look
foolish in light of rapidly changing events

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              264 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 27 words

Max Frankel comments on Pres Nixon Vietnam policy; discusses Nixon assertion
that negotiated settlement is US goal; says main issue is who will govern S
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              265 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 10 words

Article on new mil drives by Pathet Lao and N Vietnamese; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              266 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 11 words

L H Gelb article on China-USSR vying for influence in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              267 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 63 words

James Reston, commenting on Vice Pres Agnew concern over rise in isolationism,
holds cause of new isolationism is Vietnam war and that longer it goes on,
harder it will be to get pub support for Amer intervention in areas more vital
to Amer security and world order than SE Asia; defends concern of press and Cong
for Pres use of war-making power in light of A-bombs and ICBMs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              268 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 2

LENGTH: 12 words

Lr says W Averell Harriman is wrong in saying Vietnam war cannot be won

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              269 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 51 words

Tom Wicker on need for Cooper-Church amendment passage to prevent S Vietnam from
dragging or persuading Pres Nixon into continuing mil operations in Cambodia
after July 1 in aid of S Vietnamese forces who may continue fighting; notes Vice
Pres Nguyen Cao Ky statements on S Vietnamese remaining in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              270 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 5

LENGTH: 9 words

Cartoon on Vietnam war as explosive issue, USSR role

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              271 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Ed says Saigon's announced determination to keep S Vietnamese troops in Cambodia
indefinitely is direct challenge to Adm's own professed efforts and those of
Cong to re-establish limits to SE Asian conflict; scores prolonged S Vietnamese
operations; urges passage of Cooper-Church amendment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              272 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 24 words

Pres Nixon rests at Camp David (Md) mt retreat while some citizens of nearby
town of Thurmond circulate petitions supporting his Vietnam policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              273 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 111 words

Sen McGovern repts he and Sens Goodell, Cranston, Hughes, Young, Hart and
Eagleton, all critics of war in Indochina, have sent Pres Nixon lr assuring him
of their support for US policy of firmness against 'ominous and provocative'
USSR thrust against Israel, s, Amer Jewish Cong; repts they urged immediate sale
of Phantoms to Israel and intensified US efforts to restore cease-fire; say they
noted USSR might be misinterpreting natl debate over Indochina as sign that US
will not protect its vital interests in Mideast; says lr cited fundamental
differences between Indochina and Mideast situations; M Samuel says Jews are
determined to defend Israel's existence, s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              274 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 69 words

Allied comdrs describe Cambodian campaign an outstanding mil success; say
weapons seized so far would equip more than Communist div of 12,000 men and the
nearly 4,000 tons of captured rice would feed div for a yr; say enemy supply
lines have been disrupted; rept more than 8,000 enemy killed, 190 Amers and 500
S Vietnamese killed; concede gains are short-term; are sure enemy will return;
details on mil operations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              275 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 80 words

About 10,000 S Vietnamese troops stage attack on Chup rubber plantation, largest
in Indochina, against what it describes as an enemy rgt; 1 dozen men, identified
as Khmer Rouge Communist guerrillas, reptd killed, 15 captured; S Vietnamese
fighter planes reptdly bombed and strafed processing plant, caused at least 15
deaths among employes; 80 persons reptdly wounded; villagers say planes attacked
nearby villages, central mkt and principal school; Cambodian soldiers illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              276 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 24, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

500 Office of Educ employes sign petitions supporting Comr Allen in his
disagreement with Nixon over Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              277 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 25, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 16 words

Lt C C Roberts charged with premeditated murder in death of Vietnamese near
Danang on March 28

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              278 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 25, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 18 words

Min Yen Sambaur arrives in Saigon for talks with S Vietnamese leaders about
allied incursions into Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              279 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 25, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 55 words

Pulitzer Prize-winning photographer K Sawada (UPI) and UPI bur chief R C Miller
detained by N Vietnamese soldiers and released; in separate incident, D Webster,
W Brown and K Hoefler, members of CBS news team, were also held by N Vietnamese
but released when Hoefler, a Ger natl, convinced captors that other newsmen were
also Ger

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              280 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 25, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Sec of State Rogers indicates Nixon Adm will not oppose continued S Vietnamese
operations after Amer troops are withdrawn leaves open possibility that Amer
support will be provided, statement to newsmen; Nixon's communications dir H G
Klein indicates like view

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              281 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 25, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 15 words

Cambodian Prine Norodom Sihanouk to visit N Vietnam; has been invited by Pres
Ton Duc Thang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              282 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 25, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 118 words

S Vietnamese task force seizes Chup rubber plantation, reptdly confiscates all
movable assets and gives French mgrs 3 days to leave; Communist Vietnamese
forces reptdly have fallen back within 70-sq mi plantation and are surrounded by
S Vietnamese; S Vietnamese occupation of large part of Cambodia stirs
uneasiness; many intellectuals voice fear that Cambodia may be losing control
over its own country; express concern over repts of killings, rapes and
plundering by S Vietnamese forces; Cambodian troops recapture important Mekong
River ferry crossing of Tonle Bet; meet little resistance; US and S Vietnamese
forces continue sweep, find more large stockpiles of supplies; N Vietnamese POWs
illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              283 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

250 Harvard U med personnel visit Washington to tell Sens, Reprs and their aides
about impact of Vietnam war on health care profession

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              284 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Ed holding that it would be shortsighted for S Vietnamese troops to remain in
Cambodia to bolster Lon Nol regime; notes statements by Sec of State Rogers and
other officials making it clear S Vietnamese forces plan to remain in Cambodia
after June 30 deadline, contrary to Pres Nixon's May 8 prediction; says it will
not serve US interests to widen conflict Nixon is pledged to end

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              285 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 6

LENGTH: 17 words

Lr holds US options in future situations will be severely limited if US retreats
hastily from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              286 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 83, Column 3

LENGTH: 147 words

Group of Yale U profs, law students and New Haven black coalition leaders,
operating under name Com for Fair Broadcasting of Controversial Issues, files
petition with FCC asking curb on Pres Nixon's access to TV networks when
opponents of Indochina war have not been accorded equal opportunity for air
time; ABC and CBS, after Nixon's recent s on Cambodia, refused to make evening
time available under any conditions to 5 dissenting Sens; NBC made 1/2 hr
available at price estimated at over $70,000; group argues 'fairness doctrine'
has been thwarted if Nixon can enjoy free time to justify his policies while
antiwar opponents do not have access to same wide audience during substantial
bloc of uninterrupted time; controversy over Cambodia said to raise new issue
for FCC; petition is directed against WCBS and WTIC; FCC has no immediate
comment; some who join in petition listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              287 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 111 words

United Presbyterian Ch Gen Assembly, embroiled in debate over war, asks Pres
Nixon or official repr to come to Chicago and outline US policy; request is made
in telegram to Nixon signed by ch's chief exec W P Thompson; Nixon names Romney
to speak for Adm; ch takes action after debate on com rept calling Cambodian
invasion 'unjustified and dangerous extension of an already illegal, inhumane
and unpopular war'; rept says Nixon will be subjected to pressures to support S
Vietnamese further if they remain in Cambodia after June 30; urges withdrawal of
all mil personnel from Vietnam by June 30, '71; Rev Dr R S Bilheimer scores
Nixon policy; makes peace proposals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              288 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 150 words

Repr Morton, countering Dem charges Amers are losing confidence in Pres Nixon,
releases figures indicating majority of Amers approve of Nixon's Cambodian
decision; repts telephone survey of 1,053 persons taken last wk shows 53%
support decision, 32% are against it and 15% have no opinion; survey question
asked approval of Nixon's decision to 'assist S Vietnam with Amer support in
actions against N Vietnamese Communist forces in Cambodia'; Morton says he does
not feel question is slanted; poll also indicates 19% of those questioned
approve of student protesters while 72% disapprove; Chilton Co conducted poll;
Harris Poll, using differently phrased question on Cambodian decision, shows 50%
of Amers back Nixon, 43% have 'serious doubts' about move into Cambodia; Morton
predicts Amer troops will be withdrawn by June 30 and that Cambodian move will
not be issue in Nov election; Morton illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              289 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 49 words

S Vietnam pacification program suffered slight setback last mo; some officials
view setback as result of long-ordered enemy campaign to disrupt effort; figures
show percentage of population living in centers considered securely under S
Vietnamese Govt control dropped to 88.9%; other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              290 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 29 words

Ousted Cambodian leader Norodom Siahanouk reptdly in Hanoi; Hanoi radio appears
to exclude possibility that Hanoi will move more troops into Cambodia as result
of US incursion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              291 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 65 words

US command repts 201 US deaths in 25 days of operations in Cambodia, 756
wounded; repts over 600 S Vietnamese dead, over 2,000 wounded; repts 9,000 enemy
dead; scattered mil action reptd; S Vietnamese fight E of Memot; US co ambushed
1/2 mi inside border; US forces rept more enemy stockpiles captured; details;
2,000 N Vietnamese reptdly seize 3d largest rubber plantation, Prekkak; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              292 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 97 words

Feeling of instability in Pnompenh found most pronounced among citizens of
Communist nations; most Communist embassies remain open; Cambodian Govt releases
Chinese Communist Amb Kang Mao-chao and other Chinese and N Korean diplomats
held as hostages for release of Cambodian diplomats in China and N Korea; Chou
En-lai welcomes Chinese and other Communist diplomats withdrawn from Pnompenh on
their arrival in Peking; Amb Kang Mao-chao illus; Cambodian embassy has
increased permanent staff from 11 to 12 and has added 13 temporary staff members
since Prince Sihanouk's overthrow

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              293 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 127 words

Cambodian Min Yem Sambaur, in Saigon to discuss resumption of ties with S
Vietnam and problems of Vietnamese residents in Cambodia, says that although
Cambodia appreciates S Vietnamese anti-Communist mil actions, he does not intend
to discuss formal mil alliance with S Vietnam, airport remarks; S
Vietnamese-Cambodian relations and S Vietnamese resentment of Cambodian
treatment of Vietnamese residents discussed; Yem Sambaur, before leaving for
Saigon, says Cambodia will ask Pres Nixon to keep US troops fighting in Cambodia
until end of war; does not expect S Vietnamese troops to leave at same time as
Amers; says Thailand may be asked for troops if needed; Thai mil mission, its
first in Cambodia, arrives, Pnompenh; Thai Min Yem Sambaur illus in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              294 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 122 words

H E Salisbury repts information reaching NY from sources close to Communist
leaders in Asia suggests US move into Cambodia has transformed Indochina
situation more radically than originally estimated; says evaluation is being
taken seriously in Washington; says key to changed aspect in Indochina is said
to be agreement by N Vietnam, Vietcong, Norodom Sihanouk and Communist Pathet
Lao orgn in Laos on mutual protection arrangement, to which China has pledged
full support; says those who assess situation at 1st-hand say what faces US is
protacted war with virtually no possibility of arriving at settlement in Vietnam
unless there is settlement covering Laos and Cambodia; says some hold settlement
would have to include Thailand

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              295 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 136 words

Senior US Govt officials say withdrawal of all US ground troops from Cambodia is
to be completed ahead of June 30 deadline under present Nixon Adm plans; say no
new date has been set because mil situation in enemy sanctuary areas and advent
of monsoon season remain important factors; say destruction or removal of
captured mil equipment is among problems involved in seeking to advance
deadline; say Adm is eager to be able to announce withdrawal as soon as possible
for domestic pol and econ reasons; Adm admits possibility air support for S
Vietnamese will continue after withdrawal; officials say Adm seeks to improve on
Pres Nixon's commitment; Defense Dept says there are now 14,000 Amers in
Cambodia, down 4,000 from peak just after US forces entered Cambodia; says all
US troops are confined to Fishhook area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              296 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 50 words

Moscow Izvestia publishes text of statement delivered in Pnompenh by USSR Amb
Kudryavtsev warning Cambodian leaders that Cambodia 'will be plunged into a long
fratricidal war' unless US and S Vietnamese forces are withdrawn; statement
shows USSR concern over growing Cambodian-S Vietnamese cooperation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              297 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 10 words

Army has 513 gens, about 50% more than before Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              298 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 27, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 6

LENGTH: 97 words

Dem gubernatorial aspirant Samuels calls for restructuring of Legis, pledges to
work against members who do not support reform, news conf and position paper,
NYC; gives proposals; charges sessions are too short and do not permit serious
consideration of bills; questions part-time nature of office; calls for
full-time members, elected for 4-yr terms, with adequate salaries and staff;
calls for strong ethics code; suggests considering unicameral system; says main
election question is state govt effectiveness, response to Goldberg remark that
election is Vietnam war referendum

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              299 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 27, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Le Van Day, former Vietcong who defected and now serves as scout for US troops
in Cambodia, finds his life easier now, int; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              300 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 27, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 63 words

US troops battle enemy, Memot; 6 Amers killed, 25 wounded; Amers rept increased
enemy attacks in Fishhook region over border N of Saigon; S Vietnamese rept
killing 98 Vietcong in battle south of Chup rubber plantation; US troops rept
finding enemy stores; details on total stores captured and total casualties; 216
Amers reptd killed, 807 wounded; B-52s raid; refugees illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              301 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 27, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 7

LENGTH: 59 words

Cambodian Prince Norodom Sihanouk arrives in Hanoi; is met at airport by Premier
Pham Van Dong, Min Vo Nguyen Giap and Min Nguyen Duy Trinh; is hailed by Pres
Ton Duc Thang; scores US; urges Indochinese people to unite to fight common
enemy; Hanoi radio broadcast discloses Communist China will provide more aid to
N Vietnam under accord signed in Peking

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              302 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 27, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 164 words

Antiwar lobbying effort on Capitol Hill reinforced by delegations of nationally
known clergymen, by scholars and by surburbanites; about 1,000 clergymen arrive
for 2 days of lobbying in answer to call for religious convocation; nearly 350
Asia scholars meet in 'extraordinary convocation' under chmnship of Dr J K
Fairbank; urge support for McGovern-Hatfield amendment; Scarsdale group visits
Sens on amendment; group is addressed by Javits, Goodell and Sen Harris; several
clergymen participating in convocation listed; McGovern, Hatfield and Goodell
address Asia scholars; McGovern says amendment now has 23 sponsors; does not
predict amendment will pass; Goodell comments; details on scholars convocation;
Drs H Borton and D Mozingo and Prof M Mancall s; scholars announce 1,716
professors and students of Asian affairs in 240 US univs and colls signed
petition denouncing US intervention; Prof Mancoll warns that US intervention
'decreases options available to Communist China'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              303 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 27, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 31 words

Pres Nixon discusses situation with Pres Suharto (Indonesia), White House conf;
assures him US-S Vietnamese operation is successful; lauds Indonesian
sponsorship of conf in Jakarta; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              304 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 27, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 23 words

Pres Suharto (Indonesia) warns 'threat of new war is spreading', urges all
foreign forces be withdrawn from Cambodia, s, White House dinner

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              305 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 27, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 313 words

Mins Council meets, Rome; conf site, Palace of Congresses, heavily guarded; no
disturbances there but riot police using tear gas and batons break up
demonstration in suburbs by several hundred students protesting conf; US Sec of
State Rogers, in s to NATO Mins Council conf, endorses proposals by Eur allies
for mutual and balanced reduction of forces of NATO and Warsaw Pact in Central
Eur; calls for declaration expressing NATO desire for progress toward detente;
makes no ref to Brit Sec Stewart call for creation by NATO of Standing Comm for
East-West Affairs in Eur or to call by Ital Premier Rumor for rapid and thorough
preparations for NATO-Warsaw Pact talks with participation open to Eur neutral
and nonaligned countries; Amer sources see his s marking definite change in US
policy toward support in gen, if not in detail, of drive toward talks; some
diplomats see ss as NATO's 1st serious movement away from purely deterrent role
to that of body supporting collective or individual negotiations with East; Min
Schumann, noting French dislike for blocs, calls for individual approaches; W
Ger Min Scheel says US pol and mil commitments in Eur must remain unchanged if
security efforts are to succeed; Sec Rogers reads lr from Pres Nixon explaining
Amer intervention and reptg capture of enough weapons to arm 30 bns in Cambodia,
NATO Mins Council conf, Rome; Nixon puts enemy dead at 7,900, Amer dead at 201,
S Vietnamese at 451; Min Hartling says Denmark, following resolution by its
Parliament, urges NATO-member govts that supply mil equipment to Greece to
discontinue supplies until dem conditions have been restored, NATO Mins Council
Conf, Rome; Min Stray (Norway) charges regime fails to comply with dem
principles; Min Luns (Netherlands) says his Govt hopes dem principles will be
restored; diplomatic sources hold Bahr-Gromyko talks are proceeding smoothly

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              306 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 27, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 149 words

S Vietnamese-Cambodian agreement that S Vietnamese would leave Cambodia 'as soon
as their mission is completed' announced in joint communique issued at end of
Yem Sambaur-Tran Van Lam talks; agreement to restore ties also announced;
communique does not indicate when S Vietnamese will end their operations in
Cambodia or whether they will continue to operate after scheduled withdrawal of
US troops by June 30; agreement also reached on respecting for the present
boundaries of 2 countries; question of status of 1/2 million Cambodians living
in S Vietnam put off; talks reptdly reached impasse at Cambodian insistence that
S Vietnam publicly recognize Cambodian ownership of 2 offshore islands of Koh
Thmey and Koh Ses; map; Cambodia also reptdly demanded that ethnic Cambodians in
Mekong Delta in S Vietnam be granted right to Cambodian citizenship and to enjoy
legal status of ethnic minority

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              307 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 27, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 142 words

Defense Sec Laird is said to have asked Amer comdrs in Vietnam whether, in light
of recent operations in Cambodia, US can withdraw more troops from Vietnam by
May 1, '71 than 150,000 announced by Pres Nixon; high Pentagon sources say reply
is expected later this wk; cite at least 3 factors behind request to accelerate
withdrawals: capture and destruction of enemy supplies and food in Cambodia,
demonstration of combat effectiveness by S Vietnamese mil units, desire to cool
dissent in Cong and on campus by demonstrating Amer move in Cambodia should
speed US disengagement; White House press sec describes as inaccurate rept that
Nixon Adm plans contemplate withdrawal of Amer troops from Cambodia ahead of
June 30 deadline; request for recommendations on gen withdrawals said to have
been made to McCain and Abrams; chronology of pertinent events

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              308 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 27, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 116 words

Sec Romney urges United Presbyterian Ch group to withhold judgment on Cambodian
invasion for a few wks, s, Chicago; makes it clear he expects successful
conclusion to Cambodian venture, says it is premature at this time to predict
outcome with certainty; says Vietnam involvement is most tragic event in US
history but it is not Pres Nixon's doing; says former Pres Johnson escalation
added to tragic mistake of becoming involved in 1st place; says Nixon began
program of getting US out of conflict; says Nixon took initiative in seeking
negotiated peace and made it clear US would not again become involved in
internal, foreign conflict; points to need and effectiveness of Cambodian
operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              309 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 28, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 56, Column 4

LENGTH: 62 words

Sen Javits urges Cong resist demands for protectionist trade legis such as
import quotas on shoes, s to Amer Importers Assn, NYC; urges restoration of 5%
cut in surcharge; calls for acceleration of US withdrawal from Vietnam, calls it
'biggest single thing' Nixon Adm could do to restore business confidence and
reverse econ downtrend; urges $5-billion defense spending cut

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              310 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 28, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

Col R W Ellison, US adviser in S Vietnam, repts US Special Forces (Green Berets)
recruit ethnic Cambodians in Mekong Delta of S Vietnam for fighting in Cambodia;
230 Cambodians shipped out in 1 wk; drive halts when S Vietnamese prov chief
complains to S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu that recruiting went on without
his knowledge; 600,000 Cambodians sought in drive; drive requested by Cambodia
of S Vietnam; Green Berets work with Khmer Serai, Cambodian rightist movement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              311 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 28, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 81 words

Dr Holland, US Amb to Sweden, said to win praise for his spirited efforts to
repair Swedish-Amer relations despite attacks on him by youthful extremists; has
let it be known he takes extremely serious view of what he considers constant
threat of physical violence to self and family; 2 countries said to remain at
odds over US policy and expressions of Swedish support for N Vietnam; Swedish
Govt opposition to US policy expected to stir controversy when Premier Palme
visits US; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              312 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 28, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 171 words

Indonesian pres Suharto, referring to Jakarta conf, says Indonesia tried to find
solution to Cambodian war in 'objective and realistic' way with a just end
result for Cambodian people, s, Natl Press Club, Washington, after conf with
Pres Nixon; when asked in int if Indonesia planned direct mil aid, says
Indonesian diplomatic efforts had greatest chance of restoring peace; at White
House dinner stresses that 'all foreign forces' should leave Cambodia; is known
to believe that S Vietnamese forces should also leave; White House interprets
Suharto remarks on foreign troops to mean only N Vietnamee and not US or S
Vietnamese troops; difference of opinion has developed between Nixon Adm and
Suharto over meaning of Asian conf call for removal of all foreign troops from
Cambodia; White House interprets Suharto remark, made during dinner toasts in
Washington, as referring only to presence of Communists in Cambodia; Suharto
also urges efforts to prevent widening of war and to insure Cambodian
sovereignty and neutrality

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              313 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 28, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 24 words

State Dept officials disclose S Vietnamese officials are empowered to turn over
to Cambodian Army mil equipment that has been supplied by US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              314 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 28, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 113 words

High-level Thai delegation headed by Deputy Premier Gen Praphat Charusathien
leaves for Cambodia to decide on amt and type of aid it can supply; repts
persist that US pressures Thailand to provide major help; USIS article says US,
in line with Nixon doctrine, will welcome aid from any nations in area; Thai
Govt, originally gratified by US-S Vietnamese intervention in Cambodia, shifts
to mood of concern; issues repts of attacks by Communist forces in Cambodia
close to Thai border and places all Thai border troops on alert; US State Dept
discloses that Thai Govt and S Vietnam are empowered to turn over to Cambodian
Army mil equipment that has been supplied to it by US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              315 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 28, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

Pope Paul VI tells group of servicemen en route home from Vietnam that he has
prayed for peace and wants to see end of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              316 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 28, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 153 words

Pentagon spokesman confirms Laird has communicated his desire to Abrams
concerning accelerated troop withdrawals; says field comdrs should know by June
30 how much Cambodian operations have set back enemy's capabilities; Defense Sec
Laird states his hopes for speeding withdrawals, s, Pentagon; expresses
conviction that Cambodian operation has exceeded expectations of comdrs; US
command says US troops unearth 67-ton cache of arms and equipment in Fishhook
area; details on mil action; US Defense Dept spokesman says US field comdrs
should have good idea how much of captured enemy stores may set back enemy
capabilities; Laird says US will meet or beat its announced withdrawal program;
US repts further capture of enemy stores; US unit comes under small arms fire 8
mi inside Cambodia; S Vietnam repts withdrawal of 16,000 troops from Cambodia;
30,000 S Vietnamese and 12,000 US troops reptdly now in Cambodia; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              317 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 28, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 339 words

Pres Nixon host at dinner meeting with 45 business and financial leaders who
were asked to White House for closed discussions of stock mkt and foreign
policy; reptdly reassures them on state of econ and defends his policies, s; Fed
Reserve Bd Chmn Burns assures leaders that money will be supplied to keep econ
expanding at sound rate; predicts GNP will approach one trillion dollars by end
of yr; participants offer their views; dinner resulted from Lasker proposal that
Nixon Adm aides meet with NY business leaders, but guests represent wider
cross-sec of financial community; list; Nixon earlier met with Burns, Sec
Kennedy, Econ Advisers Council Chmn McCracken and Mayo to prepare for dinner;
Burns reptdly tells 45 business and financial leaders at White House dinner that
Reserve will supply enough credit to econ to keep it expanding at sound rate but
not enough to fan inflation; revs changes in money supply, noting there was no
growth in last 5 mos of '69, 4% annual growth in '70 1st qr, 10% in apr and 8%
or 9% in May; gives impression that expansion will continue at rate in excess of
low rates of winter mos; Nixon stressed 4.8% unemployment rate is 0.5% below avg
rate during '60s; Nixon defends his Cambodian policy; says he acted to save Amer
lives; holds Cambodian operation does not represent new phase of war; says
businessmen should not think Cambodian operation will depress stock mkt; says
construction workers have right to demonstrate peacefully; says he would be
popular if he brought troops home now, but US would lose its position as only
country in world to stand up against aggression; is said to get standing ovation
after explaining his position on Cambodia; reaffirms pledge to withdraw Amer
troops by June 30; says Laos will fall if US abandons S Vietnam; Nixon, in reply
to question at dinner with business and financial leaders about what he is doing
to keep campaign promise to bring country together in light of discontent among
some youth, says discontent is endemic in all advanced countries

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              318 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 28, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 163 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says S Vietnamese troops will continue to operate in
Cambodia for indefinite period after US troops are withdrawn and will require
continued Amer logistical and combat support to sustain operations, int
videotaped for showing in US; says S Vietnamese troops will assume
responsibility for all ground combat operations in S Vietnam by middle of '71;
says S Vietnam will still need more than 100,000 troops after this for support;
says he has no specific agreement with Pres Nixon on Amer aid for further
operations in Cambodia, but appears confident support will be provided; says
size and duration of Cambodian operations will depend on amt of supplies
uncovered and degree of enemy resistance encountered; says talks remain stalled
because Communists are waiting for better offer in terms of pol concessions;
Nguyen Van Thieu says Tran Ngoc Chau will get new trial, int; says he will
remain in prison until then; makes other comments; is int by C Daniel

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              319 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 28, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 230 words

Foreign Ministers Yem Sambaur and Tran Van Lam sign documents giving S Vietnam
broad and open-ended mandate for mil operations in Cambodia, communique on
Saigon talks; accord places no geographic curbs on S Vietnam mil operations nor
does it set any timetable for withdrawal; mins say S Vietnamese troops will
withdraw when they complete their mission; Yem Sambaur excludes any possibility
that his Govt will come to terms with Norodom Sihanouk; communique repts accords
include restoration of diplomatic relations, accord on econ cooperation and on
treatment of Vietnamese residents of Cambodia; US and Cambodia reptdly have
agreed to raise level of their diplomatic representation by an exch of ambs; US
reptdly consents to apptmt of Amb Sonn Vansay, now serving in France; US
Embassy, Pnompenh, silent; Soviet sources believe USSR Amb will be recalled as
an expression of Soviet displeasure with Cambodian alignment with anti-Communist
camp; withdrawal foreshadowed by harsh Soviet statement to Yem Sambaur scoring
intrusion by US and S Vietnamese forces, demanding their withdrawal and scoring
Pnompenh-US rapprochement; Norodom Sihanouk and N Vietnamese leaders are reptd
in accord on ways to cooperate in fighting US and allied forces in Cambodia,
rept on formal talks held in Hanoi; Norodom Sihanouk welcomed by Pres Ton Duc
Thang and Premier Pham Van Dong, Hanoi; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              320 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Ed notes Indonesian Pres Suharto criticism of extension of war, his call for
withdrawal of all foreign forces; notes Jakarta conf discussion of war; urges US
to reconsider its ill-advised attempt to 'save' Cambodia through use of S
Vietnam and Thailand, Cambodia's traditional enemies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              321 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 7

LENGTH: 65 words

5 Plainfield HS, Ind, teachers withdraw suit challenging school bd's policy
statement on use of arm bands worn by teachers protesting Vietnam war after
preliminary ruling indicated they had little hope of winning without prolonged
appeal procedure; are among 17 of 38 hs teachers who plan to resign; strong
conservative attitude of town's residents and effect on bd policies noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              322 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 90 words

About 250 Ohio State Univ students attend memorial service for graduates 'who
will be killed' in war in Indochina; Northwestern Univ informed by city of
Evanston that it will be billed $30,000 for extra police services and damages
incurred during protest demonstrations and disorders; about 240 employes of
Plasma Physics Lab, Princeton, NJ, sign lr of support for Pres Nixon policies;
Natl Guard troops withdrawn from campus and dispersed; are pelted with
marshmallows by students; Gov Kirk sees students successful in some Fla HR dists

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              323 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 105 words

Norodom Sihanouk aide, Min Chau Seng, says guerrillas opposing Lon Nol Govt
killed thousands of enemies, news conf, Paris; notes Communist Chinese backing
of insurgents; says he is sure that USSR will eventually grant them recognition;
says insurgents will never negotiate with Lon Nol Govt; Paris talks drag on with
no indication of progress; former Cambodian aide stresses Cambodian insurgents'
opposition to negotiations does not imply criticism of talks; Habib, during
session, denounces other side; blames it for lack of progress; N Vietnamese
delegate says US planes recently raided northern part of buffer zone and N of
zone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              324 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 73 words

Army charges Capt V M Hartmann and Lt R G Lee with attempted murder in
connection with '69 incident in which US platoon was allegedly directed to fire
at some huts in Mekong Delta for 'target practice'; says 1 woman was killed in
incident; says investigation indicates officers believed huts were unoccupied;
investigation was begun after Repr Van Deerlin wrote lr to Capt J L Sugarman
saying he had heard about incident; Sugarman comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              325 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6

LENGTH: 172 words

Chmn Burns told business leaders that Reserve would not let set money supply
growth goals stop it, 'as lender of last resort,' from supplying more money in
case of liquidity crisis; reptdly noted concern in financial community about
state of liquidity in econ; made no projections on money supply growth; much of
meeting between Pres Nixon and financial and business leadersis devoted to
explanation of SE Asian policy; Nixon again pledges all US troops will be out of
Cambodia by June 30 and says operation will help to guarantee, and possibly
speed, withdrawal of troops from S Vietnam; Nixon stand on wage-price restraints
interpreted differently by businessmen present at White House dinner; White
House press sec Ziegler denies Nixon made appeal for restraint during his
presentation; Stans says Nixon Adm keeps under consideration various proposals
short of direct controls; Under Sec Walker sees considerable merit in Sen Javits
proposal for pub of developments with inflationary implications; Chmn McCracken
opposes plan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              326 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 87 words

S Vietnamese sources say N Vietnamese troops recruit guerrillas from Cambodian
rural population in attempt to create Vietcong-like orgn; Hanoi radio repts May
7-8 meeting by Cambodian Peoples Movement of United Resistance in a 'liberated
area' of Cambodia; says orgn is subordinate to Norodom Sihanouk's Natl United
Front of Kampuchea; analysis of Saigon sources of events in Cambodia since early
March seems intended to justify allied thrusts into Cambodia; sources maintain
allied action was in response to enemy action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              327 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 68 words

Sen Fulbright, describing S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Co Ky as an 'Asian
Agnew', charges S Vietnam seeks to keep Amers 'mired in the swamp' of Cambodia;
contends Nixon Adm 'apparently intends to sustain an indefinite, full-scale mil
involvement by proxy in Cambodia'; Sen sets vote on Sen Dole amendment to bar
enforcement of pending Cooper-Church amendment until enemy releases all US POWs
in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              328 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 32 words

Saigon police use tear gas to forestall 2 demonstrations involving about 1,000
hs students planned who to protest arrest of student leaders; students retaliate
by throwing stones and firebombs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              329 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 58 words

US State Dept legal adviser J R Stevenson says US chose to invade without
Cambodian consent to preserve neutrality of Cambodia, forum, NYC Bar Assn; State
Dept ex-adviser Prof Chayes rebuts Stevenson, says US violated territory of a
neutral country, that threat of attack had been within the enemy sanctuaries in
Cambodia but not toward S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              330 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 87 words

61 Amers killed in Cambodia, 249 wounded, wk; total Us losses are 219 killed,
833 wounded; 500 S Vietnamese killed, over 2,000 wounded; 9,000 enemy reptdly
killed; 42,265 Amers have been killed in war, 278,814 wounded, 107,579 S
Vietnamese killed, 643,209 enemy killed; enemy launches attacks E and N of
Pnompenh; fight way into Preyvent; reptdly withdraw later; overrun Tang Krasang;
ambush US arty convoy near Memot; US helicopters kill 32 of enemy in NE; US
plane crashes 13 mi inside Cambodia, 29th US plane lost; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              331 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 25 words

Dem Natl Chmn O'Brien charges Nixon Adm has negative, foot-dragging attitude
toward Cong efforts to improve lot of Vietnam war veterans, statement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              332 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 41 words

Laotian mil command announces start of an offensive, repts successes against
Communist troops in wide areas of countryside; Govt warns N Vietnam that
increased Communist activities in southern Laos may force shift in its
neutralist position

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              333 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 13 words

Capt Vincent M Hartmann's father says Vietnam atrocity charges are ridiculous

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              334 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

Captured Vietcong officer repts Amer, Japanese and French correspondents
captured in Apr are alive and have been moved to rear areas; 14 or 15
correspondents are believed to be held by Communist Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              335 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

Some 200 disabled S Vietnamese veterans temporarily occupy offices of Veterans'
Min in Saigon; Min agrees to talk with them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              336 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 29 words

Several thousand Saigon students stage biggest anti-Govt demonstration in recent
wks at Phan Khac Suu's funeral; police use tear gas to disperse students; 6
students arrested

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              337 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Cambodian Natl Assembly Deputy Heour Lay Inn describes past Vietcong and N
Vietnamese activity in Snoul, taken by US troops, and Chhlong, taken by S
Vietnamese, int, Phompenh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              338 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 196 words

Ouster Cambodian leader Norodom Sihanouk, in Hanoi, acknowledges that while in
office he aided 'Vietnamese people fighting against US imperalists', rept by
Hanoi radio; answers charge of present Cambodian Govt that he betrayed Cambodian
neutrality in favor of Communists with statement that 'one cannot be neutral
between the aggressor and the victim of aggression'; N Vietnamese Premier Pham
Van Dong says Cambodia made great achievements under Norodom Sihanouk; latter
pledges all-out efforts to back 'just struggle of Khmer people against Amer
imperialists'; says neither Cambodia, Laos nor Vietnam can be free if territory
of others are invaded; thanks Vietnamese Communists for aid to people of
Cambodia; does not plan to go to Cambodia; says he is not a Communist but finds
Communism better than capitalism and the 'Amer way of life'; Sihanouk has been
almost continuously feted by N Vietnamese since his arrival in Hanoi; Hanoi
propaganda stresses that his enlistment in common cause with Vietnamese
Communists brings added weight of Cambodian people into struggle against US and
its allies; Pham Van Dong emphasizes Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia are now united
against US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              339 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 59 words

S Vietnam repts its marines battle N Vietnamese and Vietcong troops in Preyveng
to relieve besieged Cambodian garrison; marines kill 81 of enemy; Cambodian mil
sources deny marines entered town but S Vietnamese spokesmen confirm entry;
heavy fighting reptd E of Kompong Cham; Cambodian forces reptdly withdraw from
Prek Kak rubber plantation; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              340 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 135 words

Former medic Gary O Nordstrom says he and other soldiers saw civilians moving
around huts before they were fired on, int; says he saw entire incident and gave
his version of it to Army investigators last Dec; says Hartmann 'definitely
knew' some huts were occupied by Vietnamese civilians when he ordered his men to
fire into structures; says Hartmann ordered his men to withdraw without going
near huts to survey any casualties; Pentagon sources say soldiers ceased firing
when old man ran out of 1 of the huts; Nordstrom says 40 to 50 soldiers involved
never crossed 30-ft-wide river separating them from huts; reveals other details;
Pentagon spokesman says Defense Dept will make no comment on incident beyond
announcement of charges; efforts to reach Hartmann and Lee are unsuccessful;
Nordstrom illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              341 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 130 words

Pres Nixon in San Clemente in effort to get quick rest; works with aides; goes
for 45-mi drive along coast with Rebozo; stops at San Clemente drug store on
return; chats with bystanders; illus; pub complaints that he was 'isolating'
himself during his long stay in San Clemente last yr recalled; aides say his
stays will now be shorter; Ziegler says he expects Nixon, now at his San
Clemente, Calif, home, to work on econ address there; evidence indicates that
address will come soon, given sudden increase in stock prices and availability,
for 1st time in mos, of good econ news to rept to nation; Nixon meets with Tenn
U student govt pres J Smith aboard Pres airplane in discussion of Vietnam war;
Smith express his opposition to war but cites many areas of agreement with Pres

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              342 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 30, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

US CIA rept, prepared in '67, holds Cambodian Premier Lon Nol, who is now
anti-Communist, sold rice to Vietcong on several occasions a few yrs ago; notes
his action was not illegal because Cambodia was neutral country

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              343 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Comment on accord between Yem Sambaur and Tran Van Lam concerning presence of S
Vietnamese troops in Cambodia; S Vietnamese operations in Cambodia noted; map;
chart

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              344 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 13 words

Comment on 'good' battlefield performance of S Vietnamese troops in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              345 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 64 words

C L Sulzberger, saying it is too early to assay Pres Nixon's Cambodian move,
says it seems sound from Indochina battlefield viewpoint but unsound from
internal Amer viewpoint; says reaction against move, including that of China and
USSR, is not as 'fevered' as reaction of some Amers; says US opinion is swayed
by emotion, much of it featured by arrogance and founded on ignorance

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              346 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 2

LENGTH: 8 words

Reply to May 24 lr opposes US policy in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              347 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 41 words

Jacob Lippman, in lr holding Pres powers to use armed forces as Comdr in Chief,
as in Vietnam and Cambodia, very limited in comparison with Cong powers, urges
amending laws, such as draft, to bar use of forces outside US without Cong
authorization

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              348 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 13 words

Lr urges Cong to restrict Pres Nixon's power as means of ending Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              349 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 82 words

Dr Rusk discusses treatment of US Vietnam casualties; repts about 270,000 Amers
have been wounded in war and have survived; notes importance of helicopters in
transporting victims; notes Veterans Adm provides excellent rehabilitation
services but lacks personnel; notes case of 18-yr-old, hit with high-velocity
shell which took away 1 kidney, several ft of intestinal tract and 1/2 of
pelvis, who survived as result of advanced rescue techniques; deplores shortage
of med personnel and funds

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              350 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Sr Nixon Adm officials reptdly move to conclusion that Cambodia will need
increasing mil aid from S Vietnam and Thailand; see Communists using twin
strategy of concentrating N Vietnamese main units in NE Cambodia E of Mekong
River and supplying them over water routes from Laos, while bldg up insurgent
forces elsewhere in Cambodia; are concerned for survival of Lon Nol Govt; see
far-ranging civil war emerging

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              351 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 7 words

Saigon univs and colls to resume classes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              352 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 62 words

Enemy troops attack mt resort city of Dalat and surrounding mil posts in most
serious attack since Tet offensive in '68; at least 100 enemy soldiers occupy
some bldgs; S Vietnamese mil spokesman says enemy troops are surrounded; 22
enemy reptd killed, 8 S Vietnamese killed, 24 wounded; enemy shells 25 targets
throughout S Vietnam; details on Dalat attack; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              353 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 31, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 49 words

S Vietnam Govt seeks US aid to help it support Lon Nol Govt and to pay for
upkeep of its own troops in Cambodia; S Vietnamese Govt hopes to get enough
dollars to help support new Cambodian Govt and to pay for upkeep of its own
troops, numbering about 30,000 in Cambodia; details on situation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
