
                               1 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

NYS Sen candidate Buckley charges Repr Ottinger is forming Vietnam hawk now
trying to obscure position, that Sen Goodell has shifted from pro- to antiwar,
news conf, NYC; defends own support of Nixon Adm as realistic attitude; speaks
mildly about Goodell, reflecting aides fear that Goodell campaign is floundering
so that Ottinger may win decisively and Buckley's own personal liking for
Goodell; Buckley opens new campaign phase mixing personal appearances with
fund-raising meetings and confs on strategy; takes walking tour to bldg site on
Av of Amers; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 8; (AFP)

LENGTH: 9 words

N Vietnamese press lauds UAR Pres Nasser's achievements

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 49 words

Scott says last US troops will be coming out of Vietnam by next summer,
statement; says 'something more than 200,000' troops will remain for some time
to come; predicts Nixon will have favorable rept to nation by mid-Oct on war
situation and will announce accelerated schedule of withdrawals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 18 words

C-47 with 29 aboard on Banmethout-Hue flight crashes near Danang, S Vietnam;
survivors sighted near wreckage

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 1, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 103 words

Yugoslavian Pres Tito warns that universal peace and stability cannot be
achieved by big powers alone, s, Belgrade, at state dinner for Pres Nixon;
suggests that 2-power diplomacy may have even encouraged meddling in affairs of
others and 'dangerous hotbeds of conflict'; commenting on Mideast and Indochina,
implies that big powers do not understand that 'larger peace cannot rest for
long on smaller wars'; Nixon, in reply, stresses right of all nations to choose
their own course; refuses to accept implication that US involvement in Mideast
and Indochina amts to infringement on rights of smaller nations; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky will make 5-day private visit to GB

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 9 words

Abrams is recovering satisfactorily; is in Saigon hosp

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 5

LENGTH: 31 words

Reply to Sept 23 lr, which recommends acceptance of Vietcong proposals and says
US involvement is illegal, notes NYS Bar Assn approved com rept upholding
legality of US involvement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 37 words

Nguyen Van Thieu submits to S Vietnamese Assembly proposed natl budget for '71
of $16.9-billion; Assembly sec gen Pham Duy Tue says expected Govt income for
'71 is $14.3-billion; says 60% of proposed budget is for defense

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Communist forces have cut or attacked 3 major hwys leading from Pnompenh to
major centers to SE, SW and NW; Route 4 has been closed 2 days; Amer and S
Vietnamese casualties for last wk reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 2, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 189 words

Reliable sources in Washington say Nixon Adm drafts new set of proposals,
possibly including ceasefire, for submission to N Vietnamese and Vietcong
delegations at talks; Nixon is expected to make final decision on whether to
submit proposals after his meeting with Bruce; Adm officials expect Nixon to go
ahead with new set of proposals based on what is described as 'wide range' of
recommendations that he will receive from Bruce; Washington officials expect
Nixon will outline new proposals publicly this mo, while announcing accelerated
withdrawal of US troops; Kissinger meeting with Bruce noted; other details on
possible US proposals; Bruce, at session of Paris talks, says Communists have
not responded to his request for clarification of their proposals; US spokesman
says he has no comment on whether special information on proposals is being
passed on to Xuan Thuy; Pham Dang Lam scores provision calling for replacement
of Nguyen Van Thieu, Nguyen Cao Ky and Tran Thien Khiem; Bruce rejects
provision; N Vietnamese spokesman defends it; US official says Adm studies
Vietcong proposals 'seriously but not optimistically'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

A Lewis, commenting on POW issue and Vietcong proposals, says reappraisal by
Communists of POW issue could play important part in getting talks moving; says
gesture of generosity by Hanoi concerning POWs could revive Amer faith in talks
and enhance will to bargain

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 37 words

White House press sec describes as speculative rept that Pres Nixon draws up new
proposals on Vietnam; refuses to predict what Nixon might propose; says there
will be no major announcement after conf of Nixon and Bruce

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 58 words

Article on local scene in Sonmy, which has been frequently called Songmy and
will be referred to in future as Sonmy; some inhabitants are weary, suspicious
and afraid; live in resettlement area; say S Vietnamese Govt has not provided
needed aid; assert officials threaten or intimidate those villagers asked about
massacre; other details; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 80 words

Repub ethnic leaders at party's Nationalities Div annual conf boo keynote
speaker, Repr Riegle, when he indirectly criticizes Vice Pres Agnew and urges
quicker Amer withdrawal from Vietnam; some delegates walk out during his s after
he complains that some 'responsible leaders' are not heeding Pres Nixon's plea
for lowering of voices; Mitchell says much of violence is fault of 'extremist
orgns' whose philosophic view that end justifies means is 'right out of Leninist
handbooks'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 3, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 11 words

Army craft with 8 aboard crashes 48 mi E of Saigon; 6 killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 100 words

Sen McGovern campaigns with Dem US Sen candidate Ottinger in Manhattan; Ottinger
deplores Vice Pres Agnew 'vicious' attack on Sen Goodell but repeats belief that
it has put Goodell out of race, int; terms Buckley impression of reasonableness
false, linking him to Sen G C Wallace; charges that Conservative opponent J L
Buckley's suggested cuts in state police budget would force 500 state troopers
to be eliminated; says Buckley's educ aid program will drive up taxes and cut
aid to localities by $372-million; Vietnam Veterans Against the War members
stage antiwar demonstration during NYC pol rally

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 79, Column 1

LENGTH: 183 words

About 20,000 gather at Washington Monument victory rally; S Vietnamese Embassy
aide Tran Khoa Hoc reads Nguyen Cao Ky s pleading for continued assistance by
Amers and other peoples of world; Nguyen Cao Ky says he feels his 'voice' must
be among those at rally; says he decided not to come to rally because his
presence could have led to 'unrest and violence'; McIntire reiterates
accusations that Nixon Adm dissuaded Nguyen Cao Ky from coming; says Deputy Asst
Sec Sullivan is responsible; State Dept spokesman has no comment; McIntire aide
accuses French Govt of preventing Nguyen Cao Ky's wife from coming; McIntire
contends 250,000 attend rally; rally is punctuated by antiwar shouting from
peace demonstrators; clashes between construction workers and others with
demonstrators reptd; 29 persons arrested; several less active confrontations
between opposing factions reptd; crowd at rally described; said to be primarily
white, middle-aged and middle class; Repr Rarick attends rally; McIntire aide
reads article on war written by Nixon in '64 calling for victory; other details
on rally; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 41 words

Comment on troop withdrawals and transfer of equipment to S Vietnam; Amer comdrs
said to be encouraged by mil progress; many in Saigon said to find future bleak
in absence of prospects for early settlement; comment on casualty figures for
last wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 0

LENGTH: 56 words

A J Langguth, discussing his 3d tour of Vietnam, says he finds hopelessness on
all sides; urges US to negotiate immediate cease-fire and coalition govt;
foresees Communists taking over Saigon after period of pol maneuver; illus; says
no liberal center exists between Saigon Govt and Communists; notes new
nationalism of some S Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 0

LENGTH: 101 words

Article on comedian B Hope; his career, pol activity and entertainment of troops
in Vietnam and elsewhere discussed; comment on his close, personal ties with
Vice Pres Agnew; notes Hope's writers provide Agnew with jokes for his ss;
sampling; illus together; his tours to entertain US troops discussed; notes
troops in Vietnam do not enjoy his humor as much as troops did during World War
II; Hope discusses how his identification with Vietnam war has broadened into
more openly pol activity in behalf of 'Americanism' and those he feels exemplify
it; assn with conservative causes and politicians noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 0

LENGTH: 19 words

Shaplen, Robert: The Road From War. Vietnam 1965-1970, on US involvement and
other aspects of war, revd; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 85 words

Maj Am Rong confirms repts that Cambodian planes bombed region around Vietnamese
refugee village in NW Cambodia on Sept 14; says bombing came during skirmishes
in area 'infested by Vietcong and N Vietnamese'; says Govt troops suffered some
losses; declines to identify planes that had participated in bombing; says he
cannot confirm repts that S Vietnamese Govt is calling for probe; refugees
describe bombings; some say there were no enemy troops in area; illus of victim
of grenade explosion in Pnompenh mkt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 173 words

White House orders Defense Dept to plan on seeking $1-billion increase in
defense spending, fiscal '72; increase, which would bring spending level to
$74.5-billion, is first in 3 yrs but more than $4-billion below earlier Nixon
Adm guidance figures given to dept budget planners; Deputy Sec Packard says top
defense officials are 'troubled' by directive; says dept will be 'severly
pushed' to come within ceiling; discusses personnel and material problems likely
to result from funds reduction; por; Packard says defense officials seek
balanced, reduced force levels that would curtail defense outlays while enabling
US to meet worldwide commitments; US cut in troops and base closings in Japan,
Philippines, Thailand and W Ger seen likely factor in budgetary decisions for
coming yr; cut in NATO troops also likely; Adm officials say 1 factor in US
defense budgetary decisions is assumption that all but 40,000 to 50,000 of
390,000 US troops now in Vietnam will be withdrawn and many of them released
from service during new fiscal yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 226 words

NY Times series on continuing voter survey being conducted by D Yankelovich Inc
from Sept 15 to Nov 2; 1st article revs findings of 463 half-hr ints, 1st of
3,000 planned; describes cross-sec of electorate, generally middle-aged, moving
toward right, depressed by natl situation and especially concerned about
Vietnam, living costs, crime, drugs and student unrest; graph of views on such
issues; 1st findings indicate many voters have not yet related natl issues to
Gov race and 26.6%, unusually large number, are still undecided; show 75.8%
believe Rockefeller will win, including 63% of those supporting Goldberg; show
86.4% have little or no knowledge of Adams, that 49.1% of those backing Goldberg
know little of him, high proportion for major-party nominee; profile of
respondents by geog, sex, ethnic-religious, age and econ characteristics; rept
shows Rockefeller's ideological profile as described by respondents is almost
identical with their own self-images; profiles for both candidates on ideology
and personal characterisitcs; 32.6% of persons polled expect econ conditions to
improve next yr; apparent divergence between what respondents consider
themselves and figures for party regis; suggests move away from Dem
identification, possibly further evidence of statewide move to right suspected
in other responses and by candidates themselves

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHS & CHARTS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 141 words

S Vietnamese Govt announces dual exch rate for currency as part of reform
package aimed at halting inflation; beginning next wk, Amers will receive 275
piasters for a dollar instead of 118 rate in effect now; US Govt will continue
to receive old rate; officials are hopeful new measures will help stabilize econ
and divert dollars from black mkt; econ program, worked out with US officials,
also calls for pay increase of about 20% for civil servants and soldiers, higher
duties on luxury imports, concessions to encourage exports and others; AID dir
Mossler says program represents basis for good start in stabilizing econ;
chances of success said to depend in large part on Vietnamese; Vietnamese seen
opposed to change; Mins Pham Kim Ngoc and Nguyen Bich Hue, in effort to avoid
panic, go on TV to explain moves; plead for pub understanding

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 4, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 86 words

Cambodian mil spokesman says enemy forces appear to be massing for new attacks
on outer defense ring of Pnompenh; Govt troops strike at enemy concentrations 14
mi N of capital; Govt bn sent to break roadblock on Route 4; Adm McCain, comdr
of US forces in Pacific, arrives, Pnompenh; confs with Lon Nol; Min Koun Wick
says US aircraft are flying support missions for Cambodian ground troops, news
conf, San Francisco; light and scattered ground action reptd; S Vietnamese
troops kill 12 enemy near O'Reilly base; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 42 words

Vietcong forces aboard sampans attack factory hamlet of Deyeth, 16 mi SE of
Pnompenh; McCain tours mil installations; reptdly impressed with natl spirit and
unity of Cambodians; his aides rept Cambodians made routine requests for more US
mil equipment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 56 words

Allied troops repel enemy attack on outpost S of Danang, killing 11 enemy; 3
Amers killed, 4 wounded; 108 enemy killed in fighting concentrated in northern
provs; US helicopter downed; 15 Vietnamese killed, 7 wounded in 2 terrorist
incidents N of Saigon; enemy shells 19 targets; S Vietnamese troops kill 21
enemy in Mekong Delta; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 19 words

Some 1,000 demonstrators march through Dublin to US Embassy to protest visit and
US involvement in Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 5, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 132 words

Pres Nixon confs privately in Ireland with Bruce and Habib; White House
officials pointedly do not rule out possibility that Nixon will set forth new
proposals on war later this mo; White House press sec says Adm hopes to make
progress in bringing conflict to end through negotiations; Nixon, commenting on
his tour, says Europeans showed more sophisticated understanding of US aims in
Vietnam then they did when he toured Eur in '69, remarks, Dromoland Castle; says
he did not find same 'skepticism' about either US motives or prospects for
success in US effort to extricate itself; says men he talked to during last wk
now realize US brings its participation to end; White House press sec says Bruce
is not taking 'massive' new set of instructions back to Paris; makes other
comments; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

NYC Educ Bd spokesman says schools will remain open on Vietnam Moratorium Day,
Oct 15; says bd's policy of noting student and teacher absences during war
protests will remain unchanged

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 52, Column 1

LENGTH: 156 words

Pres Nixon, touring County Kildare, Ireland with wife and novelist J West,
distant cousin who has written about Quakers, gives his endorsement to disputed
finding that his ancestors are buried there; search has turned up 98-yr-old
resident who says he was told in his youth that Nixon's 6th great-grandfather
lived and died among Timahoe Quakers; marker recording Nixon's visit seen
settling any remaining arguments by stating that his maternal ancestors are
buried there; Nixon notes in jest that Amer politicians are willing to go to any
length to establish even tenuous roots in Ireland; says his wife's roots are
firm in Ireland and that Us has unquestionable debt to Irish spirit, warmth,
humor and faith; later calls on Pres de Valera, Dublin, and has lunch with Prime
Min Lynch at Dublin Castle; Nixon's car splattered with eggs on several
occasions; effigy of Nixon burned outside US Embassy by large group protesting
Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 14 words

US troop strength fell by 3,900 last wk; there are now 390,200 US troops in S
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

Vietnam; surge of enemy bombardments and attacks on allied bases reptd; 20
civilians killed, 40 wounded in attack on refugee settlement 280 mi NE of
Saigon; details on action; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

Thailand and N Vietnam resume negotiations over repatriation of about 40,000 N
Vietnamese refugees living in Thailand; flow of returnees was halted in '65 when
Hanoi Govt declared US bombing prevented its continuation; about 30,000 had left
Thailand when bombing began; new negotiations, conducted by leading officials of
Thai and N Vietnamese Red Cross orgns, begin with statements of mutual goodwill
and understanding; renewal of negotiations is viewed in Thailand as further sign
of softening of Thailand's hardline anti-Communist stand; repts about pol
attitude of N Vietnamese residents in Thailand conflict

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 52 words

Defense Dept sets mail dates for Xmas packages going to Vietnam; pkgs over 5 lbs
and going to Vietnam by surface mail should be mailed between Oct 12 and Nov 7;
pkgs under 5 lbs and carrying regular postage should be mailed between Oct 19
and Nov 21; regular air mail should be posted between Nov 30 and Dec 12

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 78 words

Int with Trinh Cong Son, Saigon, S Vietnamese composer and guitarist; his
antiwar songs have made him idol of young; he scores war; expects it to
continue; says it has destroyed integrity of Vietnamese; is in poor health and
does not give concerts any more; moves about with caution because Govt considers
him to be draft-dodger; says his songs were banned in '68, but ban was 'quietly
and officially eased'; his songs are played in coffee shops and nightclubs;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 6, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

3 student leaders released from Saigon prison after protest fast by them and
others; had been held since student assembly 35 days ago to protest compulsory
mil training at univs; about 100 students were arrested at time; no official
charges were filed against 3 students, who were detained for 'disturbing the
peace'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 4

LENGTH: 83 words

Hartke-Roudebush Sen race seen very close; Sen Hartke makes campaign issue of
Indiana econ downturn spurred by GM strike; links recession to Nixon Adm;
Roudebush campaign is strongly conservative; he scores Hartke for liberal
positions although Vietnam war issue apparently has diminished since campaign
began; Hartke criticized for '64 acceptance of $30,000 from Spiegel Inc, Chicago
mail-order co later implicated in postal rate lobbying; is stressing econ
recession, for which he blames Repub Adm

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

Ed noting effects of forgotten air war in Indochina may have been brought to
attention again by Sen Kennedy refugees subcom rept; urges negotiated
settlement; says some analysts believe unique moment has arrived when both sides
may feel they can negotiate from strength and imaginative US proposal may
trigger negotiation of provisional pol settlement; sees Kennedy rept on plight
of refugees pointing up cruel dimensions of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

Ed says hopes of US and world for era of peace ride with proposals Pres Nixon
will announce; says proposals were discussed with Bruce and Habib, but ultimate
decision is Nixon's; notes indications of strain between US and S Vietnamese
Govt; says NY Times has urged cease-fire for some time; says real question is
whether Nixon seeks negotiated compromise or negotiated victory; says war has
not been won but continues as small-unit guerrilla conflict

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 1

LENGTH: 134 words

J Reston article on majority and minority rights in US holds Middle East and
Vietnam wars have forced US voters to make judgments on delicate, complicated
and dangerous matters for which they are unprepared; discusses rule by majority
and assumption that majority opinion is necessarily right opinion; cites W
Lippmann view that majority rule can become tyranny; holds there is no
substitute on either side, majority or minority, for toleration, no right to use
dem process in order to kill it, and no validity to argument that because
majority seems to favor something, majority is necessarily right; criticizes
campus militants who challenge opinion of majority by insisting on infallibility
of their own minority opinion and who demand right to silence Vice Pres Agnew or
others who disagree with them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 75 words

S Vietnamese mil hq announces end of 3-mo operation in southeastern Cambodia and
withdrawal of task force involved; S Vietnamese troop strength in Cambodia is
12,000 men; 453 enemy killed during operation; intensified enemy shellings
continue for 3d day, most of them in coastal provs of central and northern parts
of S Vietnam; 52 refugees injured, 7 killed in attack on resettlement center
near Phumy; ground fighting continues at low level; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky says he is ordered by Pres Nguyen Van Thieu
to return to Saigon, int, London; says he has no idea what Pres Nixon's
announcement will be

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 177 words

French Pres Pompidou arrives, Moscow, for 8-day visit; accompanied by Mrs
Pompidou and Min Schumann; met at airport by Podgorny, Brezhnev and Kosygin;
illus; Brezhnev, breaking protocol, for 1st time welcomes a Western
non-Communist leader; gesture seen by French officials as effort to symbolize
USSR desire for warmer contacts with France; also seen indication of Brezhnev
growing preeminence in Soviet collective leadership; Pompidou confs with
leaders; feted at Kremlin dinner; suggests various areas of commercial
cooperation; illus; Pompidou proposes joint effort be made in expanding trade
between 2 countries; Dommunist party leader Brezhnev sees gains in 10 or 20-yr
pact; Pompidou says France favors Eur security conf if it leads to genuine
contacts 'from one end of Eur to other,' s, Moscow; says contacts must be based
on respect for and independence and liberty of all countries, 'each in its place
and within its frontiers'; says France and USSR have similar approaches to
Mideast situation; says France and USSR have similar approaches on Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 172 words

Pres Nixon announces he will deliver 'major statement' about Vietnam on TV and
that new US proposal will be presented at next session of Paris talks,
unscheduled appearance before White House press corps; says statement will be
most comprehensive ever made on subject; White House press sec says Nixon makes
announcement of s to point to its importance; repts that s will include
proposals for cease-fire tied to accord on troop withdrawals noted; Nixon says s
will not be limited to Vietnam and has been discussed with S Vietnamese Govt and
has its approval; says s is not 'propaganda gimmick'; says s arises from
discussions within Adm for several wks about US negotiating position and follows
'very thorough consideration of all the issues'; White House officials say
re-examination of position has been going on since US mil operation in Cambodia
was completed at end of June; says Natl Security Council, Kissinger and Bruce
were all involved in reassessment; Nixon says Kissinger will hold 2 background
sessions for reporters

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 7, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

Vietcong spokesman in Paris says he hopes Pres Nixon will announce acceptance of
Vietcong proposals; says Nguyen Thi Binh has sent copies of proposals to all US
Sens

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 137 words

Washington officials say N Vietnam, despite increased warnings of hardships and
sacrifices ahead, appears determined to pursue war indefinitely, at least until
peace settlement can be reached on Hanoi's terms; conclusion is drawn from
latest pronouncements by N Vietnamese leaders and from internal party debates in
N Vietnam; most significant new trend observed in N Vietnam's conduct of war and
mgt of econ is effort to create task forces that would serve as army reserves
and civilian labor units; Aug 15 edition of N Vietnamese army newspaper
describes this approach to problem of sustaining militarily and economically
strategy of 'protracted war'; Sept 19 edition of Nhan Dan, Communist party
newspaper, sounds complaints about inadequacy of production and theme that
consumer population hungers for consumer goods

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

S Vietnam, enemy shelling intensifies for 4th day; 21 targets attacked

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 23 words

Govt drops charge of inciting to riot filed against Sgt J R Kerns, Vietnam
veteran accused of ripping up Vietcong flag at Washington rally

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Ed says Pres Nixon proposals warrant advance description as 'major new
initiative' for peace; says they provide realistic agenda for serious private
negotiations; says they contain no preconditions; says Hanoi can ask no more as
opening Amer move toward compromise

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 38 words

Lr, noting Pres Nixon '68 campaign pledge to end war and recent Gallup poll
showing 55% of Amers favor complete US withdrawal before fixed date, says
Vietnamization implies more or less permanent Amer presence in Indochina; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 8

LENGTH: 39 words

Nguyen Van Thieu meets with Amb Bunker and S Vietnamese aides immediately after
Pres Nixon s; has no comment on s, although he is expected to support US
position; S Vietnamese militant Buddhist faction welcomes ceasefire proposals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 6

LENGTH: 13 words

Comparison of US and Vietcong proposals on withdrawals made now and in '69

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

M Frankel comments on Pres Nixon s; queries why Nixon proposes cease-fire now
and change of venue from Paris talks to internatl conf; says Nixon clearly feels
he will profit from cease-fire and, with end of fighting, will enhance his
staying power at conf table; says proposals do not alter US stand on Hanoi's
demands for deadline for unconditional withdrawal of US troops and for ouster of
S Vietnamese Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

Transcript of Pres Nixon address; map; graph of past, current and projected US
troop levels in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 7

LENGTH: 12 words

Comparison of US and Vietcong proposals on govt orgn made now and in '69

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 111 words

Renewal, 1st vol of de Gaulle's 3-part memoirs recounting events during
presidency, goes on sale in French bookstores; covers period from return to
power in '58 until end of '62; contains almost no reference to Pompidou;
describes effort to assert French independence in foreign affairs and restore
French grandeur; recalls May 31 '61 meeting with Kennedy in Paris in which he
urged US to avoid 'endless entanglement' in Vietnam; dismisses charges that he
neglected France's econ and soc problems when he was Pres because of concern
over world position; says he spent half his time on problems and notes they were
at forefront of his activity and concern; excerpts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 8, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 339 words

Pres Nixon asks Hanoi and Vietcong to join allies in standstill cease-fire
throughout Indochina, TV s; calls for Indochina peace conf to negotiate end to
fighting; says Paris talks will remain 'primary forum' for reaching settlement
until such time as broader arrangement begins producing 'serious negotiations';
proposes eventual withdrawal of all US troops on timetable to be worked out in
negotiations; states willingness to accept pol solution reflecting will of S
Vietnamese people and existing relationship of pol forces in S Vietnamese
countryside; proposes immediate and unconditional release of all POWs, including
innocent civilian victims of war; concedes internationally supervised cease-fire
'in place' may be difficult to arrange and even harder to sustain; says
'unconventional war may require an unconventional truce'; says cease-fire may be
prelude to pol and mil settlement; says war in Indochina has proved to be of one
piece; suggests internatl conf would include Laos, Cambodia, USSR and China, as
well as belligerents; Adm officials say Cambodia, Laos and S Vietnam approve
Nixon's proposals; portray proposals as fresh set; say US stands by its
endorsement of internationally supervised free elections to determine
composition of S Vietnamese govt; say Nixon insists on matching troop reductions
by other side; Nixon rejects Communists' demand for ouster of Nguyen Van Thieu,
Nguyen Cao Ky and Tran Thien Khiem; Bruce is expected to present proposals in
tomorrow's Paris talks session; Nixon lists 5 gen principles that must govern
any cease-fire arrangement; White House official says offer of cease-fire a yr
ago would have left allied forces at severe mil disadvantage; says captured
enemy documents disclose some discussion by enemy of cease-fire; Church hails
proposals; Fulbright says they are 'better than nothing' but flawed by Nixon's
belief that Nguyen Van Thieu and Nguyen Cao Ky will have to be kept in office;
Stennis says proposals do not offer N Vietnam very much; Nixon, Rogers and Laird
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

Newspapers supporting and opposing Pres Nixon's policy in Vietnam join in
approving proposals; excerpts from eds of several newspapers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5

LENGTH: 28 words

N Vietnam and Vietcong denounce, but do not flatly reject, Pres Nixon proposal,
Hanoi radio; say they hold proposal does not meet demand for unconditional US
withdraawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 140 words

Senior Amer mil planners hold cease-fire as proposed by Pres Nixon could be
disastrous to S Vietnamese Govt unless it is effectively supervised; say S
Vietnamese Govt could solidify its increasing control of villages, improve
training and quality of its army and devote increased attention to postwar
problems if N Vietnam accepted cease-fire proposal and sincerely lived up to it;
expect that if enemy agreed to cease-fire, it would try in every way possible to
improve its mil position; Pentagon sources say Laird and Adm Moorer were
consulted as Nixon's initiative was formulated, but some Joint Cs/S members
learned details of proposal only hrs before Nixon went on TV; Kissinger's
opinions concerning cease-fire, written in article in Feb, '69, noted; most mil
men expect N Vietnam to reject cease-fire; details on possible effects

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 11 words

S Vietnamese in Saigon listening on radio to Pres Nixon s illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 7

LENGTH: 125 words

S Vietnamese Govt, in statement issued 5 hrs after Pres Nixon announces
proposals, backs proposals and repeats its offer of free elections supervised by
comm that would include Vietnamese Communists; calls on N Vietnam to end its
'absurd and arrogant demands'; expresses hope Communists will now begin 'serious
discussions'; Nguyen Van Thieu after meeting with Bunker for 3d successive day,
confs with aides; has previously indicated skepticism over various unqualified
cease-fire proposals and has stressed need for conditions before truce; US
officials stress Nixon proposals were worked out in close consultation with S
Vietnamese Govt, which raised no exceptions; Cambodian Govt has not yet
presented proposals to pub; Laotian Govt hails them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 8

LENGTH: 14 words

Cambodian Govt has not yet informed pub of Pres Nixon's peace proposal for
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

N Vietnam hails '71 Communist Chinese aid pact; repts aid is free; expresses
solidarity with China and appreciation for aid; no details on aid reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 66 words

Brit Foreign Office issues statement welcoming Pres Nixon initiative and giving
support to reconvening of Geneva Conf; statement notes Nixon proposals have full
support of Govts of S Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia; Sir Douglas-Home says Geneva
Conf could be reconvened and internatl machinery set up to 'police the peace' if
N Vietnam is receptive to Nixon proposals, radio int; makes other comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 78 words

US command repts 38 Amers killed in action last wk, lowest number in 4-1/2 yrs;
repts 666 wounded, compared with 344 previous wk; repts 43,775 Amers have been
killed, 289,800 wounded since war began; 8,622 noncambatant Amer deaths since
war began; S Vietnamese and enemy casualties for last wk and war reptd; S
Vietnamese troops abandon O'Reilly base, which has been under enemy pressure for
last 2 mos; pull out because of monsoon rains; enemy downs 3 US helicopters

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 134 words

3 NYS candidates for US Sen comment on Pres Nixon Indochina cease-fire plan;
Repub Goodell pleased at positive tone, sees plan as 1st step towards ending
war; Dem Ottinger greets plan with mixture of hope and optimism; conservative
Buckley calls plan imaginative and comprehensive and 'as far as we can go';
Ottinger charges that NYCTA purchased 1,800 faulty pub address systems for
subway cars and repaired them in its shops instead of requiring mfr to hon
warranty; NYCTA official refutes charges; says mfr repaid auth for cost of
repairing units; Sen Goodell tours Essex St mkt on Lower E Side, is urged by
many to continue to oppose Vice Pres Agnew; Buckley comments while campaigning
Upstate; s, Binghamton luncheon; opposes legalizing marijuana and coll open
enrollment and Nixon welfare reform plan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

Ed says negativism of initial Communist reaction to proposals is not surprising
and there is reason to hope for ultimately favorable response; says N Vietnam is
unlikely to admit that US has put valid offer on table and sincerely seeks
peace; says N Vietnamese leaders are undoubtedly giving careful study to plan;
says plan is 'forward-looking' and 'flexible'; says onus for unecessary war will
be clearly Hanoi's unless serious private talks begin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

Article on Vietnamization program; US and S Vietnamese officials hold program
has progressed, security in large parts of S Vietnam has improved and
effectiveness of S Vietnamese Army has increased; hold opinion in US has been
polarized for so long that it has not kept up with realities of Vietnam and is
about 2 yrs behind current events; hold allies have never been stronger and
enemy never weaker; there is still uncertainty about how S Vietnamese will
perform on their own and about what N Vietnam will do once Amers are gone;
officials are reluctant to express their new optimism openly; details and
statistics

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 186 words

HR (Holifield) subcom rept offers evidence of 'appalling waste' in supply system
behind US war effort; describes conditions from '65 to '68; says buildup in
early '65 'generated mountainous new procurements, choked supply lines,
overburdened transport systems and for a time caused complete loss of control at
depots in Vietnam'; subcom is headed by Repr Holifield; rept says US ports
became jammed early in buildup and foreign ships had to be hired, while in S
Vietnam, 'supplies were dumped on the docks while ships by the score waited
their turn'; says problems stemmed from decision to rush troops to Vietnam
before facilities and control systems could be developed, and lasted until order
was established in '68; says there was evidence of 'superb performance' and
denies it intends to 'demean' what it terms 'Herculean achievement in supply and
logistics'; urges Defense Dept adopt 9-point reform program; Pentagon spokesmen
say there will be no comment until rept is digested; rept says Westmoreland took
'calculated risk' of putting troops in field without waiting for logistics
buildup; other details on rept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky leaves for Saigon after 2-wk stay in Paris
and London; refuses to see reporters and give his reaction to Pres Nixon's
proposals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 252 words

Communist delegations to Paris talks denounce Pres Nixon's proposals as
'maneuver to deceive world opinion' and hold fast to their demands for
unconditional and total US withdrawal and overthrow of 'puppet' leaders in
Saigon, talks session; neither of 2 delegations uses word 'rejection' to
characterize its attitude; Xuan Thuy, Nguyen Thi Binh and their aides use whole
string of epithets to denounce proposals; Communist delegations describe their
remarks as 'preliminary' and reserve right to return to proposals in future
sessions, although they make it clear it will be to criticize them; private
talks foreseen in which 2 sides will probe each other's meaning and intentions;
Communists said to have determined their response to proposals before they
entered conf room and before Bruce had chance to lay proposals on table; Bruce
does little more than read what Nixon says in his s, adding he hopes proposals
will receive 'most careful study and considered response by our side'; N
Vietnamese spokesman says his delegation listened to Nixon as he made s and had
8 hrs to study what he said; Communist delegations make clear they will pursue
matter of proposals; recent Vietcong proposals noted; Communist spokesmen
complain Nixon does not 'seriously' answer Vietcong proposals; proposals of both
sides said to give new stimulus to talks, which are said to be still deadlocked;
statements of Xuan Thuy, Nguyen Thi Binh and other Communists noted; Nguyen Thi
Binh and Xuan Thuy illus; Bruce and Habib illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 311 words

US publicly urges USSR to use its 'considerable influence' with Communists to
persuade them to accept proposals; Adm officials say they are not discouraged by
negative quality of initial response in Paris; reaction in Washington to
proposals is almost entirely favorable; Dems and Repubs, hawks and doves,
applaud proposals and ask Communists to give them serious consideration; Sen
adopts resolution expressing support for Nixon initiative; resolution calls
proposals 'fair and equitable'; is introduced by Percy and co-sponsored by
Mansfield, Church, Cooper, Hatfield, Hughes and McGovern; Vance and Harriman
welcome and support initiative; describe initial Communist reaction as
predictable and suggest proposals could become basis of private discussions in
Paris; Nixon describes world reaction to proposals as 'overwhelmingly good';
says bipartisan support will not go 'unnoticed' by N Vietnamese; says US expects
more 'serious and formal' reply from Communists in about a wk; State Dept
spokesman comments on possible USSR roles, news conf; discloses Rogers
telephoned Amb Dobrynin to advise him of proposals just before Nixon went on TV;
says no formal request for USSR intercession has been made; reprs of 29 other
countries were advised of substance of proposals earlier in day and delay in
informing USSR appears to have been intentional; foreign diplomats speculate
delay was designed to convey Adm's unhappiness over what US considers to be
USSR's connivance with UAR in violating Middle East cease-fire accord; Mansfield
gives proposals unequivocal support; Muskie says they are overdue but welcome;
Rivers expresses note of caution; Repr Sikes describes proposals as 'dangerous
concessions'; USSR press agency repts proposals but mildly rebukes Nixon for not
discussing 'constructive' Vietcong proposals and for continuing to support S
Vietnamese Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 9, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 218 words

HR, 274-31, approves $66.8-billion appropriations bill, cutting $2-billion from
Nixon Adm request; rejects, 72-33, Reprs Moorehead and Whalen amendment to
reduce appropriation to $65-billion; rejects amendments for withdrawal of forces
from Vietnam; rejects by voice vote 2 Repr Riegle amendments to defense
appropriations bill to cut off funds for US comabt operations in Vietnam after
June '71 and to impose a $15-billion ceiling on US operations in Vietnam in
current fiscal yr; rejects moves to cut funds for some controversial weapons
programs; 89-28, rejects Minshall amendment to cut $548-million appropriation
for further production of F-111 for USAF; rejects Bingham amendment to eliminate
$389.4-million for initial procurement of F-14 fighter bomber; rejects, 44-11,
move by Yates to eliminate $200-million for Lockheed; rejects move to eliminate
from defense appropriation $200-million contingency fund to help in production
of C-5A; increases operating funds by $150-million; this done after Repr Mahon
repts Laird explained at White House that it cost $50-million to transfer a
carrier and other ships into Mediterranean for 'show of force' during recent
Mideast crisis; Mahon, as chmn of Appropriations Com, fought both for and
against some cuts; Rivers takes exception to his fight for cuts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

A Lewis comment on reaction to Pres Nixon Vietnam peace plan notes praise for
effort and skepticism about its real meaning; says it will be mistake for Nixon
critics to discuss plan too skeptically

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 20 words

S Vietnamese and Amer officials, Saigon, see Pres Nixon truce plan raising many
complicated questions; some discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 2 words

News conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 10, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 169 words

Nixon Adm publicly urges N Vietnam to accept peace plan; Sec Rogers says that
while Adm expected an initial 'knee-jerk' reaction from Communists to Nixon
peace plan, it has a feeling that a secret acceptance and private talks in Paris
may follow, news conf; says US domestic support for plan is important because in
past enemy has relied on division in US to weaken US resolve to carry out its
policies; says standstill cease-fire is now practical; says Nixon, for 1st time
agreed to complete troops withdrawal as long as it is part of gen agreement
settling the war; says plan was offered because US is confident Vietnamization
will succeed and US combat forces will be out of combat by May 1; his statement
that 'in days ahead' S Vietnam will make some proposals for its pol future seen
as ref to more specific plans for elections in which Communists may participate
under a peace settlement; Deputy Sec Packard says Communists will move toward
cease-fire because they are losing ground militarily, s, Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 1

LENGTH: 98 words

About 1,000 armed services members hold 3d annual Armed Forces Audio-Visual
Communications Conv, Washington; prime topic is belief that forces pub image has
become tarnished and that older men at top are having trouble communicating with
young men who fill ranks; keynote speaker Gen Catton comments on factors of
Vietnam war and various 'gaps' such as generation one; cites dissension fostered
by war resulting in diminished respect for US armed forces and need for gaining
confidence of young people; participants in conv are skeptical about explaining
war to youth; participants int

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 77, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 35 words

Internatl Shoe corp, NYC, and Lux Inc, Miami, vying for permission by US Patent
Office to use peace symbol as trademark; such moves deplored by V F McGee Jr,
exec sec of Business Execs Move for Vietnam Peace

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

M Frankel on peace offers made by both sides over the yrs; says Hanoi and
Vietcong may not easily accept new Nixon proposals, especially for a cease-fire,
because of S Vietnam's improved position in populated southern secs; notes
Vietcong demand for a coalition govt among many S Vietnamese groups, but without
leaders of present Saigon Govt; chart shows declining casualties, Jan '69-Sept
'70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHS & CHARTS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 14 words

Comment on problems raised by Pres Nixon standstill cease-fire proposal for
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 7 words

Cartoons on peace proposals for Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 4

LENGTH: 161 words

J Reston article views US and USSR reverting from private to headline diplomacy,
arguing publicly and accusing each other of lying and deceiving; views US
convinced that UAR, with USSR, violated cease-fire and that Syrian intervention
with Soviet tanks resulting in feeling by Pres Nixon that he was being tricked
and personally tested by USSR; holds consequent 6th Fleet show of force and
charges by Rogers against Soviets for violating cease-fire are factors that
precipitated reversal; views it difficult to return to private diplomacy and
foresees forthcoming Rogers-Gromyko meetings unfruitful; says Nixon, by making
Vietnam peace offer in pub rather than in private, arouses suspicion in Hanoi
and USSR that he is more interested in Cong elections than in compromise
settlement; says this view is not fair, that Nixon is still looking for a
compromise which is not likely to be achieved unless both sides end propaganda
war and get back to private diplomacy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 25, Column 0

LENGTH: 146 words

R Wool article on Humphrey campaign against MacGregor; illus; int with him on
views of current status with liberals, their opposition to him for supporting
Johnson Adm and Vietnam war and relations with the young, especially students he
now lectures in coll; he defends longtime credentials as liberal, recalling
efforts on behalf of domestic legis while Vice Pres; recalls bitter '68
nominating conv and Pres election campaign; recalls campaign and difficulties
under which he ran, including assassinations of J F and R F Kennedy, M L King,
'trauma' of Chicago, loss of his regular liberal support and Johnson's adamancy
on correctness of his Vietnam policy; cites his current attitude that 'first
priority' must be to end war; Humphrey cites factors he says prevented him from
clearly opposing war in '68; Humphrey evaluates his chances for another run as
'highly remote'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 52 words

Vietcong reptdly ambushes joint Amer-S Vietnamese patrol 8 mi SW of Danang,
kills 1 US marine, wounds 5; enemy losses not determined; US forces rept light
and scattered actions throughout Vietnam in last 24 hrs; largest action leaves
25 Vietcong, 2 S Vietnamese dead, Chuong Thien Prov; other casualties reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

USSR dismisses Pres Nixon peace offer as 'a great fraud', Pravda commentary;
says proposals only 'legalize and perpetuate the intervention of US in
Indochina'; N Vietnamese delegation at Paris peace talks criticizes proposals;
US officials silent; N Vietnam newspaper Nhan Dan rejects truce bid; charges
conditions for holding broad Indochina peace conf have not been met; Communist
China scores proposals; Hsinhua carries denunciation of them by Norodom Sihanouk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

US Embassy officials in New Delhi concerned over possible Indian counter-move in
retaliation for US decision to resume sale of arms to Pakistan; think India
might grant full diplomatic recognition to N Vietnam or establish diplomatic
link with Vietcong; stress sale is 'one-time ltd exception' to US arms embargo
and not full renewal of regular, annual mil aid program, but acknowledge there
is no guarantee against future exceptions; Nixon Adm defends move, contends sale
will not upset existing mil balance between India and Pakistan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

Australian univ students seen divided on issues like student militancy and
Vietnam war; situation at individual univs noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 72 words

Min Ha Xuan Trung repts Saigon Govt plans program to combat widespread tax
evasion; Govt seeks new revenue sources to support growing budget; '71 budget
calls for spending of $2-billion, one-third more than in '69; Natl Assembly
prepares new tax law as part of effort at econ reform; old and new US mil scrip
illus; main targets of campaign are urban businessmen and professionals; absence
of criminal penalties for evasion noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Trial set, Ft Lewis, for 5 of 6 soldiers who allegedly refused orders in June to
transfer to units in preparation for shipment to Vietnam; men are Sp/4 C M Dix
Jr, Pfc P A Forrest, Pfc M Perez, Pfc L Galgano and Pvt J B Allen; 6th, Pfc J C
Griffith, to be tried at unspecified later date

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 20 words

Legal maneuvers slow S Sgt Mitchell ct-martial; all 5 ct members tentatively
selected have served in combat in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 17 words

US helicopter takes 2 crewmen injured in explosion 200 miles off Vietnam to US
hosp at Camranh Bay

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 33 words

VFW natl comdr H R Rainwater says he was unable to present to N Vietnamese reprs
at Paris peace talks petitions bearing some 4 million signatures asking release
of and better treatment for Amer POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 11, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 110 words

Gen Acctg Office rept says some Amer relief commodities destined for refugees
have been diverted or lost in transit because of inadequate AID supervision;
charges AID mission in Vientiane has failed to establish necessary controls to
safeguard US interests and account for shipments; Sen Kennedy, in statement
accompanying rept which he made pub, criticizes AID operations in Laos as
'sloppy mgt'; says $1.3-million worth of steel plates imported by AID in '65
were allowed to sink and rust at storage yrd at Phuan after it was found barges
were not needed; notes 3 com investigators found plates and that US Govt has
recovered over $765,000 in commercial sales

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 162 words

Ed on '70 issues charges Vice Pres Agnew and many other Repub leaders are trying
to win Repub control of Cong through exploitation of fear, anxiety and
frustration and exacerbating mistrust of 1 group for another; says instead of
offering proposals aimed at solving real domestic issues such as conduct of
foreign policy, management of Govt's relationship with econ, econ recession at
home and Vietnam War and Middle East crisis; they are stressing what is called
'soc issue' (campus disorders, permissiveness, violence, crime, drug addiction),
which it calls non-issue; scores Repub efforts to link assorted soc ills to 'Dem
permissiveness'; says it is no accident that Agnew and Nixon, while protesting
they do not want to curb acad freedom, keep focusing hostile pub attention on
univs; notes youth behavior is human conduct situation outside realm of pol
leaders; sees Adm wanting to protect existing vested interests and usher in new
era of reaction and passivity

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 58, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 28 words

Min R Castro, in Moscow, confs with USSR Min Grechko, other USSR Gens, N Vietnam
Min Cham Sham; Tass repts Castro en route to Warsaw Pact maneuvers, presumably
in E Ger

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 143 words

NYS Sen candidates hold 1st TV debate; illus; responses on major issues of
crime, foreign affairs, econ and environment summarized; Goodell challenges
polls indicating he is losing support within Repub party; trade views on war;
Buckley charges Goodell wants to 'throw in the towel' in a precipitate
withdrawal from Vietnam; Goodell says it is time Vietnamese fought their own
war; charges Ottinger profits from cos that contribute to pollution, such as his
family's US Plywood Corp; says he has sold stock in family's co; Ottinger
charges Buckley would bomb Communist China, concentrating attack on him; Buckley
denies Ottinger charge he favors bombing Communist China; accuses Goodell of
favoring precipitate Vietnam withdrawal; says voters have 'overriding concern'
that nation has lost its ability to cope with soc problems, citing escalation of
protest

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 32 words

S Vietnamese hamlet of Nhonhoa turned into model sanitary hamlet under Amer
advisory program of pub health; residents doubt need of project; say cities and
big towns need it; project described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 12, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 240 words

Sec of State Rogers and Defense Sec Laird, cataloguing in effect examples pf
what Nixon Adm considers Soviet bad faith, warn that US may have to embark on
'tremendous increase' in defense spending unless accords are reached with USSR
in strategic arms limitation and in other areas, TV and radio int; tone of
remarks appears to reflect rapidly growing disillusion in Adm with Moscow's
recent attitudes in almost every area of relations with US; Laird mentions USSR
build-up in weapons development and violation of Mideast cease-fire while US has
been 'trying to move from era of confrontation to one of negotiation; dismisses
repts that there was no clear agreement with USSR on ban on introducing missiles
into canal zone after start of cease-fire; for 1st time, appears to put limit on
accord in SALT; says US has delayed start of new nuclear submarine program
pending outcome of SALT but says decisions now cannot be delayed more than 12
mos; Rogers says he does not think bitter criticism of Nixon peace plan in USSR
press reflects the view of the USSR Govt fully, calls it standard Communist
propaganda; feels USSR and Hanoi will give careful consideration to Nixon plan
because of support it got in US and abroad; is indignant over USSR charge that
plan is a 'fraud'; Laird says Nixon Adm is commited to bring US troops level
down to 284,000 by next May 1, notes there were 549,500 US troops in Vietnam
when Nixon took office; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 1

LENGTH: 146 words

Pres Nixon makes campaign swing through Conn with Repub candidates; dedicates
Ital-Amer center in Stamford; motorcades in Stamford and Hartford described;
Nixon shakes hands with construction workers in Hartford; illus; antiwar
demonstration noted; 4-hr visit to Hartford and Stamford, accompanied by
Weicker, Meskill, Ucello and Mayor Wilensky, also Cong candidate; candidates
describe appearance as nonpol but Repub chmn Hausman sees help for ticket;
Bailey sees indication that Repubs believe they are in trouble; Repub Controller
candidate Mayor Agostinelli throws himself on antiwar demonstrators heckling
Nixon, tears up Vietcong flag; Nixon makes brief stopover at Westchester County
Airport on way back to Washington; greeted at airport by 1,000 backers of NYS
Conservative Sen candidate Buckley; 'appreciates' fact that Buckley supports him
but declines to go further

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 5

LENGTH: 14 words

Lr urges C S Eaton to intercede more actively with N Vietnam on behalf of Amer
POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

South Vietnamese Govt, in campaign to eliminate 'dishonest elements' in Saigon
area, tries to suppress 'new youth culture'; so far, 1,446 youths have been
forced by police to cut their long hair or have it cut by police, sometimes
shearing them with own bayonets; haircut policy is only part of larger 'for the
people' program aimed at 'eradiction of social vices to insure security for the
capital'; details on police actions in carrying out program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

Nguyen Thi Binh says US must set specific date for total withdrawal of US forces
before Vietcong will agree to cease-fire or freeing of POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 24 words

Hanoi and Vietcong reprs at Paris peace talks dismiss Pres Nixon decision to
pull out 40,000 US troops by Christmas as election campaign move

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 53 words

N Vietnam and Vietcong forces in Laos, with approach of dry season, begin to
ship supplies southward along Ho Chi Minh Trail; B-52s raid trail for 4th day;
Danang air base hit by 140-mm rockets, largest in enemy's arsenal; enemy weapons
cache found near Rangrang is largest uncovered in S Vietnam in at least 6 mos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 13, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 273 words

Pres Nixon says US will withdraw 40,000 troops between now and Xmas, statement
made at briefing for news execs, Hartford; White House press sec says he
originally intended to withdraw only 10,000 but increases figure because of
success of Vietnamization and because of effectiveness of Cambodian operation;
White House does not permit remarks of officials and Nixon to be made known
until later; similar briefings have been held in San Clemente, Calif, New
Orleans and Chicago; execs briefed include those from NY Times, NY Daily News,
Newsday, WCBS, WNBC, WABC, Hartford Times, New Haven Register, Washington
Evening Star, Baltimore Sun, Berger (NJ) Record, Newark Evening News, Christian
Science Monitor, Boston Globe, Boston Herald Traveler, Worcester Telegram; Laird
says he hopes to do away with draft calls by July 1 '73, news conf; says
services secs and Joint Cs/S Chmn have been directed to draw up list of
'priority steps' to be taken at once to move toward all-volunteer force; rejects
suggestion that timing of Adm discussion of steps to eliminate draft is aimed at
influencing Cong elections; says objective of all-volunteer force was announced
at start of Nixon Adm; repts small numbers of N Vietnamese troops have been
found in Cambodian sanctuaries but he expects S Vietnamese, with Amer air
support, to handle situation adequately; warns that should USSR build and
operate missile submarine base, it would be viewed as 'very serious challenge';
says Us has begun to replace arms and ammunition used by Jordanian Army during
fighting with guerrillas; Times officials attend Nixon briefing for news execs,
Hartford, Conn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 9 words

B-52s again make heavy attack on Ho Chi Minh Trail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

Cts-martial for 6 who refused to rept for Vietnam duty, Ft Lewis, postponed to
Oct 26-28

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 2

LENGTH: 11 words

Ed castigating S Vietnam police for shearing longhaired youths

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 4

LENGTH: 19 words

Lr on S Vietnamese Govt campaign against long hair suggests US soldiers grow
long hair and get sent home by Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 5

LENGTH: 15 words

Lr says Pres Nixon Vietnam peace plan is tantamount to formal declaration of US
surrender

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 44 words

S Vietnamese Govt reptdly plans to offer Vietcong new basis for a pol
settlement, believed aimed at reinforcing Nixon's peace plan; informants believe
Saigon will proclaim readiness to cancel restrictions on pol activity by former
Vietcong members and Communists

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 109 words

Defense atty Brown in ct-martial, Ft Hood, Tex, of Sgt D Mitchell in connection
with alleged Sonmy massacre, contends that CIA was involved in a 'systematic
program of assassination of Vietcong' as part of Operation Phoenix in S Vietnam;
ct denies Brown bid to subpoena high CIA officials; says US condoned this
killing and then turned around and 'charged Sgt Mitchell with assault to commit
murder'; Govt counsel says CIA had nothing to do with Sonmy operation; outside
courtroom CIA atty J Creany says CIA was not involved in Sonmy operation; says
he does not know if CIA played role there before the killings; full ct panel of
7 officers is completed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Saigon businessmen, at 1st trade fair since '61, seek to show investors that S
Vietnam has entered 'stability of the postwar phase'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 89 words

Top sources believe that Communist forces have failed in their initial objective
of toppling Cambodian Govt through widely diffused mil pressure on major
population centers; believe that in next 3 mos when dry season comes, their
intentions will be made clear; hold Govt offensive was not a failure in that it
diverted bulk of Communist forces from beleaguered Kompong Thom and deflected
movement of enemy troops southward either against Pnompenh or S Vietnamese
units; improvement in Cambodian army efficiency and morale lauded; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 243 words

French Pres Pompidou and Soviet Pres Podgorny sign accord, Moscow, to 'extend
and deepen' French-Soviet pol contacts and to hold consultations during periods
of internatl tension; accord signed in televised ceremony in Kremlin; both
sides, in round of ss and news confs, stress it does not affect commitments to
each nation's allies; Brezhnev, Kosygin and other Politburo members present at
ceremony; accord provides for foreign mins to meet at least twice a yr;
declaration issued affirming agreement on range of issues and avoiding mention
of differences; Western diplomats comment on pol accord; Pompidou, in news conf,
says Brezhnev was chief spokesman in confs; visit ends; Brezhnev joins Kosygin
and Podgorny in seeing Pompidou off; Pompidou arrives in Paris; illus in Kremlin
with Brezhnev and Gromyko; communique says 2 countries hope talks will spur
'further improvement' in Eur situation; declaration, says both sides hold
'favorable attitude' toward holding conf, but includes statement of French
condition that conf be properly prepared; Pompidou and Podgorny urge continued
efforts to give people of Indochina an opportunity 'to be masters of their
destiny' without foreign intervention and on basis of Geneva accords; accord,
takes moderate position calling for Israeli withdrawal from occupied territories
under terms of Nov '67 UN resolution; urges end to war and end to foreign
interference in Vietnam on basis of '54 and '62 Geneva confs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 14, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 340 words

Nixon Adm officials, at Hartford, Conn, briefing of Northeast news execs; White
House does not permit naming officials participating; Nixon known to be
concerned about isolationist sentiment that seems to be developing in US;
believes nation's leaders must persuade Amers to accept patient, continuing role
in world affairs, despite what he sees as their preference for dramatic, instant
solutions to internatl problems; Adm officials see Soviet-Chinese dispute as
most intractable internatl problem; hold that a war between USSR and China would
not be to advantage of US; say that Adm has been trying to move toward
'generation of peace' by not seeking to squeeze greatest natl advantage from
every bargaining opportunity but by recognizing need for restraint in time of
nuclear parity between US and USSR; Adm worried whether USSR is willing to
behave in similar way; appears to be deeply concerned about Soviet intentions;
Nixon known to feel there are major forces impelling US and USSR to avoid
confrontation; also known to feel that US must be effective counterweight to any
expansionist desires of China and USSR; reptdly does not regard UN as an
effective instrument to resolve major issues involving US and USSR but can be
effective in areas where major powers have common aims; officials say chances
for continuation of middle-east cease-fire appear good but chances for start of
talks are not as bright, foreign policy rev for news execs; say US is perplexed
over what immediate advantages USSR might seek to gain from present situation;
say Nixon feels Middle East is more dangerous than Vietnam because of possible
big-power confrontation, unstable govts in area, collective leadership in UAR
and long-standing animosities; say that in July, US pub expected too much
progress and that it is now too pessimistic; says Nixon is concerned with
shifting pub mood; officials hold US, rather than gaining an advantage from
proposed Vietnam cease-fire, would be taking calculated risk that enemy might
gain ground; briefing made pub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 33 words

Rev C McIntire announces plans for series of monthly 'patriots marches for
victory in Vietnam', news conf; says marches are meant to 'confront' Nixon with
'increasing cry for victory every month'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 5

LENGTH: 39 words

Excerpts from Prof N Glazer article in Harvard Bulletin on Vietnam war as chief
factor for unrest and crisis over campus pol activity; sees war creating many
crises in US and making 'America an evil country in the eyes of its youth'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 52, Column 6

LENGTH: 130 words

Article on polls' finding that Dems have strong opportunity to make comeback
from '68 setbacks while politicians do not see '70 as strong Dem yr; pol
leaders, while disagreeing as to why Dems appear unlikely to capitalize on
favorable natl climate, agree that growing advantage of incumbency, 2d-string
team of Dem natl campaigners and waning influence of natl party leaders are
factors; details on factors; Gallup poll finds voters consider Vietnam war most
serious natl problem; finds voters consider campus violence 2d most serious natl
issue; shows voters rank civil rights 3d; finds voters consider high cost of
living ranks 4th as most serious natl problem; finds that voters consider crime
and law enforcement as 5th ranking major issue in upcoming elections; Harris por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

2 Amer lawyers, W Meyers and P Weiss, of Lawyers Com on Amer Policy toward
Vietnam, who conferred with Vietnamese Communists 7 hrs in Paris, say Nixon Adm
is wrong if it believes private view of Communists toward Pres Nixon peace plan
will be different from their pub statements

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

Authoritative Cambodian sources say Lon Nol approval of Nixon peace proposal was
not unqualified; Govt's reservations center on fact that proposed cease-fire
would leave all troops in position they hold at the moment; claim that N
Vietnamese and Vietcong troops invaded Cambodia which makes situation different
from that in other Indochina nations; Cambodia is determined to forestall any
accord even implying recognition of right of Communist troops to remain in
country

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 76 words

US command repts a US helicopter gunship accidentally fired 12 rockets at S
Vietnamese soldiers Oct 11, killed 8, wounded 23, Mekong Delta; 9 US soldiers, 1
S Vietnamese soldier killed, 5 Amers wounded by Vietcong booby trap 66 mi SE of
Danang; ground action light elsewhere; S Vietnamese forces reptdly fight at 3
points along border against N Vietnamese troops reinfiltrating into their former
sanctuary areas; map; B-52s bomb trail, 6th consecutive day

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 15, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AFP)

LENGTH: 132 words

N Vietnam officially rejects Nixon's proposals; says it is 'entirely unanimous
with statements' of Norodom Sihanouk's govt in exile, Laotian Communist Central
Com and Vietcong's provisional revolutionary Govt 'which condemns and rejects
these deceitful peace proposals'; says they do not contribute to peaceful
settlement but only 'serves the scheme to prolong and expand its (US) aggressive
war in Indochina'; holds proposal to convene an internatl conf is 'cunning trick
aimed at fooling pub opinion', hiding the fact that US continues its
'aggression'; says US must end its 'aggression'; Laotian Patriotic Front rejects
peace plan as 'maneuver of deception at time of Cong election campaign'; calls
on US to reply seriously to 'concrete proposals' of Vietcong advanced in Paris
Sept 17

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 5

LENGTH: 100 words

Goodell endorsed by 62 presidents of student bodies and editors affiliated with
Movement for a New Cong, news conf with him, NYC; is pledged support of up to
5,000 volunteers, lauded for Vietnam stand; Goodell repts several prominent
Repubs have made point of appearing with him Upstate in response to Agnew
attacks, news conf, NYC; Nixon aide R H Finch says Agnew was not representing
White House when he attended NYC luncheon for Buckley and denounced Goodell,
news conf, Milwaukee; repts Rockefeller and Goodell have asked to run own
campaign in state; Finch endorses Olsen, news conf, Milwaukee

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 3

LENGTH: 28 words

Lrs by Repr Anderson and others on Pres Nixon's Vietnam peace proposals;
Anderson says proposals introduce domestic pol to talks; says US Govt
contributes to stalemate

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 4

LENGTH: 46 words

Peace activist R Davis article, discussing Vietcong and Pres Nixon's peace
proposals, lauds Vietcong proposals and says they could be accepted by most
Amers; scores Nixon proposals as 'clever package' designed to stir up hope; says
Amer antiwar movement rejects Nixon proposals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 49 words

US command repts 1 Amer killed, 19 wounded in several incidents; US troops
discover 11 tons of rice in northern Quangngai Prov and find more than a ton of
ammunition 45 mi NE of Saigon; S Vietnamese troops kill 30 enemy; US command is
scheduled to begin 5th phase of Nixon's withdrawal program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5

LENGTH: 22 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky has long audience with Pope that was not
previously announced and is shorn of official protocol

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says Vietcong can no longer launch mil
offensive, reassures S Vietnamese that US is not running out on them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 77 words

Series of antiwar rallies held in NYC; largest 1 draws 300 people; main focus of
events, planned by several antiwar orgns, is impact of war on NYC; Repr Koch,
Councilman Katzman and others participate; Abzug, addressing rally, deplores
size of turnout; Vietnam Peace Parade Com stages march; 5 reprs of group and P
O'Dwyer present 10,000 signatures on petitions to Councilwoman Greitzer in
support of Katzman antiwar resolution filed with City Council last wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 193 words

88th session of Paris Peace talks; Communist delegations at talks declare
rejection of Nixon proposals is 'firm, total and categorical', but US refuses to
accept this as final answer; delegations make point-by-point denunciation of US
peace program and say only US agreement to withdraw its mil forces quickly and
unconditionally and end its support of present Saigon Govt can end war; Bruce
says US will not take comments as final position; says US will seek serious
negotiations; both sides appear to be as deadlocked as they were before Nguyen
Thi Binh made 8-point initiative; US spokesman says Bruce draws distinction
between hope and expectation; Bruce says Communist statements are 'negative and
intransigent'; other comments of Cmmunists noted; Bruce is expected to seek
private conversations with Xuan Thuy; during session, Communists produce barrage
of denunciatory statements; Xuan Thuy scores call for Indochina conf; Communists
reject proposal on troop withdrawal because they say Nixon refuses to set date
and continues to insist on mutual withdrawal; N Vietnam scores Nixon call for
gen Indochina conf as 'deceitful'; other details on session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 16, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 117 words

White House refuses to accept N Vietnam's rejection of Pres Nixon's peace
proposals as final and emphasizes willingness to compromise; White House press
sec, after consultation with Nixon, reads statement to reporters expressing
belief that Hanoi 'should and will continue' to examine proposals; statement
says N Vietnam's rejection is 'traditional bargaining technique'; describes
Nixon proposals as 'comprehensive, reasonable and moderate'; says they are
attempt at compromise; Vance says there is every reason to expect other side to
explore offer; Harriman says he sees no lasting significance in rejection; some
officials hold there will not be much serious negotiation before US elections
next mo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 98 words

US B-52s pound Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos, 8th consecutive day, to smash push by
N Vietnam to move war materials into Cambodia; allied command repts fresh
evidence that Vietnamese Communists are reinfiltrating into their former
sanctuaries; S Vietnamese forces clash with N Vietnamese units just inside
Cambodia; casualties light; Cambodian troops strike Communist positions close to
village of Roca Kong; about 500 Cambodian guerrillas overrun Laotian Army camp
near Thai border, force defenders to march with them to Cambodia; informed
sources say US 25th Div will be pulled out soon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 302 words

UAR Min Riad accuses US of having misled Nasser into accepting cease-fire, s, UN
Gen Assembly; charges US promised that it would refrain from sending more planes
to Israel but reneged on its commitments after cease-fire was accepted; says UAR
expected cease-fire arrangements and supervision to be discussed with Jarring
but then discovered that US preferred to rush into cease-fire in attempt to cut
short time that UAR needed to complete aerial defense system; charges Israel,
with US collusion, violated cease-fire by bldg new mil installations in
cease-fire zone; denies charges that UAR moved new missiles into zone after
start of cease-fire; Yost deplores substance and tone of Riad's s and rejects
charge that US deliberately undermined its own efforts to bring about peace
talks, s; renews US charges that UAR violated cease-fire creating crisis of
confidence resulting in interruption of peace talks; Tekoah accuses Riad of
delivering message of abuse, distortion and blind hostility, s; says Riad charge
that Israel violated cease-fire is reminiscent of '50s in Gaza Strip; el-Zayyat
and Saudi Arabian repr J M Baroody reply; Arab diplomats, commenting on
implications of Riad statement, differ with negative interpretation given by US
and Israeli officials; hold statement may contain seeds of compromise; others
discussing situation in ss include Libyan Under Sec M R Kikhia, Nigerian Comr O
Arikpo and Polish Min Jedrychowski; Jedrychowski criticizes UN failure to end
'imperialist aggression' in Indochina; Costa Rica Pres Figueres Fereer discusses
econ gap between developed and developing countries; Deputy Min Loliki (Congo)
deplores UN present weakness but holds internatl community more determined than
ever to preserve peace; Nigerian Comr Arikpo scores UN for not acting to end war
in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 199 words

Soviet Min Gromyko rebuffs Sec of State Rogers's attempts to reach accommodation
on Berlin, conf, NYC; 2 illus; US hoped conf would indicate Soviet desire to
shift to more cooperative attitude; US officials still question whether USSR is
interested in achieving resolution of conflict; hold USSR indicated no
willingness to accommodate US and Israeli demands for 'rectifications;' Gromyko,
during private conf with Rogers, reptdly rejected US charges that USSR colluded
with UAR to violate cease-fire; those attending conf included Sisco, Yost,
Vorontsov and Malik; Rogers accompanied by Dir Smith, Hillenbrand and DePalma
and Amb Rush; Gromyko accompanied by Dobrynin, Amb Abrasimov and L I
Mendelyevich; both Rogers and Gromyko, in NYC conf, reptdly express hope for
progress toward limitation of strategic nuclear arms when SALT resumes in
Helsinki Nov 2, but there are no indications discussion dealt in any detail with
arms issue; Rogers and Gromyko reportedly dealt at length with Pres Nixon's
peace proposal and an expanded Indochina peace conf; urged Russians to use their
influence with Hanoi to have proposal taken seriously; discuss possible
composition of future S Vietnamese govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 17, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 161 words

Ed says Pres Nixon announcement that another 40,000 troops will be brought home
by Xmas is 'clearly a curtain-raiser' for campaign swing he begins; says 'fine
print' does not meet expectations announcement creates; says same is true of Adm
statements, repeated by Rogers last wk, that US 'combat role' will by and large
be finished next spring; notes Laird statement that between 40% and 60% of
284,000 US troops left in Vietnam next May 1 will be combat troops that will
take 'protective actions' to guard US support troops; says announcement of
withdrawal of 40,000 does not increase total of 100,000 to be withdrawn between
now and May 1; holds pol is major factor in Laird announcement of plan to
abolish draft; holds Laird did not direct service secs or Joint Cs/S to take any
actions on ending draft but ordered them to draw up list of steps needed to
bring about 'zero draft calls'; holds list is likely to show cost of ending
draft would be prohibitive

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 58, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

R Hughes, who has been having financial difficulties running hostels for S
Vietnamese war orphans, gets aid from R Macauley, who agrees to write 'blank
check' for project; 250 persons responded to article in August on project;
Hughes and Macauley comment; Pan Amer World Airways supplies Hughes with ticket
for US fund-raising drive; Times Aug 3 story

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 0

LENGTH: 53 words

Ad by SANE, Vietnam Veterans Against the War and other groups, approving in
principle Pres Nixon's desire expressed in his proposals for pol solution
reflecting wills of S Vietnamese people, urges Nixon to see that solution can
never come about as long as S Vietnam is controlled by Nguyen Van Thieu and
Nguyen Cao Ky

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 32 words

Lr, commenting on Nixon proposals, says war will not be resolved as long as Adm
continues to mask its true nature; notes much of population of S Vietnam is
sympathetic to aims of N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 0

LENGTH: 49 words

NY Times reporter J P Sterba, who completes 16-mo tour of duty as Saigon
correspondent, assembles excerpts from orders, articles, documents, messages and
personal statements in article revealing his impression of war; includes
personal statements of Amer soldiers and related material; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 52, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

About 4,000 persons attend parade hon Vietnam war veterans, Pine Bush, NY

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1; (GP)

LENGTH: 45 words

Gallup Poll repts Pres Nixon's popularity up 3 percentage points above July
rating since his Indochina cease-fire proposal; chart; illus; Gallup finds 35%
of people polled in Sept favor seating Chinese Communists, largest percentage
ever polled; 49% oppose Communists

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 42 words

Goodell charges Ottinger 'flummoxed' pub on Vietnam stand, st int while touring
downtown Bklyn shopping dist; quotes 2 Ottinger statements; later concedes war
seems to have lost some of impact as issue; is endorsed by Teamsters City
Employes Local 237

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Pres Nixon's proposals arouse new interest in Internatl Control Comm, which may
someday serve as nucleus for machinery to supervise a cease-fire in Vietnam; it
now owes money to almost everyone it has done business with; comm chmn S K
Bhutani says money problems began 5 yrs ago when Communist Chinese stopped
paying their share; says problems seem to be getting worse; comm's dwindling
role and financial difficulties discussed; details on work of comm

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 4

LENGTH: 160 words

Sec of State Rogers and Soviet Min Gromyko conf for 4 hrs, NYC, in talks
described as chilly and argumentative; only possible bright spot in
Rogers-Gromyko talks on key East-West issues is hope expressed by both sides for
progress in SALT; Gromyko reptdly rebuffs Rogers's assertion that some
'rectification' is required; reptdly is noncommittal to hope expressed by Rogers
that cease-fire can be extended beyond 90-day deadline; US was hoping that talks
would provide sign that USSR is interested in moving towards cooperation but US
officials say sharp disagreements persist and that neither side has yielded;
hold Soviet position leaves doubts whether USSR wants pol settlement; have been
disturbed by Soviet and UAR diplomatic tactics in last 48 hrs; US reaction seen
resulting partly from pique at USSR; Rogers returns to Washington to rept to
Nixon that he rejected pressure for start to talks without rectifications;
details of what Rogers will rept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 7 words

2,000 Amers are withdrawn from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 18, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 66 words

US casualties have dropped to level where nearly as many men die from noncombat
causes as are killed in combat; more Amers (33) died from nonhostile causes wk
ending Oct 3 than those killed in action; 43,821 Amers have been killed in war,
8,659 have died from other causes; other figures and details; ground fighting
continues light and scattered; S Vietnamese troops make plans for new offensives

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

B-52s extend raids on N Vietnamese supply routes into Cambodia, 1st time in over
1 wk; several actions reptd; US helicopter downed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 167 words

Allende, who is expected to become Pres of Chile, assures businessmen that 98%
of Chileans 'have nothing to fear' from his Govt, s, victory banquet in his
hometown, Valparaiso; stresses patriotism; other coalition leaders s, including
Communist party sec gen L Corvalan; Allende says Chile will not 'export'
revolution or interfere in other nations affairs; has indicated he will renew
ties with Communist China, N Vietnam and N Korea; Chilean bankers and Dr
Allende's experts discussing plans for nationalization of banks, say credit
policies of nationalized banks will shift from short-term profit through
collateral-backed loans to middle-sized or small borrowers whose investment
plans are in accord with state's goals; foreign banks will be allowed to
continue operations financing foreign trade but will not be allowed to extend
credit for domestic investments;bank employes and depositors will have reprs on
governing bodies of banks and foreign banks will not be allowed to receive
deposits

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 19, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 315 words

CIA, in rept to Nixon, says Vietnamese Communists have infiltrated more than
30,000 agents into S Vietnamese Govt in apparatus that has been virtually
impossible to destroy; says resurgence of Communist strength can be expected as
US troops are withdrawn because of situation; says agents include Nguyen Van
Thieu aide Huynh Van Trong, former prov chief and high officials of police and
of mil intelligence; US officials say study raises questions about key aspect of
Vietnamization policy; high White House officials confirm existence of rept;
contend it exaggerates extent of infiltration; reject analysis as inaccurate and
'overly pessimistic'; say Nixon has read summary of rept and that he is
understood to believe analysis is unwarranted because of generally optimistic
repts he has been receiving from other sources about progress of pacification,
improved mil performance of S Vietnamese and effects of Cambodian incursion; CIA
analysis does not assert or imply S Vietnamese Govt is likely to fall in next
few mos; does not discount likelihood S Vietnamese Army will perform well in
battle for some time to come; implies S Vietnamese Govt has little chance of
enduring over long run because of great extent of Communist penetration;
officials say study was made last May and has been circulated in White House,
Pentagon and State Dept; say information received since May continues to confirm
findings; study says early last yr, after number of battlefield setbacks,
Communists decided to shift long-range strategy from intense mil activity to pol
erosion, against day when US troop strength would no longer be serious threat
because of withdrawals; details on study, which describes workings of 3
Communist pol-action and intelligence orgns; study offers many-faceted
assessment of advantages of enemy's virtual monopoly on subversion; comments of
White House officials noted; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 1

LENGTH: 127 words

Vice Pres Agnew portrays self as victim of 'hate' campaign, abetted by press, s,
Chicago; says his opponents have reacted to his criticisms by calling him
everything from 'emissary of hate' to 'racist'; says whereas his own utterances
have been examined at every turn, press has failed to subject 'libelous
mouthings' of his opponents to equally strict standards; cites attacks by
Ottinger, Spock, ADA, A E Stevenson 3d; Agnew charges Stevenson besmirches
father's 'great name' by calling him, Agnew, 'peddler of hate,' s, Repub
fund-raising dinner, Chicago; illus with Smith; charges Stevenson engages in
'pathetic contortions' to camouflage earlier criticism of Chicago police
behavior during '68 Dem Natl Conv; scores him for denouncing S Vietnamese regime

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 1

LENGTH: 112 words

Ed saying that N Vietnam's formal rejection of Pres Nixon's peace proposals is
cause for disapppointment, not despair; says Bruce's refusal to accept negative
answer was proper response; says both Nixon and Vietcong proposals conceal more
than they reveal about kind of deal either side would entertain to end war; says
N Vietnam cannot expect US agreement to their pol and mil proposals in advance
of negotiation; says withdrawal date and truce conditions are negotiable; says
US desire for serious negotiations can no longer be challenged; says attitudes
of N and S Vietnam are less certain; urges US to persist in seeking private
talks; says next move is up to N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 39 words

US troop strength in Vietnam drops to 378,900 men, lowest total since Dec, '66;
light and scattered ground action reptd; US troops kill 37 enemy in 2 sharp
actions in northern sec; US planes provide support for Laotian Govt forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Sen Mansfield predicts serious peace talks on Vietnam will start in 'next
several mos', s, Atlantic City; says latest proposals on both sides offer area
for meeting

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 31 words

CIA Dir Helms arrives in Japan from Saigon, where he made 2-day visit that
included conf with Nguyen Van Thieu; Helms tours southern Japan on what US
Embassy terms 'personal vacation'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 20, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 215 words

C Sledge, who was member of inf unit that swept through Mylai 4, testifies
screaming women, children and old men were pushed into a ditch and shot by
Mitchell and Calley, ct-martial; D I Conti, who was attached to Calley's command
post during Mylai operation, says he saw both men standing at edge of ditch but
saw only Calley fire; Sledge says he saw both fire 2 magazines of bullets (about
40 rounds) from M-16 rifles into mass of people; trial counsel Capt M K Swan
delivers opening statement that Govt will prove Mitchell fired into group of
'helpless, unarmed old men, women and children with short bursts of automatic
rifle fire'; no mention is made during proceedings of HR subcom refusal to
release transcript of testimony by 4 prospective witnesses; Swan tells ct that
some 30 civilians were rounded up, pushed into ditch and shot to death; his
statement is 1st by Govt to go beyond terse legal language used in drawing up
formal charges; both Sledge and Conti testify that, in addition to shooting at
ditch, they saw another group of unarmed S Vietnamese shot down near
intersection of 2 trails in Mylai; Brown cross-examines Sledge, who appears
confused when faced with his previous testimony to investigatory groups; other
details on Sledge and Conti testimony; Sledge illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 4

LENGTH: 63 words

Mrs Johnson, in magazine installment of her White House 'diary' that will be pub
as book, says Johnson told her 1 mo after ordering bombing of N Vietnam in '65
that he saw no way out of US involvement; McCall's pub 1st of 2 installments of
her White House Diary, which describes her impressions of life in White House,
events during those yrs and persons who figured in them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 51, Column 1

LENGTH: 78 words

House of Bishops, at session during Episcopal Ch conv in Houston, adopts
resolution calling on Nixon and Cong to withdraw support of S Vietnamese Adm,
cease bombing in Vietnam and withdraw all US forces by Dec, '71; agree to
transmit to its 90 dioceses for study plan developed by Consultation on Ch Union
over 8 yrs to merge 9 major Prot denominations; Deputies defeat move to
reconsider women priests; adopts resolution condemning 'repression' by N
Vietnam's Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 55, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Sen McCarthy finds Ottinger Vietnam record realistic and consistent and better
than Goodell's, joint news conf in Ottinger NYC hq; warns liberals not to vote
for Goodell to irk Agnew, holding Agnew strategy is to draw Ottinger votes away;
Sen Goodell, touring Borough Park sec of Bklyn, issues proposal to improve
city's ct warrant process so that accused criminals who skip ct dates would not
be able to go back to committing more crime; proposal will permit Fed aid for
purpose of supplying enough police manpower to serve warrants

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Army records show that almost half of Army gens who served in Vietnam war last
yr brought back medals for bravery in combat; show about 1 in 10 of avg
servicemen got similar awards; Defense Dept makes detailed figures available in
response to questions from NY Times; details of awards; Pentagon officer says he
would be 'very skeptical' of any rept that gen got award to which he was not
entitled; Pentagon spokesman says 7 gens have been killed in war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 74 words

Vietcong unit ambushes US convoy near S Korean outpost in central highlands; 7
Amers and 7 S Korean civilian truck drivers wounded; S Koreans kill 7 enemy
after ambush; 7 Amers killed, 2 injured in collision of 2 helicopters NW of
Quangngai; enemy troops increase pressure on allied camp and dist town near
Danang; map; US command announces 3 more Army units, totaling 520 soldiers, are
being deactivated as part of Nixon's 5th round of cutbacks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 21, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 428 words

US Army awards Silver Star for valor to Brig Gen E P Forrester based on
description of acts of heroism during recent Cambodian incursion that were
invented by enlisted men under orders to hastily draft citation; decoration was
presented to Forrester last wk at Phuocvinh; Army spokesman says Forrester has
not seen citation and did not know role of enlisted men; Forrester is not
available for comment; Col G Newman acknowledges he ordered recommendation
drafted quickly so it could be presented to Forrester before he left 1st Cavalry
Div to assume new post as asst chief of staff for civil operations and rural
development support in Saigon; says he did not order recommendation out of
knowledge of specific act of valor, but says he had frequently heard how
courageous Forrester was; says he is new to his job as 1st Cavalry chief of
staff and assumed necessary data for drafting of Silver Star citation would be
colleced in usual way; says he did not know enlisted men were required to draft
citation under deadline with no dates or any records of Forrester's actions;
usual preliminaries went by the board in rush to abide by Newman's orders, but
Army cannot explain why it was not possible to collect eyewitness statements
1st; charges that citation is based on improvisations were made in lr signed by
6 men and sent to Repr Rivers and NY Times; Pvt J Olstad says he invented acts
because he had no choice; details on citation; Olstad says Forrester did not see
action he gets medal for; is backed by Sp/4s R Trent and R Kempkens, who say, in
int, that Capt L B Mineweaser ordered draft citations be drawn up and that they
were told by Mineweaser that orders came from Majs L H Hodges and M F
McAllister; Hodges says he acted under orders; McAllister is not available for
comment; Newman says he takes responsibility for what happened; says 'the
system' went wrong; other comments made by Olstad, Trent and Kempkens noted;
Newman discusses incident; says it would be regrettable if conclusion was drawn
that Forrester was not worthy of medal; says he accepted and vouched for
validity of 2 eyewitness statements by Lt R F Waggener Jr and Warrant Officer S
Murray attesting to acts of valor on June 9 by Forrester; Waggener says
certificate he and Murray signed describes same events that Olstad says he
invented; Army spokesmen do not offer proof of Forrester's actions; insist medal
is merited; Rivers HR com staff member says Rivers received lr from soldiers and
that it was forwarded to Pentagon; Pentagon says lr will be acted on; Forrester
and medal illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 0

LENGTH: 136 words

Excerpts from NYS Governor candidates' debate; illus; in response to 5 major
questions, Adams discusses basic differences with opponents; scores budget gap
and urges tax reform; holds Vietnam war irrelevant to state contest because Adm
is withdrawing and denies war causes campus unrest; concedes party has little
support among Negroes in reply to question about campaigning in such areas;
lists fiscal integrity, narcotics, civil disorder and pollution as state
priorities; excerpts from replies; Goldberg sees deficit of $600-million;
Rockefeller defends adm fiscal conduct, revs revenue impositions to finance
essential services; Adams stresses tax reduction; Goldberg stresses need for
broadest reform and criticizes Rockefeller adm record; Rockefeller justifies
record and that of Legis; excerpts from transcript

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 39 words

Pres Nixon tells Postmaster Gen Blount to go to Hanoi, if necessary and
possible, to deliver Xmas mail to Amer POWs in N Vietnam, statement read at
dedication of stamps honoring POWs; Post Office spokesman says Blount may make
trip

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 39 words

Goodell urges voters 'teach Spiro Agnew a lesson' but stops short of calling for
his removal from '72 Repub ticket, s, Hofstra U; would not support Nixon Adm if
US is not out of Vietnam by then; opposes penalties for marijuana use

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 46 words

World Conf on Religion and Peace, meeting in Japan, adopts resolution calling
for immediate cease-fire and demanding foreign govts withdraw mil assistance to
N and S Vietnam; some 300 religious leaders approve resolution calling for
prompt halt to S Africa's racial policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 34 words

B-52 bombers pound Ho Chi Minh Trail, 13th consecutive day; light and scattered
action reptd; Vietcong, in mortar barrage, damages USN base in Mekong Delta; new
allied campaign near Danang is under way

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 122 words

White House categorically denies repts from Saigon that US and S Vietnam may
announce unilateral cease-fire before end of mo; Saigon repts say Nguyen Van
Thieu has ordered comdrs to provide maximum security in preparation for
cease-fire; are based almost entirely on Nguyen Van Thieu's call for meeting
this weekend with principal aides to study consequences of cease-fire; White
House press sec says US plans no announcements beyond those already made; says
US believes negotiations are quickest way to gain peace and that is path it
pursues; speculation develops among many Adm officials that some form of
'understanding' may soon be sought in new round of secret talks to provide basis
for ending hostilities in foreseeable future

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 94 words

Amb Bruce said to find himself in much the same deadlock at Paris talks now as
his predecessor (H C Lodge); there are indications in Paris that he feels same
discouragement; Amers hold Communists continue to insist US solve their pol
problem for them by getting rid of present Saigon regime and allow establishment
of coaltion govt on Communist terms; Bruce is understood to feel Communist
position is still basically unacceptable; basic US objection is that Communists
seek to limit to themselves alone determination of who shall be eligible to
govern with them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 22, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 228 words

Goldberg debates opponents at NY Times; illus; clashes sharply with Rockefeller
on various issues, denying charge he speaks half-truths and misleads pub;
charges Rockefeller claims many businesses have located in state without
mentioning those that have departed; lists as priority for office restoring pub
confidence in govt; also mentions drugs, educ, pollution; rejects criticism of
his role in supporting Johnson Adm Vietnam policies, scores Rockefeller stance;
demands he call Legis special session on unemployment benefits; denies
neglecting Negro areas in campaign; Rockfeller and Goldberg clash on question of
calling special Legis session to authorize additional unemployment benefits for
persons who have already recd standard 13 wks of benefits; Goldberg contends
state funds should be made available for such people until state unemployment
rate reaches 4%, level at which Ny would be eligible to receive Fed funds to
subsidize additional 13-wk period; Rockefeller says he would not call session
until state was eligible for Fed aid; illus; Goldberg charges Rockefeller claims
that 7,400 businesses have located in state in his adm but does not add that
13,000 have departed, campaign debate at NY Times; Adams, stresses fiscal
integrity and stability as priority issue; scores size and complexity of state
budget; draws humorous reaction from Rockefeller

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 152 words

Paris peace talks 89th session; Communists say they 'totally, globally,
categorically and definitively' reject Nixon's 'so-called peace initiative',
terming it a 'swindle' aimed at helping Repubs in coming elections; Bruce, after
4-hr session, says Amer negotiating team is not 'discouraged in the slightest'
by Communist position on initiative; says he is 'sometimes slightly
disappointed', but adds he still does not accept Communists' 'hasty
generalizations' as final answer; US spokesman says Communists can set no
preconditions for secret talks; Xuan Thuy implies cease-fire would weaken
Communists militarily; Vietcong spokesman, commenting on CIA rept, says figure
of infiltrators 'must certainly surpass 30,000 because the CIA is in the habit
of counting as Communists anyone opposed to the Saigon leadership'; says rept
'demonstrates the isolation of the US even behind the facade of a controlled
adm'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

Casualties for last wk and war reptd; correction of Oct 18 rept on casualties; S
Vietnamese troops kill 45 enemy in scattered actions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 23, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 197 words

3 Cambodian bns, about 1,500 men, reptdly are at Paksong, an Amer Special Forces
camp in southern Laos, for commando training and possible use in
Laotian-Cambodian border region; camp is principal base for surveillance of and
raids on Ho Chi Minh Trail; its operations and training of Laotian and Cambodian
troops are under CIA direction; about 600 Cambodians reptdly were recruited
among refugees who drifted northward to island of Khong; Amer, Cambodian and
Laotian officials decline comment; indications seen that deployment of Cambodian
troops was initiated by CIA in cooperation with some qrs in Cambodian and
Laotian mil and that none of the govts involved have been informed; speculation
that Prince Boun Oum of Champassak, effective ruler of parts of southern Laos,
may have played important role in arrangements noted; area has become main depot
and staging area for Communists since fall of Saravane and Attopeu and is source
of major concern to allied intelligence; use of Cambodian troops in Laos has
necessitated establishment of frequent air liaison between Pnompenh and Pakse;
Continental Airlines reptdly is sponsoring formation of Cambodian line, Khmer
Akas; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 24, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 106 words

S Vietnamese opposition leader Ngo Cong Duc article says war destroys untold
human and material resources in S Vietnam; says 2,000,000 young S Vietnamese
people are forced to take up arms to help Amer imperialism achieve its pol aims
in SE Asia; says US seeks to uphold militarists and prolong war; says purpose of
US aid is to force Vietnamese population to become totally dependent on US; says
Amer pol and econ aims have completely altered nature of soc; says S Vietnamese
population is now rising in revolt; says econ situation is catastrophic; says
Pres Nguyen Van Thieu Govt is dictatorial and persecutes opposition; details;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 24, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 9 words

USSR agrees to provide N Vietnam with additional aid

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 24, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 76 words

Vice Pres Agnew scores Duffey and natl ADA, of which he is pres, s, Repub
fund-raising dinner, Hartford; lauds Weicker, warns vote for Dodd will aid
Duffey; declines to retreat on earlier charge that Duffey is self-avowed
'Marxist revisionist'; Agnew, in apparent ref to NYC Mayor Lindsay decision,
terms his Repubs 'pol conglomerate'; scores Lindsay for Apr statement calling
heroic those draft evaders willing to go to prison rather than serve in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 24, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4; (AFP)

LENGTH: 21 words

N Vietnamese commentator, in Nhan Dan article, predicts Pres Nixon will
'intensify and extend' war after US elections are over

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 24, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 117 words

USN repts 19 ships of US 7th Fleet, including 2 aircraft carriers, are being
recalled from Vietnam to be retired from active service as part of Nixon's
cutback of US forces in SE Asia; spokesman says ships will either be put in
mothball fleet or taken off rolls and sold or used for target practice; sources
say most ships will not be replaced, including at least 1 carrier; B-52s begin
3d wk of raids on N Vietnam's supply line; US aircraft reptdly have flown
tactical support missions for Royal Laotian Army; casualty figures for last wk
reptd; Indian Prime Min Gandhi confs with Sec Rogers, NYC, reptdly underscoring
earlier Indian protest against US decision to lift embargo on arms sale to
Pakistan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 24, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 50 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu and S Vietnam's top mil and pol leaders map
strategy for cease-fire or prolonged war, Vungtau; discuss what actions they
would take if Vietcong accepts Nixon proposals; Nguyen Van Thieu rejects
speculation that S Vietnam may declare unilateral cease-fire; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 57, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 29 words

VA repts number of Vietnam war veterans receiving disability compensation has
risen from 8,287 to 188,353 in less than 3 yrs; puts compensation costs at over
$285-million a yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 49 words

Comment on CIA rept on Communist infiltration of more than 30,000 agents in S
Vietnamese Govt says N Vietnam is more successful at espionage than S Vietnam; S
Vietnam censors bar refs to CIA rept on N Vietnamese agents infiltration into
south, but some pubs appear before order goes out; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 42 words

Lr takes issue with NY Times eds backing Nixon Vietnam proposals; says Nixon has
'brilliantly' outsmarted his critics, but he has not outsmarted enemy, which
seeks natl liberation; says A Lewis Oct 10 column is 'serious critical
appraisal' of proposals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

NYS Educ Bd offers to set up special educ programs for hospitalized Vietnam war
veterans who have not completed hs; program was conceived by M Polner, bd aide

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 49 words

Typhoon curbs allied mil operations as it moves inland toward northern coast of
S Vietnam and forces precautionary evacuation of mil hosp and some planes in
Danang; details; 3 civilians killed, 15 wounded in Vietcong shelling of 2 towns
near Danang; Cambodian command repts mil action light

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 7; (AFP)

LENGTH: 17 words

N Vietnam Pres Ton Duc Thang promulgates decree for protection of govt property;
decree lists penalties

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

Article on US soldiers who arrive for service in Vietnam; soldiers said to find
little cheer in Pres Nixon's plan to step up withdrawals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 25, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

J W Jones, Vietnam war veteran who says he is opposed to all wars, pays $2,500
fee to city of Houston so that Amer Legion can hold its annual parade; Legion
had canceled parade because it did not have money to pay fee

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

HR 4th Dist campaign in Iowa revd; Repub Repr Kyl challenged by Dem R Blobaum,
running low-budget, person-to-person campaign stressing Kyl record on agr, drug
abuse, pollution and need to withdraw from Vietnam rapidly; illus campaigning

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 61, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 20 words

Swedish Premier Palme says war is civil, not aggression by N Vietnam, and sooner
US realizes this, sooner peace will come

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 99 words

Article on Amer Friends Service Com rehabilitation center in Quangngai, S
Vietnam, which treats only civilian casualties; civilian war casualties said to
be 1 of most wretched problems facing Saigon Govt; center physical therapist
says whole country has to be educated in rehabilitation; center is only 1 in
country that treats civilians only; US statistics show there were 37,5000
civilian casualties in 1st 5 mos of '70; monthly avg for '68 was 7,037, for '69
avg was 5,647; details on operation of center, which has treated 1,935 patients
since June, '67; comments of personnel noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 223 words

Pres Nixon, revg US-Panama treaty situation, tells Pres Lakas US is ready to
resume talks for new Panama Canal treaty whenever Panamanians are prepared to do
so, conf, Washington; Makarios meets with Nixon for diplomatic talks,
Washington; talks include Cypriote communal problems; Nixon and Yahya Khan conf,
Washington, on US mil and econ aid; Pres Nixon confs with Emperor Haile
Selassie, Washington, on USSR expansion of naval forces; Nixon confs with Chief
of State Cheng Heng, Washington; assures him of continued US support for
Cambodian independence and neutrality; White House press sec, in rept on conf,
says it would be foolish to assume that US grant of $40-million worth of small
arms and ammunition during current fiscal yr will be end of Amer aid; security
precautions for dinner noted; Nixon spends time at Camp David to prepare for
conf with Ceausescu; Ceausescu attends White House dinner in hon of 25th anniv
of UN, 1 of 2 Communist dignitaries present; Nixon Adm attaches special
importance to scheduled meeting between Nixon and Rumanian Pres Ceausescu in
light of possibility that Rumania, which has close ties with N Vietnam, may
again be willing to explore chances of peace settlement with N Vietnam; some
diplomats hold that Rumania played role in '68 in arranging for start of Paris
talks and other developments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 95 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu ends meeting with officials; there is no
indication any major decisions were made or that he for cease-fire or other
peace initiatives; Nguyen Van Thieu, in statement, seeks to put down speculation
about unilateral truce; says meeting was called to rev pacification plans; dined
privately recently with Tran Thien Khiem, Nguyen Van Vy and others; Nguyen Van
Thieu says he called meeting with top S Vietnamese officials to rev pacification
plans; says 97% of S Vietnamese territory is under Govt's control, along with
93% of population

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 174 words

Highly placed sources say US Special Forces troops leading clandestine
operations in Laos have suffered casualties in recent mos that have never been
made pub; claim Amer helicopters from bases in S Vietnam are participating in
ground operations in Laos, that about 150 mercenaries and 10 US Special Forces
troopers were used in operation in southern Laos in Sept to force out 2 enemy
bns for attacks by Amer bombers; rept N Vietnamese force of about 500 men was
destroyed, that 40 mercenaries were killed and 40 to 50 mercenaries and 2 Amers
were wounded; say casualties in Laos are being included in weekly casualty
summaries of 'cumulative figures for SE Asia'; spokesman for US command says
'there are no US ground combat troops in Laos'; sources also charge that
squad-size patrols consisting of mercenaries led by US Special Forces men
operate in Laos, watch Ho Chi Minh Trail and are trying to capture enemy
soldiers for intelligence purposes; US command repts Army helicopter downed in
Laos panhandle; declines to disclose its mission

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 60 words

Article on morale sag among professional servicemen; major factors are
frustrations of Vietnam war, wave of antimilitarism in US, race troubles and
scandals in individual services; Sonmy incident contributes to drop in morale of
US professional fighting men; armed forces professionals say US troops perform
well once they get away from aggravations of training

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 26, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 50 words

Allied troops kill 37 enemy without suffering any casualties in series of
battles in northeastern sec; battles are part of S Vietnamese offensive in
Quangtin Prov; 14 Amers killed in mine and booby-trap explosions in Quangtin and
Quangnam Provs; US Army ammunition barge explodes in Danang harbor

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

US command in Saigon recommends Forrester be stripped of medal because it was
based on fabricated citation; awaits approval from Washington before taking
action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 77 words

6,000 S Vietnamese troops, supported by US arty, reptdly have pushed into Snoul
in new offensive; move reptdly brings number of S Vietnamese troops in Cambodia
to 17,500; S Vietnam repts 139 N Vietnamese and Vietcong soldiers killed in
operation begun earlier in Fishhook region and Parrot's Beak area; 20,000
Cambodian troops reptdly massed in Taing Kauk area to begin 2 major offensives;
US command announces total number of US troops drops to 377,100; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 209 words

Former US specialist on Asia C L Cooper says allied intervention in Cambodia
makes it 'almost impossible' to negotiate Vietnam settlement in Paris without
enlarging talks to deal with Cambodia and Laos as well, news conf to publicize
his forthcoming book on 2 decades of US policy in Indochina; says he believes
Nixon proposals reflect recognition that Paris talks are unlikely to make much
progress as presently constituted; book makes disclosures about secret efforts
to arrange peace negotiations or to press them forward; among the disclosures
are the following: Johnson was close to approving restriction of Amer bombing of
N Vietnam in May, '67, 10 mos before he actually took step, but Joint Cs/S
appealed for delay to permit them to raid target in Hanoi; Kissinger felt that
Xmas 'peace package' proposed by group including Vance last Nov would be
'premature'; Kosygin told Johnson in June, '67, meeting that Hanoi was prepared
to start negotiations if US halted its bombing of N Vietnam, but nothing more
was heard from Moscow or Hanoi after US gave 'cautious, tentative' reply; Cooper
suggests Nixon Adm should now be gearing up for open presidential elections in S
Vietnam next fall, with plans to withdraw virtually all US forces by end of '71

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

Negro Sgt J E Hobson goes on trial before gen ct-martial, Stuttgart, W Ger, on
charges of attempted murder and conspiracy growing out of incident May 21 at
Hohenfels training ground in which grenade was thrown into mess hall, injuring
10 men; is 1st of 10 soldiers, 9 of them black, charged in connection with
incident to face trial; disputes about his character and background noted; he
was arrested 43 times as youth in Chicago and later decorated for heroism in
Vietnam; trial has strong racial overtones and involves funds being raised in
Chicago for defense

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 27, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 239 words

Rumanian Pres Ceausescu reveives colorful reception, White House; illus with
Pres Nixon inspecting White House hon guard, Washington, DC; meets with Nixon
for talks on world issues; visits White House official G F Shultz and Secs
Rogers and Hardin; attends White House dinner with wife; Nixon notes Ceausescu
is in 'rather unique position' as head of Govt which maintains relations with
US, USSR and Communist China; earlier in wk, Ceausescu met with bankers,
businessmen and industrialists, in effort to obtain investments in Rumania, and
held talks with Israeli Premier Meir and UAR Min Riad, NYC; officials rept no
indications that Nixon Adm is prepared to ask Cong to grant Rumania
most-favored-nation clause, giving Rumanian products equality with most of other
nations exporting to US; White House press sec Ziegler says Ceausescu and Nixon
discussed trade between 2 countries during Washington meeting; notes total
exchanges have risen from $24-million in '68 fiscal yr to $75-million in '70
fiscal yr; does not indicate if Adm is prepared to ask Cong to grant Rumania
most-favored-nation clause; Pres Ceausescu signs $10-million contract with Amer
Metal Climax to supply sheet-rolling plant; White House press sec acknowledges
Nixon and Ceausescu revd Nixon's Vietnam peace plan and Communist China's role
in possible settlement; Rumanian sources say Ceausescu feels Peking's attitude
is vital in any movement toward peace

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 68 words

Gen Do Cao Tri, comdr of new S Vietnamese offensive, says his troops will push
deeper into Cambodia and try to force N Vietnamese to fight, news conf, Bienhoa;
sees N Vietnamese forced to withdraw and accept some pol solution in near
future; repts his task force met only light resistance in recapturing Snoul;
Cambodian force preparing to move out from Kompong Thom area comes under heavy
mortar fire; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 80 words

Army spokesman says Saigon command is revoking 2 medals, Silver Star and DFC,
awarded to Forrester on basis of fictitious citations; action is described as
1st of its kind to be taken against gen officer in Vietnam; Army statement
clears Forrester of blame; Silver Star and Distinguished Service Cross were
presented to Forrester Oct 15; Army says investigation continues to determine
who was responsible for 'administrative irregularities'; statements of Newman
and Olstad noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 28 words

Calley returns to S Vietnam to gather evidence for his defense in Mylai masacre;
declines to make any statement when he arrives; is traveling on official orders;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

EEC Mins Council authorizes France to negotiate 5-yr commercial treaty with N
Vietnam subject to Council approval

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 178 words

Rumanian Pres Ceausescu holds series of meetings with US bankers and
businessmen, lunches with US Sec Stans and others; Mrs Ceausescu lunches with
Mrs Agnew; Ceausescu ends visit by taking US helicopter to Andrews AF Base, Md,
where he boarded Soviet-made plane for trip home, in move seen symbolizing
Rumania's ind role in internatl affairs; Rumanian officials underline
Ceausescu's satisfaction with Washington talks and with entire visit; officials
say that through Ceausescu Nixon was able to get 'Communist over-view' as
against Soviet view from Gromyko; Rumanians see trip exemplifying Ceausescu
contention differences in systems of govt need not prevent close relations among
countries; Nixon said to have used Ceausescu visit as opportunity to explain his
peace proposals, with implied hope that Rumanians may assist him in some Asian
statesmanship; Rumanian diplomats say Ceausescu provided Nixon with
clarifications of N Vietnam's stand; say Ceausescu indicated his understanding
that N Vietnam would accept principle of coalition govt as basis for settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          October 28, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 81 words

T'Souvas takes witness stand at his pretrial hearing at Ft McPherson, Ga; says
he does not remember whether he shot 2 Vietnamese; defense tries to have charges
against him dismissed on ground he was denied right to speedy trial; judge Lt
Col M Wright 2d sets Dec 8 ct-martial date; T'Souvas says Calley told platoon to
'kill the livestock and everything in the village'; says platoon was told all
civilians had been ordered out of village; is questioned by his mil atty Capt R
A Link

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 166 words

Torres, in formal mil complaint filed at Ft McPherson, accuses Abrams of
allowing prisoners to be beaten and tortured in his presence; alleges Abrams was
witness to, but did nothing to stop, physical assaults by allied personnel on
prisoners suspected of Vietcong sympathies at village near Saigon in August,
'68; newsman P Arnett, only witness listed on Torres's charge sheet, discounts
accusation and says that Abrams was not aware of action of his troops; C
Weltner, Torres's atty, says charges were filed under Uniform Code of Mil
Justice provisions in attempt to bring Army 'face to face with reality and with
the hypocrisy of trying teen-agers for war crimes when gens were involved in
them as well'; charges against Abrams are based on news article written by
Arnett; include accusation that Abrams violated code requiring personnel
observing war crimes to rept them to higher authorities; spokesman quotes
Robinson as saying Mitchell ct-martial will probably not resume for another 2
wks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 42 words

S Vietnam mil spokesman repts 44 guerrillas killed in sharp clash near Snoul;
puts S Vietnam losses at 1 killed, 36 wounded; 41 Vietcong killed in action; 4
persons killed, 9 wounded in Vietcong shellings of 2 Mekong Delta towns; B-52s
continue bombing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Calley confs with Army officials in Saigon; declines all comment; Army announces
no news of his activities will be released; Calley's group will not meet with
press; depositions of Sonmy survivors will be taken by Raby and Army prosecuting
atty Capt J Partin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 29, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 62 words

US officials see Swedish anti-Americanism on wane as Swedes become more
concerned over domestic problems, especially inflation and air pollution; say
protests, based almost entirely on Vietnam and race issue, began to decline
sharply after arrival in Apr of US Amb Holland; hold Vietnam issue has ebbed in
favor of demonstrations in support of Arab commandos in Middle East

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 3

LENGTH: 9 words

Lr on stand on Vietnam taken at Episcopal Bishops conv

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 4

LENGTH: 79 words

Nobel Prize winner Prof Samuelson, discussing successes and failures of Nixon
Adm econ policy, concedes maintaining full employment and price stability is
difficult feat but notes unemployment is worse than anticipated and is expected
to continue to rise well into '71; warns further rises should not be treated
philosophically; disagrees with Adm claim that rise is inevitable result of
winding up of Vietnam war and cutting back of unproductive aerospace programs;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 4

LENGTH: 74 words

Labor negotiator T Kheel, commenting on his visit to Paris, says roadblocks to
analysis of whether negotiated settlement is possible are immeasurable; says
question of who controls country when elections are held is central to issues in
talks; says settlement cannot be negotiated on formula that spells certain
defeat for either side; says settlement must be based on some form of compromise
on pol control among contending forces in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 1

LENGTH: 130 words

NYC Mayor Lindsay campaigns with Goldberg in Buffalo, Amherst and Lackawanna,
scoring Nixon Adm on econ, Vietnam and crime and rarely mentioning Goldberg in
ss; refuses to attack Gov Rockefeller, reiterates he remains Repub; appears with
local Dem leaders and Crangle; lauds Goldberg and Paterson as candidates who
stand against those who divide Upstate and NYC; aides say they are not concerned
that Goldberg defeat will reflect adversely on Lindsay; Goldberg again scores
Rockefeller attack on him for not registering and voting in '67, noting that as
US Amb to UN he believed he should stay out of partisan pol at time; pledges
crime probe by special grand juries if elected, news conf at NYC hq with
Walinsky; later attends receptions in Smithtown, E Meadow and Hempstead, LI

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 74 words

US command rept covering losses in Laos lists no casualties for last wk but
summary repts total of 19 Amers killed, 71 wounded in operations over Laos since
Mar 10; B-52s continue bombing raids over trail; US repts on casualties in
Indochina in past 10 yrs; Cambodian troop-ship convoy hit by barrage of mortar
shells, Mekong River; 13 soldiers killed, 51 others wounded; 300 Cambodians
aboard ship were returning from training in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 30, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 8

LENGTH: 76 words

D K E Bruce, head of Amer delegation at Paris peace talks with N Vietnamese,
repts Communists have become progressively stronger in their denunciations and
rejection of Nixon peace proposals; 90th session; Communist delegations insist
they have 'buried deeply' Nixon proposals; refuse to comment on repts from
Washington that they may still be interested; Xuan Thuy says Vietcong and N
Vietnamese proposals are sole basis for settlement; Bruce comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 31, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

US command discloses rise in deaths of Amer soldiers in Vietnam from drug use;
ascribes increase to greater use of hard drugs and more accessible supply of
'high potency heroin'; terms problem 'matter of grave concern'; repts 25
soldiers have died this yr from drug abuse, compared with 16 deaths during all
of '69; repts 64 additional deaths this yr may have been result of drug use;
disclosures come day after Sen Dodd issues statement in Washington charging
deaths from drug overdoses have skyrocketed among Amer troops; his subcom is
investigating drug use in Army; other details on US command disclosures

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 31, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

Lull in action is broken as enemy troops attack allied positions in central
highlands and Saigon area, reptdly killing 4 Amers and 3 S Vietnamese; 16 enemy
killed; details on action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 31, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 38 words

S Vietnamese officials estimate that heaviest floods in 6 yrs in 3 northern
provinces have left 50,000 people homeless; at least 12 Vietnamese and 4 US
marines reptd dead in floods; Saigon Govt flies relief supplies to victims

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           October 31, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 53 words

S Vietnamese natl press center has withdrawn press accreditation of Amer
journalist D Luce, World Council of Chs correspondent who 1st publicized
'tiger-cage' prison cells and abuses on island of Con Son; Luce says press
center dir told him, after he was refused accreditation, that he should not have
gone to Con Son

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 73, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 23 words

Communist China and N Vietnam sign accord covering living standards and working
conditions for Chinese technicians working in N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32, Column 5

LENGTH: 44 words

US Postmaster Gen Blount announces US will issue 6c stamp in '71 to commem 450th
anniv of introduction of sheep on N Amer continent; illus; item hon DAV 50th
anniv and item hon servicemen of past wars and Vietnam POWS and those missing or
killed in action unveiled

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 13 words

Comment on Calley visit to S Vietnam to gather information for his defense

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Vietnamese Communists believed to be more willing to negotiate standstill
cease-fire than originally thought; alacrity with which their repr at Paris
peace talks gave 2 US antiwar lawyers Vietcong maps of Indochinese states and
nature of maps cited; comment on recent developments concerning Pres Nixon
proposals; notes Vietcong peace plan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 5

LENGTH: 21 words

Lr charges Pres Nixon, in his peace proposal, presupposes that N Vietnam could
arrange cease-fire among all involved groups

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 184 words

Nguyen Van Thieu declares Communists have no intention of negotiating settlement
unless they are assured domination of S Vietnam, state of the nation s before
joint session of Natl Assembly; stresses 'peace in victory' will not come at
Paris talks, but on battlefield; says Communists view negotiations merely as way
to gain time and 'achieve victory gradually'; says he will never accept
coalition govt with Communists; denounces as cowards those who advocate
compromise with N Vietnam; says Communists must be expelled from S Vietnam even
after peace; makes no mention of Nixon proposals; does not restate his own
propositions for settlement; insists S Vietnam is willing to talk at any time
either in Paris or through other forms of secret negotiations; cites 'countless
past experiences' in saying peace treaty with Communists will not insure peace;
says Communists have deliberately created stalemate in Paris; scores opposition
politicians in S Vietnam who have been urging compromise; portrays weakened
enemy incapable of large-scale attacks; says his Govt now controls 99.1% of S
Vietnamese people

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 59 words

US command says 9 S Vietnamese civilians were killed, 25 were wounded and 15 are
missing in mistaken attack by US helicopters on group of fishing boats in June
that were sighted in restricted waters in Gulf of Siam; says US-S Vietnamese
inquiry shows both armies are responsible in case and that persons who file
valid damage claims will be compensated

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

France talks with N Vietnam on new 5-yr treaty to begin; trade between 2
countries seen small, totaling only $500,000 in '69; French Foreign Min notes
trade is in non-strategic goods; US officials say they can remember no time when
trade matter has come up at NATO meetings on internatl embargo of strategic
goods

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

N Vietnam's postponement of prearranged visit to Hanoi by Indian aide said to be
rebuff to India's attempts to play intermediary role in negotiations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 23 words

In Vietnam, monsoon rains sweeping across northern provs bring halt to mil
action as mil forces concentrate on aid instead of destruction

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

Charity rummage sale held by Amer and Brit women of Saigon Episc ch quickly
turns into rout as S Vietnamese crowd into sale area and steal about half of
items to be sold; Mrs Nguyen Van Thieu makes s at opening of sale; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 2, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 94, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 11 words

Lt Gen F Weyand becomes deputy comdr of US forces in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 2, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

Mrs O B Lord, former US repr to UN Human Rights Comm, comments on Nixon's
Vietnam peace proposals, is optimistic that war can be ended, article

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 2, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 78 words

Vietcong gunners shell Saigon for 1st time in 3 mos; 6 Vietnamese killed, 15
wounded, cluster of houses destroyed; details; S Vietnamese forces launch
operations in northern provs aimed at preventing Vietcong from gaining control
of flooded areas; light battlefield action reptd; 173 reptd killed, nearly
250,000 made homeless by floods; US command steps up troop cutbacks; withdraws
more than 1,600 men from combat, including 1st units from 25th Inf Div; other
details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 2, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 116 words

Maj Gen Duong Van Minh, popular S Vietnamese figure, breaks yr-long pol silence
with broad hint that he will challenge Nguyen Van Thieu for presidency next yr,
Natl Day statement; declares S Vietnam is becoming more destitute, its soc more
heart-rending and life of its people more miserable; charges S Vietnam's
sovereignty is increasingly impaired and people are losing faith in their
leaders; calls for 'natl reconciliation' as way to end war and implies he is man
who can achieve it; implies criticism of large scale of US involvement; his
supporters speak of major pol clash next yr; is greeted by Govt opponents at
reception as conquering hero; his other comments noted; Duong Van Minh illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 9 words

B-52s raid Vietnam for 1st time in more than 3 wks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 241 words

US orders accelerated closing of 3 Air Force meteorological and high-atmosphere
observation stations at Easter Island, Punta Arenas and Quintero within 90 days,
in move described by diplomatic sources as effort to reduce non-essential US
official activities in Chile at time of pol uncertainty; period of 'watchful
waiting' by US expected after Meyer delivers oral message from Nixon; Amb Korry
communicates decision to Govt after flying to Easter Island to inform officers
of pullout; neither Frei nor Allende reptdly objects; diplomatic sources say US
decided before Allende election to close stations for econ reasons but pol
reasons hastened move; air of secrecy surrounds Easter Island station, estab in
'66 and operating under agreement with Chilean Air Force; Air Force describes
mission as 'investigation of ionospheric phenomena' but Chilean officials assume
Amers monitor French nuclear tests in Pacific and possibly track USSR
satellites; other US mil presence small, consisting only of 13 officers and
group of enlisted men who procure US equipment for Chilean armed forces; major
US official activity is in area of development loans and grants, now put at over
$40-million a yr; new education loan sought; Communist paper El Siglo repts
Allende has invited, without official accreditation, reprs of Cuba, E Germany, N
Korea, N Vietnam and the Vietcong; more than 50 foreign delegations, including
Meyer, present credentials to Frei

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh indicates her side may be prepared to deal with S Vietnamese
govt headed by Duong Van Minh, who recently called for natl reconciliation and
implied he could achieve it; restate her side's position on contacts with S
Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 35 words

Calley, in helicopter, flies over Sonmy area; confs with Maj Gen Nguyen Van
Toan, comdr of S Vietnamese div that operates in area; is unable to int 2
Vietnamese who investigated complaints following incident

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

New leave policy for servicemen in Vietnam apparently catches Pentagon spokesmen
by surprise; they are unable to furnish details or say what impact it may have
on manpower levels; policy is to take effect Nov 16

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 150 words

US command announces, without explanation, new policy doubling leave time
available to US soldiers to enable them to get free ride back to US for 2-wk
visit; policy applies to servicemen who have spent at least 4 mos in Vietnam and
not more than 8, and allows them to take time off and fly home free on
space-available basis on mil aircraft; until yesterday, servicemen were allowed
1-wk leave and 6-day rest-and-recreation visit to 1 of 6 exotic places; new
policy will not affect continuing rest-and-recreation program; stipulates
serviceman will have to produce paid-for return ticket that will bring him back
to his duty station by specified time before he will be allowed on free flight
home; other details on new policy; spokesman discounts speculation that low
morale among troops precipitated move and suggests declining level of combat
makes it possible to allow soldiers extra wks of leave

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 82 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu indicates he may not seek 2d term, remarks to
newsmen at reception in Saigon; says 'job takes so much out of one' and 'I have
been looking for someone else to do it'; remarks are considered significant
because of recent statements made by Nguyen Thi Binh and Duong Van Minh; rumor
has been circulating in Saigon that US is pulling its support away from Nguyen
Van Thieu during next yr's election in order to help Duong Van Minh; US Embassy
has denied rumor

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

N Vietnamese statement accusing US forces of gen policy of civilian massacres
has been circulated at UN to all members at request of Hungarian Govt; asserts
war has spread since Nixon came to power; says Vietnamization is closely linked
with extending war to all Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 27 words

At least 193 persons dead; S Vietnam floods are worst in 6 yrs; 10 more persons
missing and 11 injured; map; highest priority is being given to reopening main
hwy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 88 words

Article on Mekong Delta hamlet of Chothom, which has been held by S Vietnamese
Govt for a yr after belonging to Vietcong all through '60s; officials say hamlet
reflects trend of increasing Govt control; prov in which hamlet is situated
ranks 43d out of 44 provs in terms of pacification; for residents, change of
control primarily means they no longer need fear allied planes and arty;
villagers describe life under Vietcong, which was marked by hard discipline;
decline to endorse their new allegiance with any enthusiasm; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 12 words

Lr deplores alleged shortages of some supplies of US soldiers in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

Sharp fighting reptd in S Vietnam's northern sec in wake of floods; details on
action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

USSR press agency, softening its line, reiterates its opposition to Pres Nixon's
Vietnam peace proposals and its support for Communist proposals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 49 words

S Vietnamese Air Force takes over from US Mekong Delta air base; transfer is
part of Vietnamization program; Sec Seamans and Gen Abrams attend ceremony; air
base will be home of 2 S Vietnamese helicopter squadrons with US providing 62
aircraft, 31 of which are handed over during ceremony; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 34 words

J M Sweeney, who declared in Stockholm news conf on Aug 25 that he had joined
Vietcong after being left to die in jungle by co comdr, charged, Quantico, Va,
with desertion, abandoning arms and aiding enemy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 1

LENGTH: 117 words

C L Sulzberger says Paris talks have succeeded in reducing to 2 issues
separating belligerents: troops withdrawals and new S Vietnamese govt; says
withdrawal is under way and is irrevocable; says US has made it plain it will
not bow to Communist demand of ousting present Saigon regime; says stalemate
appears doomed to continue for unpredictable further time during which main
function of Amers is to keep door open until Hanoi realizes it must deal with
Saigon realities; says US hopes S Vietnam can create strong enough structure,
before US troops are withdrawn, to protect itself against debacle; says Hanoi
wants to hold off settlement until it has another try at smashing Saigon
structure; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 6 words

Vietnam flood death toll reaches 237

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 85 words

Joint Logistics Rev Bd, top-level mil rev bd, issues rept blaming Johnson Adm
for some of mistakes of war, asserting long-range contingency plans were ignored
by not calling up reserves and by planning for short war; rept says pol
considerations in Saigon and Washington sometimes overruled mil needs; bd is
headed by Gen F S Besson, who was apptd to job last yr by Deputy Sec Packard;
rept says rapid buildup of forces in Vietnam beginning in '65 was based on
premise that war would end quickly; other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

S Vietnamese troops open new offensive designed to block enemy infiltration into
S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              260 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 118 words

Amer officials in Washington, discussing developments since Pres Nixon made
proposals, say prolonged period of diplomatic exploration by US officials is
likely to occur before actual negotiations on settlement get under way;
assessment appears to coincide generally with opinions of Communist diplomats in
Washington whose govts maintain close ties with Hanoi; Amer officials recognize
Communists may hope to bargain for 'medium' position while allowing war to
continue; cite intelligence data indicating N Vietnamese increased use of Ho Chi
Minh Trail, in anticipation of approaching dry season, for southward movement;
say it is too soon to determine whether troops are headed for S Vietnam or
Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              261 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 144 words

91st session of Paris Peace talks; Amer and Communist negotiators charge each
other with discourtesy as conf settles back into familiar routine of
non-negotiation; Xuan Thuy declares Nixon has lied to Amer people and
reactionary policy he practices is tied to prolongation and expansion of war;
Bruce asks Xuan Thuy to be courteous after scoring Xuan Thuy's remarks; Xuan
Thuy insists his words are 'perfectly founded'; Nguyen Thi Binh backs him; US
spokesman says he has attended all meetings and never heard anything like
reference made to Nixon; N Vietnamese spokesman says Bruce 'lost control of
himself'; allied side appeals for compromise on proposals, Communist side sticks
to its demands; Xuan Thuy charges Nixon lost recent Amer elections; N Vietnamese
spokesman says defeat was caused by Nixon's continuation and extension of war;
Bruce and Habib illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              262 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 115 words

Sec Seamans says US Air Force is entering crucial time in its efforts to prevent
N Vietnam from moving supplies down Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos toward Cambodia
and S Vietnam, news conf, Saigon; says Communists have been hampered up to now
by heavy rains; says US invasion of Cambodia and subsequent loss of Communist
supplies makes it imperative for N Vietnam to get major increases in materiel
from Laotian network; says US seeks to deter supply movement; says US planes
have 'not encroached' on N Vietnam's territory; mil sources in Saigon say supply
buildup amts to about 40% to 50% more this yr than at same time in '69; Seamans
makes clear buildup refers to supplies rather than men; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              263 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 0

LENGTH: 346 words

Group of comments on war: A Lewis says tragedy of Vietnam is one of proportion;
says US has caused mil destruction 'almost beyond imagination' for pol end of
modest significance; notes extent of destruction and estimate that 300,000 S
Vietnamese civilians have been killed in last 5 yrs; notes statement in Prof T
Taylor book that US has spent for civilian relief only about 4% of its mil
expenditure for air operations alone; says lesson to be remembered is that US
has succeeded mainly in arousing fear among others and internal revulsion and
dissension; former Deputy Asst Sec M H Halperin says Nixon proposals raise hopes
of negotiated settlement, but, although proposals are fair, N Vietnam is
unlikely to accept them; says cease-fire would operate almost entirely to
Saigon's advantage; says prospects for pol settlement remain dim and key
question continues to be what US intends to do if there is no progress in talks;
says Vietnamization policy will lead to indefinite US presence; sees possibility
of increased mil pressure by N Vietnam and mil response by Nixon; urges US to
set date for withdrawal and comply with it; Washington observer S Alsop says
urge for 'well-intentioned, liberal-minded' Amers to play role of 'Miss Fix-It'
underlies US involvement in Vietnam; says Nixon now stages retreat from
commitment that burgeoned under Pres Johnson; opposes US imposition on Saigon of
coalition govt acceptable to Communists; urges US to support S Vietnam but to
restrain its urge to 'fix things up'; French novelist R Gary says war's tragedy
may appear to future historians as having saved world from global conflict and
US from its 'own secretly active demons', and as having started US on new path;
says moral issue of war challenges US and US is capable of response; Prof O
Morgenstern says gain in war is entirely on Communist side; says USSR and China
jointly benefit from war, regardless of its outcome; notes statistics on US
involvement; holds US has been 'gravely weakened'; says Amers who push war are
achieving opposite of what they strive for; drawings

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CRITICAL REVIEWS & APPRAISALS

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAMS & DRAWINGS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              264 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

2 replacements named to ct-martial bd that will try Calley; Calley leaves Saigon
for US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              265 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 49 words

US calls for UN action to press N Vietnam to allow identification of POWs and to
allow access to them by IRC, UN session; Sen Pell appeals for humane treatment
of POWs; families of POWs watch from gallery; Algerian repr says he supports N
Vietnamese position that Amers POWs are 'war criminals'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              266 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 73 words

6,000 S Vietnamese troops advance across 100-mi-wide front in southeast Cambodia
in major new operation designed to clean out any new enemy border sanctuaries,
block movement of N Vietnamese troops into S Vietnam and ease pressure on
Pnompenh; N Vietnamese units shell command post of separate S Vietnamese task
force operating along Hwy 7; enemy soldiers ambush Cambodian troops west of
Angkor, start 8-hr battle; other clashes described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              267 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Article on transer of US helicopter to S Vietnamese Air Force; behind transfer
stands vast amt of planning and paperwork and some skirmishes between Vietnamese
and Amers and between US Army and USAF over diverse issues; transfer said to
provide some insight into mechanics of Vietnamization; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              268 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 21 words

Comment on Duong Van Minh statement; it is assumed he will challenge S
Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu; Duong Van Minh illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              269 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 15 words

Natl Strike for Peace (NSFP) ad urges blood donations on Veterans Day for peace
in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              270 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 0

LENGTH: 28 words

Chester L Cooper book The Lost Crusade, tracing US involvement in Vietnam
through its various phases and showing war from inside natl-security
bureaucracy, revd; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              271 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 64 words

Reprs of 9 Southeast Asian nations meet, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, to discuss
population growth; 9 currently have some 280 million people and population is
expected to increase by over 50% in next 15 yrs; Singapore and Malaysia are only
countries to promote some kind of measures while Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos,
Nepal, Philippines, Thailand and S Vietnam are relatively unconcerned

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              272 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 45 words

Cambodian chief of state Cheng Heng says Pres Nixon personally promised him
larger mil and econ aid to underwrite war against N Vietnam, news conf,
Pnompenh; says Cambodia will try through mil means and negotations to bring
about peace but rules out any coalition govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              273 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 95 words

Article on plight of Nguyen Bang, S Vietnamese civilian who was hired by Green
Berets and lost both his legs fighting for US Special Forces unit 3 yrs ago; S
Vietnamese Govt considers him a civilian, and, as such, he is not eligible for
veteran's compensation; he is said to be 1 of several thousand Vietnamese who
have fought for Special Forces and who are caught between US and S Vietnamese
responsibility after having been wounded; received about $200 when Green Berets
dismissed him and is now unemployed; depends on his widowed mother and sister
for support; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              274 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 56 words

2 grenades explode in movie theater, Pnompenh; 18 persons killed, 46 wounded; S
Vietnamese task force in SE Cambodia makes futile search for enemy troops; 1,000
Cambodians open drive NE of Pnompenh, encounter no resistance; Lt Do Cao Tri
holds enemy is 'in great trouble in Cambodia'; S Vietnamese soldiers emerging
from barge illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              275 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 68 words

Survey of returning Vietnam war veterans finds most slipping back into soc
without fanfare that attended those returning from World Wars I and II; finds
they are faced with employment problems virtually the same as those of avg
civilian; finds they are less inclined toward further educ and show little
evidence of seeking continuing outlets for pattern of violence to which they
became habituated; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              276 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 9, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 4

LENGTH: 54 words

Pathet Lao leader Prince Souphanouvong article calling for peace in Laos charges
Nixon Doctrine is 'epitome of a policy of letting Asians fight Asians' and has
intensified US 'war of aggression' in all Indochina; scores heavy US bombing and
'escalation'; demands US withdrawal from all SE Asia so that peace may be
restored

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              277 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 9, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 1

LENGTH: 226 words

Ed, noting that stalemate in Paris talks, Nguyen Van Thieu's 'cocktail banter'
about stepping down, and Duong Van Minh's call for natl reconciliation stir new
interest in S Vietnam's impending presidential campaign, says these and other
developments concerning and reflecting on negotiation of pol settlement in S
Vietnam have led to theory that Communists are delaying negotiations until next
yr's election is over; notes Saigon rumors, despite US denials, that US may
withdraw support from Nguyen Van Thieu and help Duong Van Minh get elected; says
speculation is based on misconceptions; says Amer diplomats hold Nguyen Van
Thieu has every intention of running; holds his control of election apparatus
makes his defeat by any rival extremely unlikely; says there are no assurances
that Communists would try to reach settlement with Duong Van Minh even if he
were elected; urges US not to interfere with elections; says if pol upset did
occur, Nguyen Van Thieu's successor is more likely to be another member of
Saigon mil leadership, even less moderate than Nguyen Van Thieu on terms of
negotiated settlement, than any outsider; holds Communists have no good reason
to delay negotiations; says they now face choice of seeking aim of majority
control of Saigon through mil victory or to transfer struggle to pol field by
negotiating compromise settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              278 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 9, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 15 words

3 US soldiers killed, 3 wounded in Vietnam when 1 apparently steps on unexploded
arty round

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              279 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            November 9, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 97 words

N Vietnamese troops shell S Vietnamese posts and bases near frontier; S Vietnam
repts 62 enemy soldiers killed in fighting following shellings; heaviest
fighting takes place 2 mi N of Snoul; other clashes along Routes 1 and 7 and in
Parrot's Beak area detailed; S Vietnam repts 7,000 S Vietnamese and Cambodian
troops are driving toward 14-sq-mile area of jungle between Routes 2 and 3 in an
attempt to re-establish Govt control over area; map; US command in Saigon says
ammunition barge with 11 US crewmen capsized and sank in heavy seas during storm
1-wk ago; repts no survivors

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              280 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 161 words

Pres Nixon gave background briefing for selected columnists in White House, Nov
5, on his belief he has ideological majority in Sen; briefing seen as another in
series of almost daily Adm efforts to give wide distribution to its
interpretation of results; assessment holds that Nixon's personal campaigning
yield important divds, that polls in early Oct, before Nixon started
campaigning, showed Repubs running behind in all closely contested Sen races
except in Tenn; Time repts Nixon told Cabinet and staff that he decided to
campaign against advice of aides when he saw polls; 2 of columnists at meeting
say Nixon told group he was 'delighted' by Buckley's election and that he
himself dispatched Agnew to campaign for Buckley; article in Time (pub) says
Nixon has told his associates that war will be over for all practical purposes
by '72, enhancing Repub party's chances in '72 elections; Nixon, says S
Vietnamese situation will be well under control before '72

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              281 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

S Vietnamese forces have taken over offensive operations from US troops in
1000-sq-mi area N of Saigon; shift virtually ends US offensive role along Saigon
River corridor

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              282 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 109 words

Cambodian officers reptdly are holding talks with members of Prince Boun Oum's
entourage on possibility of sending sizable numbers of Cambodian troops to Laos
to be equipped with US arms; move stems from fact that Cambodia has more troops
than arms while Laos needs soldiers but has found it easy to get arms from US;
Cambodians deal directly with Boun Oum because he controls southern Laos almost
independently of central Govt and has direct dealings with CIA; intelligence
repts of growing Communist build-up in southern Laos have added urgency to need
for troops to contain Communistsand block their flow of men and supplies down Ho
Chi Minh Trail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              283 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 56 words

N Vietnamese and Vietcong troops launch coordinated attacks against govt mil
positions and towns NE of Pnompenh; 5 Cambodians reptd killed, 6 wounded in
attack on Kompong Cham airport; 15 N Vietnamese reptd killed around Skoun; S
Vietnamese columns move against suspected Communist concentration at Tonle Bati,
20 mi SE of Pnompenh; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              284 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 355 words

US Sup Ct refuses to hear challenge by State of Mass to Vietnam war's
constitutionality; Justices, 6-to-3, reject state's effort to forgo lower ct
proceedings and test legality of war; Fed Govt has insisted state lacks standing
to litigate question of its individual citizens' rights; Justice Dept has said
question of war's legality is not 'justiciable'; Sup Ct's order implies it
agrees with 1 or both of these arguments; Justice Douglas, who has urged Ct in
several dissents to rule on war, protests in long dissent that question of
unconstitutional war is neither academic nor pol; argues Ct should hear case and
rule on war; Justices Stewart and Harlan issue separate dissent saying Ct should
not throw suit out without hearing arguments on right of state to challenge war
in way it does; suit was brought by Mass Atty Gen R H Quinn after state's Legis
passed law last April designed to force judicial ruling on war's legality; Ct's
action does not declare law unconstitutional; Quinn announces he will file new
suit in Fed Dist Ct in Boston; details on Douglas dissent; US Sup Ct, in
agreement to decide if unanimous jury is required to convict defendent in
criminal case, grants appeal to R Apodaca, convicted of assault with deadly
weapon under Ore law that permits conviction with approval of 10 of jury's 12
members; Ct affirms lower ct ruling declaring unconst Ariz law permitting state
to send mental patients back to their home states if they have not been
residents of forwarding state for at least 1 yr; Ct agrees to decide if states
may const set limits on tax rates that counties may impose to raise funds for
educ; at issue is Fla law that reduces state educ payments to localities if they
raise local school taxes above certain level; Sup Ct grants rev of Fed Dist Ct
June ruling, which declared Rhode Island violated 1st Amendemnt's barrier
between ch and state by allocating state funds to supplement teachers' salaries
in nonpub schools; Ct will hear case together with similar Penna case and Fed
aid-to-higher educ program; hearings could lead to broad Sup Ct decision on
const of pub aid to ch-related insts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              285 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 6

LENGTH: 40 words

Australian Prime Min Gorton heckled by antiwar demonstrators after s attacking
opposition Labor party for opposing Vietnam war, election rally, Perth; antiwar
demonstrators drape Vietcong flag across shoulders of Gorton at election rally

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              286 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 51, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

Blount is in Paris on 1st leg of journey that may take him to Hanoi to assure
Xmas mail gets to Amer POWs; confs with Amb Bruce

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              287 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 46 words

Atty Gen Mitchell announces Communist party aide A S Johnson is indicted by Fed
grand jury for contempt of Cong; indictment alleges Johnson willfully refused to
be sworn to testify June 11 before HR com, which was investigating nature and
objectives of New Mobilization Com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              288 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 1

LENGTH: 155 words

Sec Hodgson repts Labor Dept manpower study predicts 'dramatic' rise in number
of 25-to-34-yr-old workers and 'explosive' increase in number of young black
workers in labor force by '80, news conf; illus; says number of young blacks
entering work force will grow at rate nearly 5 times faster than number of young
whites; holds providing jobs for young blacks will be 1 of major tasks in '70;
Hodgson repts Labor Dept manpower study forecasts 37-million working women by
'80, compared with 30-million in '69 and 18-million in '50; holds job training
must by made available for mothers re-entering work force and day-care
facilities must by expanded; Labor Dept study predicts fewer openings in
teaching as result of decreasing enrollment in pss; warns this may mean problem
for women entering work force; predicts that there will be significant increases
in employment by housing and construction industries after Vietnam War ends

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              289 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 12 words

Vietnam peace talks in Paris postponed a wk because of de Gaulle's death

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              290 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 45 words

Treas extends combat-zone tax benefits to mil personnel who participated in
Cambodian operation in Apr, those qualifying for 'hostile fire pay' while
serving in Laos and those qualifying for it because of flights from Okinawa,
Thailand and other areas outside Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              291 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

State Dept officials announce S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky will visit US
next wk; do not disclose time and place of arrival for security reasons; say he
will meet with Pres Nixon; other plans

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              292 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 192 words

Article on ct tests in Japan faced by antiwar Amers Miss B Bye and Pfc N Ewing;
cases are linked only by Amers opposition to war; Bye, who arrived in Japan on
multiple entry tourist visa July 2, fights deportation order by Japan following
her antiwar activities aimed at US servicemen; spent several wks counseling
servicemen on how to register as conscientious objectors; comdrs at Amer bases
have been disturbed by antiwar activity; Japanese immigration authorities are
having to deal with young Amer civilians who come to Japan for various reasons
and then engage in antiwar protests, which include propaganda directed at Amer
servicemen stationed in Japan or on leave there; both Bye and Ewing have support
of Japanese peace group; Tokyo ct has refused Bye 2d extension of her stay in
Japan; her lawyers are appealing decision; Ewing, who is Vietnam veteran, is to
go on trial soon for having been absent from his unit stationed in Japan for
over 2 mos; his lawyer and Japanese peace orgn officials, at news conf, say he
went absent without leave as means of registering his opposition to war; Ewing
was also involved in stockade riot; other details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              293 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Visitors arrive with increasing regularity to question Duong Van Minh on his
plans; said to come away convinced that he will challenge Nguyen Van Thieu;
Duong Van Minh explains to them why he thinks 'natl reconciliation and
solidarity' will lead to peace; his recent statement recalled

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              294 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 41 words

Swan, prosecutor in Mitchell case on Vietnam atrocity charges, says he plans no
changes in his case despite Kennedy ruling; says he will continue to base his
case on testimony of 3 witnesses; says he will not ask Robinson to change his
decision

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              295 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 5

LENGTH: 32 words

Concerned Air Force Acad Grads, orgn of service acad alumni, calls on Nixon to
'put aside self-serving pol goals' and withdraw all troops; scores Vietnam war;
spokesman Capt R Black comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              296 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 77 words

2 bns of Cambodian troops ambushed on Hwy 7, 5 mi East of Skoun; 2 cos sent out
to reinforce them; situation between Kompong Cham and Skoun confused; Communist
rgt deployed against Govt task force shifted to new position, apparently readies
for renewed assaults on Kompong Cham; enemy buildup near Oudong reptd; 6,000-man
S Vietnamese task force withdraws from Cambodia after making contact but failing
to trap part of Vietcong div in Fishhook sanctuary area; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              297 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 20 words

S Vietnamese task force pulls out of Cambodia after making contact with but
failing to trap enemy troops; 41 enemy killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              298 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Prof Nguyen Dang Thuc, 1 of S Vietnam's leading thinkers, says he believes US
should play significant role in post-war Vietnam, int; sees possible East-West
cultural unification; explains why US efforts have failed; says Amers have shown
no respect for cultural tradition; makes other comments; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              299 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

US command repts 7 Amers killed, 14 wounded in action in Vietnam; repts 45 Amers
died last wk from nonhostile causes; Kompong Cham, Cambodia attacked, 4th
consecutive day

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              300 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

Postmaster Gen Blount seeks IRC aid in getting mail to POWs in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              301 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 122 words

Soviet Min Gromyko confs for 80-min with Pope after 3 days of talks with Govt
leaders, including Ital Min Moro; discuss proposed European security conf;
discuss efforts to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapone; police clash with
several hundred right-wing demonstrators staging unauthorized parade, Rome, to
protest Gromyko visit; reptdly discuss internatl problems including Middle East
situation; discuss Vietnam war; Vatican spokesman Orof Allessandrine says Pope
Paul, in talks with Gromyko, referred to life of ch in USSR; other Vatican
sources suggest that Pope might have urged Gromyko to help obtain permission for
churchmen in Lithuania and other Soviet areas with sizable RC communities to
communicate with Holy See

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              302 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 4

LENGTH: 20 words

Lr urges proposal to create 'caretaker' govt directed to oversee rapid Vietnam
troop withdrawals and organize elections

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              303 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 42 words

US servicemen who would normally be discharged between mid-Dec and Jan 3 '71 to
get early releases; Defense Dept seeks reduction in fares between Us and S
Vietnam so that personnel there can take advantage of new liberal Xmas and home
leave policies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              304 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 15 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky will arrive in NY tomorrow for 2 1/2-wk
visit to US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              305 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 170 words

Defense Sec Laird warns N Vietnam that US is ready to retaliate against any
continued firing at US aircraft on reconnaissance missions over N Vietnam,
comment during question-and-answer period following s at Pentagon; makes what
appears to be threat to resume strikes against air defense sites after Amer mil
command announces downing of US reconnaissance jet by enemy ground fire 42 mi S
of Vinh; Pentagon officials say some reconnaissance planes have been fired at
since May raids, but that none were downed; say they know of no immediate plan
to strike at AA batteries; Laird says firing at reconnaissance planes was barred
by '68 understanding between US and N Vietnam under which US agreed to stop
bombing; says US is deeply concerned about loss of 2 flyers who were on plane;
Saigon rept of incident notes accompanying fighter escorts saw plane crash and
explode but did not see parachutes; Laird says US will continue to take actions
necessary to protect its troops; light and scattered ground action reptd; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              306 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 66, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 41 words

Swedish Cabinet turns down appeal from J Parra, who went to Sweden in '68 after
deserting from Vietnam and is scheduled to be deported next wk; Parra will be
1st US deserter to be sent home from Sweden; is finishing jail term for
narcotics offense

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              307 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 64 words

Prof R M Pfeffer lr accuses Nixon of practicing new form of McCarthyism in
seeking scapegoats to explain militant and violent protest; sees repression of
those who seek radical change; seeks scapegoats to explain 'frustrated hopes for
continuing Amer dominance abroad'; cites Nixon Vietnam proposals and US
attifutde that enemy is agressive as part of 'Nixonian McCarthyism' tactics

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              308 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 7; Page 56, Column 0

LENGTH: 18 words

Shaplen, Robert: The Road From War. Vietnam 1965-1970; Shaplen lr on J C Thomson
Jr rev; Thomson replies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              309 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 24 words

Postmaster Gen Blount, back from Paris, says he will await word from N Vietnam
before taking further steps to arrange mail deliveries to POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              310 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 198 words

Pakistan, in communique on Pres Yahya Khan visit to Peking, 'notes with positive
interest' Chinese proposal for summit conf of all countries to discuss
prohibition and destruction of nuclear weapons; says both nations hold
Indochinese people must resolve Indochina problem for themselves; Pakistan backs
Govt's claim or sovereignty over Taiwan; Communist China backs Pakistani Pres
Yahya Khan proposal that Pakistan and India withdraw troops from Kashmir to
enable people to 'freely exercise their right of self-determination'; Pakistan
and Communist China trade pact including backing of Palestinian and other Arab
peoples in their struggle against imperialism and Israeli Zionism; Pres Yahya
Khan announces econ cooperation pact with Communist China; says China offers
$200-million interest-free loan, representing 100% rise in Chinese aid; says
repayment will not start for 20 yrs; China pledges further aid to help make econ
self-reliant; Pakistan supports Communist UN seat; Yahya Khan meets with Chmn
Mao, calling him 'the great man' of China, Asia and the world; Premier Chou says
he will visit Pakistan at earliest possible opportunity; Yahya Khan ends visit,
returns to Dacca

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              311 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 74 words

Australian opposition Labor party head E G Whitlam's call for immediate
withdrawal of 8,000 Australian troops in Vietnam has not had appeal he expected
as Sen campaign issue; poll indicates 45% of voters favor bringing home troops
now, while 43% would continue war effort; union push for 35-hr work wk is key
issue in upcoming Sen contest; Prime Min Gorton holds shorter work wk in country
constantly beset by strikes would be disastrous to econ

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              312 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

Army announces reshuffling of major units as result of reduction in number of
troops in Vietnam and parallel cutback in over-all arms strength

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              313 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 21 words

US Embassy makes pub rept saying cost of living in Saigon rose 2.8% last wk,
rose 40% in last yr, has risen 604% since Jan, '65

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              314 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 32 words

N Vietnamese troops attack 2 US units in northern jungles, killing 4 Amers,
wounding 25; other action reptd, raising US casualties in northern sector to 8
killed and 49 wounded in 24-hr period

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              315 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 122 words

Ewing becomes symbol of confrontation between Amer and Japanese antiwar
partisans and US mil establishment; ct-martial begins; Ewing pleads guilty to
charge of absence without leave and breach of peace, is expected to testify
about his antiwar beliefs at next session; problems created for Amer mil
establishment in Japan by Japanese and Amer antiwar activists noted; Ewing case
said to have brought together Amer and Japanese radicals not only on antiwar
front, but on legal front; Capt J Keys, judge in case, denies defense motions;
agrees to permit Mrs Yudis, his mother, to be brought to Japan to testify in his
behalf; Ewing says he is ashamed at times to call US his country after what he
saw in Vietnam, int; details on case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              316 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

N Vietnamese delegation to Paris talks denies there was understanding with US
concerning unarmed reconnaissance flights; rejects Laird statement; says US must
bear entire responsibility for 'hostile acts'; insists US agreed to cease
bombardments without condition

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              317 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 66 words

US command repts 44 Amers killed in last wk in Vietnam, highest wkly toll in 5
wks; booby traps and land mines kill 9 Amers, wound 10; S Vietnamese troops rush
to outer defenses of Pnompenh to shore up gaps along eastern banks of Mekong
River where elements of N Vietnamese div are reptd deployed; Communist troops
break hole in Govt's northern front with attack routing garrison near Kompong
Cham

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              318 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 57 words

S Vietnam Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky arrives in NYC under heavy security guard;
small group stages antiwar demonstration at Kennedy airport terminal; is greeted
by Bui Diem and Deputy Asst Sec Sullivan; declines to answer questions, but says
he comes to US to express gratitude of his countrymen to people of US; Nguyen
Cao Ky illus with wife

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              319 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 93 words

Allied comdrs in 2 northern provs prepare for possible N Vietnamese attack
against coastal lowlands S of buffer zone after current monsoon season ends;
allied officers have urged comdrs to prepare for attack because of routine
expectation of increased enemy activity after wet season and because of more
specific signs, including presence of new enemy troops and indications that
enemy prepares field to support more troops; details on recent action in area;
allied officers estimate there are 30,000 to 40,000 enemy troops in area and
nearby in Laos; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              320 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 199 words

Green Beret officers rept their forces will be reduced from 9,000 to 6,000 in
next 3 yrs as result of basic change of emphasis on primary mission; forces,
which were developed in '52 to be parachuted into hostile territory and to form
large groups of indigenous guerrillas, will now function as small training teams
to move into underdeveloped areas for 6 mos or less to instruct local armed
forces in combating insurgency or banditry or in methods of gaining backing in
remote areas; forces will also be developed for special reconnaissance and
ordnance missions; recalls that 50-man team was rushed to Bolivia in '67 and
trained ranger battalion to fight guerrillas under E C Guevara, subsequently
captured; alerting of special small reconnaissance teams of US Army Special
Forces during Jordanian civil war noted; US Special Forces team in Thailand
trains Laotians to use armored scout cars against N Vietnamese troops operating
on Plaine des Jarres; small team operating in S Vietnam trains Laotians for
reconnaissance missions in southern Laos; J F Kennedy Center for Mil Assistance
has begun special course to help US Army intelligence officers to become
advisers in Operation Phoenix

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              321 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Pres Nixon presents 50th anniv Vocational Rehabilitation Medal to several
recipients; US Sen approves resolution expressing grief at de Gaulle's death; HR
votes, 271-58, to authorize $3.4-million for operation of Civil Rights Comm in
current yr; HR approves bill to extend veteran home loan benefits to wives and
children of Amers missing in action or known to be prisoners in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              322 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 35 words

BLS repts that of about 3-million Vietnam war veterans in labor force, 200,000,
or 6.5%, were jobless in mid-'70, compared with natl jobless rate of 5%; jobless
rate expected to increase as US reduces war role

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              323 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

N Vietnamese delegation at Paris talks announces US POWs can receive larger
holiday gift packages and Xmas and New Yr letters this yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              324 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

4,500-man S Vietnamese task force drives into northeastern tip of Cambodia in
new offensive, 1st move into area in 6 mos; N Vietnamese troops reptdly batter 2
elements of Cambodian task force 50 mi N of Pnompenh; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              325 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 165 words

S Vietnam Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky visits West Point; says Cambodia would be
overrun by Communist forces 'within 24 hrs' if S Vietnamese troops currently
operating there are withdrawn, s; describes Cambodian incursion last May as
'turning point' of war; says enemy, as result, has been forced to revert to
low-level guerrilla warfare; says 'central effort' of enemy has been defeated;
his visit will take him to several US mil installations where S Vietnamese
soldiers are training; he is scheduled to spend wk in Washington, where he will
visit with Nixon and other Adm officials; details on West Point visit; he
predicts combat role of US in S Vietnam will be over 'very soon', statement to
reporters; says, during s, that his Govt is concerned that Adm may yield to
'pressure of antiwar groups' and pull out remaining US troops too quickly; West
Pointers applaud Ky's remark that his Govt provides free haircuts for youths;
says 'they look much better when you can see their faces'; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              326 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 117 words

Pope Paul VI reasserts ban on all froms of birth control except periodic
abstinence, s, FAO 25th anniv meeting, Rome; illus; urges internatl bodies not
contribute to spread of contraceptive techniques banned by ch; indirectly refers
to '68 Papal encyclical and recalls earlier admonition by Pope John XXIII in
action seen reminder that ban is not his personal decision but ch tenet; FAO Dir
Gen Boerma warns that world is being overpopulated, s; illus; Pope expresses
hope that nations, including USSR, Communist China, N Vietnam, N Korea and
Albania, that are not members will join, s at session marking orgn's 25th anniv;
deplores arms race; proposes internatl youth corps to achieve better world

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              327 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 42 words

Big Bienhoa air base is struck by rockets, apparently fired by Vietcong
guerrillas; damage and casualties are light; enemy shells US camp near Hue;
allied forces kill at least 40 guerrillas in series of clashes in northern
provs; details on action; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              328 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 24 words

Repr Price announces he plans to meet in Paris with N Vietnamese official Nguyen
Minh Vy and is optimistic about getting information on Amer POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              329 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 0

LENGTH: 18 words

Taylor, Telford: Nuremberg and Vietnam: An American Tragedy; Lane, Mark:
Conversations with Americans revd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              330 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

S Vietnam Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky visits Air Force Acad, Colo; Air Force mil
police ask 3 demonstrators to leave airport where he lands

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              331 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 16 words

Premier Thanom Kittikachorn says Thailand will withdraw all its 12,000 troops
from Vietnam by '72

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              332 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 76 words

S Vietnamese forces continue push into NE Cambodia, rept discovery of large food
and equipment dumps in Ratangkiri Prov; guerrillas shell Neak Leung, S Vietnam's
main command post in Cambodia; hand-grenade thrown into group of Cambodian
soldiers, Pnompenh, kills 1, wounds 8; about 16,000 S Vietnamese forces are now
operating in Cambodia, 4,500 of them in sweep; enemy shells Bienhoa air base; 3
Amers and 2 S Vietnamese killed; 14 civilians wounded; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              333 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 3

LENGTH: 40 words

Pres Nixon meets with Sen-elect Chiles, Dem, Fla; Civil Service Comm repts that
over 14,000 Vietnam veterans were apptd to Fed jobs, 1st half of '70; decision
on Vice Pres Agnew place on presidential election ticket seen deferred until '72

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              334 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

9 civilians killed, 42 other persons wounded when hand grenade explodes in crowd
watching film 20 mi NE of Saigon; incident attributed to terrorists

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              335 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Gen Walt, who commanded US marines in S Vietnam for 2 yrs and who will retire as
USMC asst comandant, ponders lessons of war, news conf; says war would have been
shortened if US pub could have been made to understand and if definitive steps
could have been taken to shut off flow of enemy supplies; avoids direct censure
of news media, but complains about nature of news coverage; his other comments
noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              336 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

S Vietnam Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky exchanges greetings with 11 S Vietnamese
attending US Army coll, Ft Leavenworth, Kan; Ky places wreath at USAF Acad War
Memorial, Colo Springs, Colo, honoring grads who died in war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              337 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 146 words

US Pres Nixon supplemental request to Cong for $1.03-billion more in foreign aid
funds includes $48.9-million to replenish funds borrowed from aid program
designated for Taiwan, Greece and Turkey and transferred to Cambodia; Nixon asks
Cong for sixfold increase in aid for Cambodian Govt as part of an over-all
supplemental request, special message to Cong; request includes $70-million for
econ aid, $85-million for mil; $30-million in surplus agr commodities; Nixon
describes funds as part of price of Nixon doctrine, vital to containment of N
Vietnamese along Cambodian-S Vietnam border and to continued success of program
of withdrawal of Amer troops from Vietnam; Sen Fulbright and other Sens
skeptical about request; inclusion in Nixon Adm $1.03-billion supplemental
foreign mil aid request bill of $500-million credit for Israel, largest single
request in bill, noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              338 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 72 words

US officials say N Vietnam is sending nearly twice as many troops southward in
early wks of dry season this yr as it did in '69; cite Vo Nguyen Giap statement
saying war in S Vietnam raises 'striking and complicated problems' which must be
solved in time in order to 'frustrate...new schemes and tricks' of enemy; US
officials speculate on distination of new N Vietnamese units moving southward
down Ho Chi Munh Trail in Laos; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              339 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 5

LENGTH: 14 words

Reply to Nov 16 lr says Vietnam war was project of liberals from its very
beginning

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              340 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 5

LENGTH: 148 words

Norodom Sihanouk replies to 4 questions submitted to him by cable in Peking,
text; says Khieu Samphan, Hu Nim and Hou Yuon, members of his Govt supposedly in
Cambodia, are alive, have never been detained and are living in Cambodia and
functioning to aid his cause; says he does not presently plan to return to
Cambodia since difficulties posed by his need to travel through Laos and Vietnam
to reach country raise additional problems in light of intense US bombing; holds
US intervention to aid Lon Nol is unjustified from Cambodian point of view,
reply to query on whether he plans to bring matter before UN; says after
Cambodia is liberated the present Govt of FUNK (Sihanouk movement) will be
installed in Pnompenh, that there will be Communists, nationalist royalists,
non-Communist progressives and all types of people in the United Natl Front;
says he will then retire to France

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              341 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 66 words

US negotiating with India to divert 2 food shipments to Pakistan to speed aid
for survivors; Sen McGovern proposes all US helicopters and crews in Vietnam not
urgently needed for war effort be sent to Pakistan; Agency for Internatl
Development coordinator S Tripp comments on efforts to bring in supplies;
photographer K Potter describes conditions seen in flight over Bhola and Manpura
Islands

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              342 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

N Vietnam warns US that it will continue to oppose reconnaissance flights over
its territory, peace talks session; US makes clear it has no intention of
abandoning flights; N Vietnamese spokesman scores Nixon; Bruce says it has
always been clear that US would continue reconnaissance flights after cessation
of bombing in '68

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              343 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 58 words

US Army aide A W Allen Jr says large influx of highly potent, cheap heroin in
Vietnam has increased drug-related death rate of US soldiers, HR subcom; says 25
such deaths have occurred this yr; figure last yr was 11; Allen says drs suspect
64 such deaths in Aug-Oct period of this yr, but this cannot be determined by
autopsy; makes other comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              344 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 4

LENGTH: 140 words

Chicago trial Judge Hoffman begins hearing, ordered by Appeals Ct, to determine
whether he or any of Fed marshals at trial had improper communications with
jurors while they were deliberating in Chicago 7 case; 1 of grounds for appeal
is defendants' contention that on 2 occasions jury notified Hoffman that it
could not reach verdict; defendants also allege that Fed marshals improperly
indicated to jurors that they would have to stay until they reached verdict of
some kind; 5 of jurors testify but cannot agree on exactly what happened during
deliberations; 4 of 5 do agree that at least 1 note was sent to Hoffman saying
they could not agree on verdict and that Fed marshal returned to jury room and
told them they should continue to deliberate; those testifying are Mrs S
Seaholm, Mrs J Fritz, Mrs F Robbins, Mrs J Butler, E Kratzke

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              345 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 196 words

Pres Nixon's request for more funds to aid Cambodia seen stirring major debate;
Sen Foreign Relations Com to hold talks on Nixon request; major debate seen over
Cambodian request; Cong coms show little enthusiasm toward approving requests
following briefings by Defense Sec Laird and Sec of State Rogers; White House
officials say aid package is essential to Nixon Doctrine of reducing US mil
commitments; Foreign Relations Com sets hearings on request; Sen critics of
Vietnam war fear US may be repeating Vietnam pattern; Sens Javits, Fulbright,
Church and Scott comment; Laird and Sec Rogers brief Cong coms on Nixon request;
little enthusiasm seen; HR expected to approve it; White House officials stress
fact that aid pkg is essential to Nixon doctrine of reducing Amer commitments;
Nixon's linkage of increased funds to Cambodia with success of Vietnamization
program noted; Javits says result of increased aid could be to give Cambodia
'built-in veto' over Amer withdrawal; Nixon Adm officials, arguing that
supplemental foreign mil aid request bill is essential to Nixon Doctrine of
reducing US mil commitments, hold Cong delay could jeopardize $500-million for
Israel

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              346 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 61 words

US marine helicopter, returning from rescue mission, crashes into mt near
Danang; 15 marines killed, including members of patrol that called for rescue;
Lt Col W G Leftwich Jr was among them; details on incident; US command repts 28
Amers died in Vietnam last wk from nonhostile causes; 1,000-man S Vietnamese
task force opens drive across border NE of Boduc; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              347 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 121 words

Awarding of medals to Amer servicemen has come under rev of Defense Dept, as
result of Forrester case, in Saigon and Washington to determine how much
represents accomplishment and how much has been allowed to lapse into procedure
and pub relations; number of awards for heroism has gone down recently, but Army
has made more awards for meritorious service and achievement in noncombat
situations so far this yr than in all of '68, war's bloodiest period; surge of
interest in awards follows Forrester case; US officers explain rush of awards
this yr as result of Cambodian incursion; make other comments; importance of
awards in promotion system discussed; 3 medals illus; list of awards issued in
Vietnam and other wars

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              348 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

A Lewis comments on Sup Ct rejection of suit by Massachusetts challenging
Nixon's power to carry on Vietnam war without formal declaration of war, which
would, had challenge prevailed, force Cong to define attitude toward war; says
if US again becomes involved in undeclared war, Cong must promptly face
responsibility laid on it by Const

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              349 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 130 words

Mrs K R Stevens, juror in Chicago 7 conspiracy trial who became self-apptd
negotiator in jury's deliberations, testifies she wrote 2 notes about jury's
deadlock and they were read to all jurors before jury foreman, Kratzke, gave
them to Fed marshal R Dobroski; says Dobroski came back each time and said
Hoffman wanted them to keep deliberating; says Dobroski said judge could keep
jury as long as he wished; 4 other jurors testify; 2 cannot remember any
messages going to Hoffman, 2 others remember at least 1 message to Hoffman
concerning jury's inability to reach verdict; Hoffman clashes with defense atty
T Sullivan when latter tries to question Mrs Stevens about articles she wrote
for Chicago Sun-Times after trial describing her role in bringing about
compromise verdict

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              350 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 3

LENGTH: 68 words

Calley trial; R L Pendleton testifies ditch piled with bodies of Vietnamese
civilians was casual target for 2 soldiers who were not members of Calley's
platoon; says some of those in ditch may have been alive; defense attempts to
prove shooting of civilians was not exclusive act of Calley's platoon; Pendleton
is questioned by Raby; G R Oliver testifies there was armed Vietcong soldier in
hamlet who fired

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              351 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 7

LENGTH: 84 words

Defense Sec Laird warns Cong that refusal to provide $155-million in mil aid can
slow Amer troops withdrawal from S Vietnam; Scott makes like statement;
Fulbright announces that J G Lowenstein and R M Moose, com staff consultants,
are being sent to Cambodia so com may have 1st-hand rept before considering
Nixon Adm request; notes Rogers, in Apr 27 testimony before Sen com, expressed
concern that large-scale mil aid would probably be followed by need for Amer mil
advisers and eventually for troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              352 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 64 words

Defense Sec Laird issues statement saying US conducts raids as part of policy
and effort to protect Amer lives; describes raids as 'limited duration
protective reaction' strikes taking place below 19th parallel; says strikes are
in response to attacks on reconnaissance planes; asserts US halted bombing in
'68 with understanding of fact that reconnaissance flights would continue

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              353 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 61 words

Hanoi radio repts 'wave after wave' of US bombers attack targets in N Vietnam,
including POW camp where there were several Amer casualties; says planes attack
targets ranging from Haiphong to Hoabinh Prov, SE of Hanoi; (see also subhead
Mil Action_POWs, N 21 par); repts at least 3 bombers and 1 helicopter downed;
repts considerable number of civilians killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              354 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

Comment on lull in ground action and S Vietnamese assumption of greater fighting
role; comment on Defense Sec Laird statements; US officers hold varying opinions
on reasons for lull; S Vietnamese soldier illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              355 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 30 words

Comment on S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky visit to US says he attempts to
improve his prospects for challenging Pres Nguyen Van Thieu in next yr's
presidential race; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              356 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Ed on US air raids against N Vietnam; says they will arouse concern over their
nature and significance; notes Defense Sec Laird statements and N Vietnam's rept
of depth of raids; says raids are likely to solidify N Vietnamese morale and
make N Vietnam tougher antagonist at conf table

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              357 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 5

LENGTH: 52 words

26 demonstrators arrested when they cross police barricades in act of civil
disobedience following NYC antiwar rally; no violence occurs; R Davis, at rally,
says people of Vietnam are willing to make peace; urges 'unilateral GI
cease-fire'; rally is sponsored by Natl Coalition Against War, Racism and
Repression

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              358 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 74 words

Article on S Vietnamese deserter who has been hiding in his family's house in
Saigon for more than 2 1/2 yrs and loathes his life of fear; he is 1 of
thousands hiding in Saigon and other urban areas; rate of desertion from S
Vietnamese Army has dramatically increased this yr; it is estimated 10,000 to
12,000 desert every mo; police rounded up 1,645 deserters in Saigon during 2 mos
that ended Nov 13; deserters were sent back to their units

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              359 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 42 words

2 small factories in Saigon produce 5 cars a day; jeep-like vehicle, called the
Dalat, has engine and frame made by Citroen Co (France); rest is made in Saigon;
car priced at $1,818, expected to increase to $2,727 after newly imposed import
taxes; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              360 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Mylai trials stir little interest in S Vietnam among S Vietnamese and US
soldiers; S Vietnamese in Saigon know very little about incident; Saigon Govt
never revealed details; only 1 Vietnamese newspaper has published eds; US
soldiers are uninterested in accounts of trials printed in Stars and Stripes
(pub)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              361 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 22 words

Mitchell, who has been acquitted of murder in connection with alleged massacre
in S Vietnam, says he wants to be soldier for life

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              362 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 44 words

US vessels sink presumed N Vietnamese trawler in battle in S China Sea as
trawler attempts to infiltrate S Vietnam; USN says incident is 1st of its kind
since Feb, '68; allied boats search for survivors; USN minesweeper suffers
superficial damage in gunfire exch

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              363 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

Article on USAF and USN reconnaissance efforts over N Vietnam as gleaned from
Govt and other sources; US jet fighters equipped for high-speed reconnaissance
have been flying over N Vietnam almost daily since bombing halt was announced;
planes are unarmed, but each is escorted by at least 3 jets equipped with
rockets and other weapons and authorized to fire back when fired upon; N Vietnam
has repeatedly said flights are violation of air space; US has emphatically
stated it will continue flights and retaliate if planes are fired upon; details

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              364 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

Article on Sen reaction to raids; Muskie deplores 'new reliance on mil
pressure'; holds bombings imply policy shift to force settlement; Aiken is
surprised and concerned; McGovern expresses amazement; Pell is shocked; Dominick
and others support raids; Mansfield says raids mean resurgence of activity; says
they will retard prospects for negotiated settlement; reactions of Hatfield,
Cooper, Sparkman, Baker and Javits noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              365 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 108 words

N Vietnamese spokesman at peace talks calls reporters to N Vietnamese delegation
hq and denounces raids; says they 'gravely affect' talks; hints N Vietnamese
boycott of talks; displays map marking areas of bombardment; says Amer planes
hit provs of Haiphong, Quangninh, Hatay and Hoabinh, causing civilian
casualties; says planes, in 2d attack, bombed Hatinh and Quangbinh Provs; says 6
aircraft were downed; says N Vietnam has downed 127 planes since bombing halt in
'68; reveals other statistics on US air activity over N Vietnam; formal
delegation statement says raids violate US commitment to cease bombardments and
other acts of war; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              366 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 39 words

Hanoi radio broadcasts say 6 US planes have been downed in raids; N Vietnamese
high command communique scores raids; warns of reprisals; Communist Chinese
newspaper ed says N Vietnam has every right to 'annihilate the US aggressors'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              367 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 219 words

US continues heavy bombing in N Vietnam; announced purpose of raids is to
suppress AA installations, but there are indications aim is destruction of war
stocks; Defense Dept officials say bombing ends as scheduled after about 28 hrs;
Congressional reaction to raids ranges from support to shock; Defense Sec Laird
says raids are being conducted against missile and AA sites in retaliation for
downing of US reconnaissance plane 9 days ago, statement; says US will continue
to take protective reaction as necessary to protect pilots of reconnaissance
planes; says raids are also designed to protect pilots interdicting flow of
supplies along Ho Chi Minh Trail; disputes, in effect, N Vietnamese repts that
raids are being conducted as far north as Hanoi-Haiphong area; authoritative
sources say major purpose of strikes is to destroy supplies waiting to be
transported over trail to S Vietnam; Pentagon sources say raids were approved
shortly after downing of reconnaissance plane, but strikes had to await break in
cloud cover; sources say raids are intended to back up warnings to N Vietnam not
to exploit withdrawal of US troops by stepping up infiltration and attacks;
Laird says repts that US planes attacked POW camp are false; various repts on
target areas noted; other details on Laird statements; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              368 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 7 words

US command in Saigon is silent on raids

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              369 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AFP)

LENGTH: 111 words

N Vietnam repts raids; Hanoi shakes from blast of bombs only 25 mi away; repts
tell of dead and wounded from raids, which hit several towns around Hanoi;
Foreign Min warns raids are 'serious threat' to Paris talks; calls raids
'extremely grave acts of war'; details on N Vietnamese rept; observers in Hanoi
view raids as start of US operation aimed at dissuading N Vietnam from aiding
Vietcong; say US doubts success of Vietnamization policy; N Vietnamese high
command communique scores raids; warns of reprisals; Communist Chinese newspaper
ed says N Vietnam has every right to 'annihilate the US aggressors'; pledges
Communist Chinese backing for Vietnamese people

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              370 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

A Lewis comment on air raids against N Vietnam and Defense Sec Laird statements;
says raids indicate Pres Nixon seeks mil victory by another name; suggests Nixon
plans to count on big air strikes to keep Communists off balance while S
Vietnamese forces carry burden of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              371 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 153 words

Article on Pres Nixon's plans for final 2 yrs of his term says that instead of
belaboring Dems for their 'permissiveness' on crime and violence, said to be
planning ways to demonstrate more positive concern with effort to reduce
nation's crime rate; said to be planning new efforts to shift pattern of Fed aid
to colls; Nixon expected to dramatize recall of US combat troops from Vietnam,
build much stronger case for his argument that he has laid groundwork for what
he calls 'generation of peace'; M Frankel comment on Nixon's strategy for 2d
half of his term holds Nixon reptdly is thinking about enunciating new
strategies for developing health care built around specific proposals for broad
health ins program; Nixon aides view sound econ as key to '72 Pres election;
Nixon seen repeatedly disappointed by professional forecasts of econ recovery;
also seen having abandoned hope of full employment by election yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              372 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Part-time NY Times correspondent T C Fox tells of Vietnamese marriage customs in
article on his experiences prior to marrying S Vietnamese woman

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              373 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 206 words

There are increasing indications that air raids against N Vietnam were ordered
by Pres Nixon to deter enemy from offensives throughout Indochina in coming mos;
official silence continues following Defense Sec Laird's announcement;
authoritative informants describe strikes as 'pattern of strategic response'
against rapidly growing enemy buildup along most Indochina fronts; Adm
officials, speaking privately, say that, for time being and barring unforeseen
events, no additional raids against N Vietnam will be made; do not rule out
attacks in other areas; Mansfield indicates he shares view that raids are
related to buildup, TV int; informed sources say raids are consistent with
Nixon's often-stated policy of reprisals if enemy takes advantage of US
withdrawals; cite April 20 s in which Nixon announced withdrawal of 150,000 more
men by May, '71; say Nixon was concerned by repts of rapid enemy buildup; say
series of high-level meetings were held in Washington by Nixon and Special
Action Group, which resulted in recommendations for limited action that would
warn N Vietnam to desist from offensive preparations and that would interfere
with them; say decision for strikes was made at Natl Security Council session at
White House

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              374 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 57 words

In S Vietnam, US command has imposed almost total blackout on information about
air raids against N Vietnam, including routine details normally made pub after
similar raids in past; spokesman limits his remarks to reading Defense Sec Laird
statement; refuses to answer reporters's questions; official silence promotes
speculation about raids

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              375 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 73 words

US resumes normal air strikes against suspected enemy positions; Laotian Govt
spokesman repts N Vietnamese troops have overrun at least 7 Govt outposts within
last 48 hrs, 1st major Communist offensive in '70; enemy's capture of 3 northern
Govt outposts, NE of Pak Ou, poses serious threat to security of Luang Prabang;
Communist commando units edge toward Luang Prabang with apparent plan to take
town's airfield; other clashes described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              376 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 5

LENGTH: 137 words

Conversations with Adm officials suggest information US has on Amer POWs is
limited and imprecise; Defense Dept declines to disclose why it thought Amers
might be held at camp; Manor says planners believed 'good percentage' of Amer
POWs were in camp; some Pentagon officials say Mrs Weiss was source of
information concerning dying POWs; source denies telling Adm anything of the
kind; says she told Govt names of 6 dead Amers because this was information
given her by N Vietnam; Defense Dept says it lists 378 men as known POWs of
approximately 1,500 listed as missing; list includes names of 6 dead men; N
Vietnam publicly acknowledges holding 339 POWs; Govt sources say POWs are held
in more than 4 compounds; only facility N Vietnamese have taken newsman to visit
is 1 wryly known among Amer pilots as 'Hanoi Hilton'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              377 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 99 words

N Vietnamese and Vietcong delegations to Paris talks say they will not attend
next session of talks to protest US air raids, news conf; Xuan Thuy says Nixon
Adm's 'serious acts of war threaten' talks; says his delegation will attend
session sceduled for Dec 3; gives no indication of whether talks will be
affected by further US raids; rules out retaliation against Amer POWs; says that
as excuse for 'acts of war' US invented 'so-called understanding' permitting
reconnaissance missions; N Vietnamese delegation head Xuan Thuy says N Vietnam
will not take reprisals against US POWs for raids

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              378 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 8

LENGTH: 26 words

N Vietnam Sec Gen Thant says air raids are 'disturbing development'; says he
hopes US will abide by its officially announced intention not to continue them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              379 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 45 words

M Frankel sees in Pres Nixon's approval of POW rescue mission his anxiety about
consequences of Amer withdrawal; says attempt, even in failure, is reward for
Nixon; holds Nixon shows his desire to extricate himself and US from Vietnam
war; notes questions mission raises

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              380 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 33 words

USSR reacts officially to US bombing raids with statement affirming support for
N Vietnam but avoiding direct involvement; says 'new provocation' indicates US
seeks to prolong and inflate conflict

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              381 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

French newsman's dispatch on US air raids on N Vietnam; repts presence of US
Shrike missile parts in ricefields in Hanoi; says N Vietnamese authorities
maintain silence on casualties; repts N Vietnamese reaction to raids

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              382 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Marshal R Dobroski testifies he took note from jury to Chicago 7 Judge Hoffman
during jury's deliberations and was ordered by judge to tell jury to continue
deliberations; says he took 2d note to Hoffman and was told by him to instruct
jury that its request to see part of trial transcript was denied

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              383 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 242 words

State Dept does not reply to Fulbright urgent request for top dept officials to
appear at Sen Foreign Relations Com closed hearing on implications of air raids
over N Vietnam; reaction in Sen to raids suggests revival of antiwar sentiment;
Fulbright says actual US policy seems to be to escalate war and seek mil
victory; says rescue attempt has implications of 'much wider war'; says
'physical invasion' is 'provocative act'; concedes idea of rescuing POWs is
'very appealing'; Sen Jackson says attempt is 'fully warranted' in light of N
Vietnam's failure to live up to terms of Geneva conv on POWs; concern of Sens
over consequences of revival of air war overshadows news of rescue attempt; Sen
com members complain that all information they received on raids was through
news media; Defense Dept says some Congressional leaders were informed of raids;
Mansfield and Repr Morgan indicate they were not informed; McGovern scores
raids, s, Sen; Sen sources say raids are likely to complicate even further Adm's
efforts to seek additional aid to Cambodia; State Dept press officer suggests
raids were approved by Natl Security Council; Sen Foreign Relations Com sources
say com, in requesting appearing of State Dept officials at closed hearing,
seeks explanation of how air raids are likely to affect talks; dept has not
replied to request; Adm sources see new US raids over N Vietnam further
complicating Adm request for supplemental appropriations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              384 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 324 words

Defense Sec Laird discloses small task force of Army and Air Force men landed
about 23 mi W of Hanoi at Sontay over weekend in unsuccessful attempt to free
Amer POWs thought to be held at camp there, news conf; says raid was staged
about 1 hr before about 250 US planes attacked targets in N Vietnam; says 2
missions are unconnected; says raid was 1st directed at POW camp and was
approved by Pres Nixon after he was told this mo that some POWs were dying; says
raiding party discovered POWs had moved away; says Amers 'successfully returned
to safety' without suffering single casualty; repts 1 helicopter intentionally
destroyed and 1 man slightly wounded; Laird and men who were in charge of
mission decline to give specific details; Laird leaves open question whether
similar rescue operations may be attempted in future; White House press sec, at
subsequent news conf, says Nixon does not intend to conduct ground activities in
N Vietnam; says Nixon felt possible gains of mission were worth risk; says Nixon
does not expect enemy to take reprisals against POWs; Nixon will meet with Brig
Gen L J Manor and Col A D Simons, 2 officers most directly involved in planning
and executing mission, and who are both present at Laird news conf; illus; map;
news conf after morning briefing at Pentagon had left reporters with impression
that US aircraft might have staged strikes in Hanoi-Haiphong area, as charged by
Hanoi radio; at morning briefing, Deputy Asst Sec Friedheim refused to say
whether US aircraft had also operated N of 19th parellel during raids; Laird
says rescue mission was only operation that took place N of 19th parallel; White
House press sec says Nixon does not intend to conduct ground activities in N
Vietnam, but US will attempt to rescue downed pilots, news conf; Friedheim
disclosed about 200 fighter-bombers and about 50 support planes took part in
raides S of 19th parallel; other details on his account of raids

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              385 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 1

LENGTH: 108 words

Ed saying there is good reason to believe air raids over N Vietnam represent
effort to block Communist buildup in S Vietnam and not simply 'protective
reaction'; says Defense Sec Laird explanation that raids are in response to
downing of reconnaissance plane is not 'very credible'; says credibility of
Adm's explanation is further undermined by repts from French press agency in
Hanoi that raids extended N of 19th parallel; says reopening of air war only
suggests tendency to fall back on policy that has proved futile; says it could
jeopardize prospects for negotiated settlement, which is only way US may still
extricate itself with hon from war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              386 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 1

LENGTH: 19 words

Article on young Vietnamese girl who sells Xmas cards and other items in streets
of Saigon to US soldiers; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              387 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 59 words

US Dist Ct, San Diego, orders USN to discharge Lt R McMahon, member of Concerned
Officers Movement, who signed petition objecting to Vietnam war; rules USN
failed to prove he is not bona fide conscientious objector; USN had held that
group objected to particular war, not war in gen as set forth by US Sup Ct in
recent decision on conscientious objection

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              388 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

O and J Schell lr says recent US air raids against N Vietnam are important part
of emerging strategy of escalation of air war, in which air power is being used
to offset effect of decrease in ground combat

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              389 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

C L Sulzberger, quoting English observers who see shift in war against N
Vietnam, and commenting on bombing raids and their effect, sees emergence of
eventual arrangement, which is ancillary to Paris talks, in which Vietnam will
be partitioned into 2 segments, with neither part recognizing the other for yrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              390 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 127 words

At Chicago 7 trial, Marshal Dobroski, final witness, testifies jury sent only 1
deadlock message during 5 days of deliberations and it was sent on Sat, 1st day
of deliberations; 2 jurors have testified that 2 deadlock messages were sent, 1
on Sun and 1 on Mon; 2 others recall 1 message was sent on Mon; another recalls
message being sent on Sun; 4 others remember at least 1 message but are not
certain on which day it was sent; importance of when message was sent noted;
Dobroski testifies he revd question of communications with Hoffman, with other
marshals who handled jury and with Asst US Attys before current hearing began;
denies he said anything to jury other than to repeat Hoffman's reply to deadlock
message that jury was to continue deliberating

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              391 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 7

LENGTH: 32 words

Amer lawyers M Stavis and P Weiss (husband of Mrs C Weiss), who were in Hanoi
during rescue mission, say they bring back lrs from 320 Amer POWs, news conf,
NYC; say they did not see any POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              392 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 37 words

About 200 persons attend peaceful 1-hr rally protesting US bombing of N Vietnam;
about 100 leave rally and throw rocks at Aero-Astro Sciences Bldg, Stanford U
campus, breaking 49 windows, before being dispersed by police

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              393 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 19 words

N Vietnamese photo shows newsmen viewing fragment of what N Vietnam says is US
Shrike missile, used during raids

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              394 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

Helicopter carrying S Vietnamese troops collides with light US plane in Mekong
Delta; 13 S Vietnamese and 4 Amers killed; no US battle deaths reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              395 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

Excerpts from transcript of Sen com hearing in which Defense Sec Laird testifies
on Vietnam; includes questions by Fulbright, Gore, Aiken, Church and Pell on air
policy; Laird, Fulbright and others illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              396 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 191 words

S Vietnam Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky pictures himself as misunderstood moderate,
'an ex-hawk turned dove', whose primary interest is in ending fighting, s, Natl
Press Club, Washington; insists he has often been misrepresented in Amer press
as 'militarist, a rightist, and Amer puppet and the spearhead of Amer
imperialism'; says he is none of those things; other details on s; he meets with
Pres Nixon and top aides, including Kissinger and Under Sec Irwin; says he
emphasized to Nixon seriousness of econ problems facing S Vietnam as result of
diminished US mil force and rising costs of equipping and maintaining
million-man army; about 75 antiwar demonstrators picket Natl Press Club bldg;
scuffle with police; 2 demonstrators arrested; Secret Service agents conduct
bomb search after unidentified male calls club warning that bomb had been placed
under Nguyen Cao Ky's seat; Nguyen Cao Ky says N Vietnam will return to
bargaining table after wk's absence; says N Vietnam realizes its position grows
weaker and weaker; Ky says rescue mission is justified; lauds courage of
soldiers who participated in raid; Nixon, Nguyen Cao Ky and Bui Diem illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              397 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 65 words

Pope's departure moved up to permit him to visit E Pakistan; other details on
trip; Pope will fly on Alitalia plane; 9-day trip will cover about 24,800 mi;
Pope Paul to stop for hr in Dacca in gesture of concern for stricken; Pope
reptdly plans to broadcast appeal for negotiated peace as plane carrying him to
Philippines passes over Indochina; his recent conf with Cambodian repr noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              398 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 60 words

Revolutionary 'shadow' govt has apparently changed its name from Provisional
revolutionary Govt of the Republic of S Vietnam to Govt of the Republic of S
Vietnam; Western observers reserve conclusions about change; official roles of
Huynh Tan Phat, Nguyen Thi Binh, Nguyen Huu Tho and Tran Nam Trung noted;
Vietcong, Communist China and N Korea protest raids

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              399 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 265 words

Defense Sec Laird says he would recommend to Pres Nixon resumption of full-scale
air attacks on N Vietnam if enemy engages in major violations of tacit
understanding with US that halted bombing in '68, testimony before Sen Foreign
Relations Com; session is televised; Laird refuses to elaborate on what in his
judgment constitutes violations; says he will urge bombing if enemy troops come
across buffer zone; discusses POW rescue mission, which he presents as event
isolated from air strikes; insists US intelligence in planning operation was
'excellent'; session is televised; Laird says all advance information on
location of prison compound was correct, but intelligence could not have known
POWs had been moved because US does not possess camera that 'can see through
roofs'; defends 'protective reaction' strikes as proper response to what he
terms enemy violations of understanding reached in Paris; says, in answer to
Javits question, that strikes are intended to signal enemy that US will not
tolerate setting aside understanding; says downing of a reconnaissance plane
would result in 'immediate protective reactions'; insists Adm policy seeking
negotiated settlement has not changed as result of raids; lists N Vietnam's part
of understanding; says US gave N Vietnam 'message' a wk before strikes saying US
believed understanding had been violated; cites other mil actions as violations
that brought reprisals; other details on his testimony; Aiken urges greater
consultation with Cong on foreign policy; Sen Dole says he will introduce
resolution hailing mission; Laird illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              400 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 122 words

Calley trial; former pilot B W Livingston testifies he saw Vietnamese civilians
cut down by strafing by helicopter as they streamed out of Mylai in panic on
morning of massacre; his testimony does not support defense contention that
alleged victims of Calley might have been killed by airborne machine-gun or
rocket fire, or perhaps by arty; Livingston insists civilians he saw killed from
air were not in areas where Govt contends Calley killed or had killed 2 groups
of civilians; says he also saw '35 to 50' Vietnamese bodies in ditch; testimony
by Livingston, Lt J R Culverhouse and former Warrant Officer D R Millians
supports Thompson testimony on his actions; Culverhouse and Millians give
accounts of Mitchell's presence

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              401 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 60, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

Judge Hoffman decides he needs more time to study trial record before placing
into appeal record his recollections of any communications he might have had
with jury, Chicago 7 trial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              402 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 80, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky meets with Sen Foreign Relations Com;
closed reception is described as 'congenial'; Aiken, Fulbright and Nguyen Cao Ky
comment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              403 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 64 words

Pope says he will be traveling as bishop, pastor and 'fisher of men,' gen
audience; reads latest dispatches from 8 places he will visit and revises ss;
confs with Cardinal Villot; Vatican and US officials surprised by extension of
trip to Pago Pago; Vatican Secretariat of State opposed side trips; Pope known
to have weighed visiting both Vietnams; N Vietnam reacted coolly to bid

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              404 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 115 words

Mrs Weiss accuses Defense Sec Laird of distorting for pol purposes information
on Amer POWs that Com of Liaison with Families of Servicemen Detained in N
Vietnam has been providing, int; voices objections to Laird's implication that
17 men reptd dead by N Vietnamese had died from mistreatment in detention;
contends Nixon Adm seeks to use POW question as 'diversionary tactic' to divert
Amer's attention from escalation of war; Defense Dept spokesman declines to
comment on accusation; charges N Vietnam has refused to observe Geneva conv
provisions for verification of humanitarian treatment of POWs by IRC; Thant
renews plea to N Vietnam to permit IRC or other orgns to see Amer POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              405 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

USN cancels planned visit by newsmen to aircraft carriers in Tonkin Gulf; ban
appears to prevent newsmen from learning more about recent US air raids and POW
rescue mission

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              406 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 130 words

Psychiatrist Dr G Caplan testifies 'brutalizing' of soldier by combat
experience, especially in guerrilla warfare, causes Vietnam veterans serious
problems of readjustment to civilian life, Sen subcom hearing on problems of
veterans; also cites absence of home values in Army and mixed reception
servicemen receive on return; VA head D E Johnson disagrees; Sen Cranston, com
chmn, scores Nixon for failing to aid returning veterans; Sen Yarborough calls
situation of returning veterans 'shameful' and 'disgraceful'; accuses Nixon Adm
of lack of concern for veterans; Johnson, Asst Sec Kelley and Natl Com on Jobs
for Veterans chmn J F Oates Jr defend Adm and argue veterans' affairs have been
given highest priority; details on Caplan's testimony; Johnson discusses VA
efforts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              407 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 39 words

N Vietnam says 'a number' of US POWs were wounded in recent US air raids against
N Vietnam; Hanoi press confirms US rescue mission; N Vietnamese officials are
silent about mission; N Vietnam said not to want publicity about mission

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              408 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

Pravda says rescue mission is 1st step toward 'spreading the land war' into N
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              409 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 2

LENGTH: 37 words

N Vietnamese delegation to Paris talks accuses Defense Sec Laird of lying in his
comments on air raids; Pravda says rescue mission is 1st step toward 'spreading
the land war' into N Vietnam; cites presence of Shrike missile

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              410 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

N Vietnam charges US planes killed at least 49 civilians and wounded at least 40
in raids

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              411 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 308 words

Defense Sec Laird says Nixon Adm disclosed rescue mission last Saturday to avoid
'credibility problem' with Amer pub, testimony to HR com; Sec of State Rogers
says mission is not likely to affect Paris talks; says 'in the absence of
interest, negotiations in themselves have no urgency'; Laird seems to astonish
Congressmen when he says it was not his plan to bring raid to pub attention;
senior Adm officials say US originally had no intention of announcing mission
because it failed; Nixon, at White House ceremony, awards medals for gallantry
to 4 participants in mission; Laird says credibility problem was created by N
Vietnam's accusation that US planes raided Hanoi and Haiphong; says he
recommended mission be revealed because Adm had to 'explain what we did in the
North'; confirms, under questioning by Repr Culver, existence for several days
of situation in which both US and N Vietnam, each for its own face-saving
reason, hoped to avoid telling world of mission; N Vietnam has informed its
population of mission; Nixon Adm appears to turn mission into something of
domestic pol victory; Nixon awards Distinguished Service Cross to Manor, Simons
and Sgt T J Adderly; awards Air Force Cross to Sgt L M Wright; promises US will
do all it can to free POWs; does not explain remark; describes mission as 1 of
'mercy'; Under Sec Irwin and Deputy Under Sec U A Johnson testify before closed
session of Sen Foreign Relations Com; Fulbright calls Irwin's testimony
'helpful'; temporarily blocks Dole resolution; says he fears resolution could be
interpreted as 'approval of policy'; Laird contradicts, in effect, statement
made by Agnew that mission failed because of 'faulty intelligence'; Secs Laird
and Rogers assure HR com that $255-million aid to Cambodia will not represent
beginning of new mil involvement; White House ceremony illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              412 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 241 words

Details on rescue mission in N Vietnam emerge from ints with US officials;
planners of mission had to take into account position of moon and USSR
satellites, and had to gather men from all over world; say mission was executed
in nearly flawless fashion but fell short of mil expectations; raids were
hindered by bad weather and were ended after about 250 strikes, instead of
planned 500; sources refuse to say whether any N Vietnamese guards were
captured; most men on mission came from Ft Bragg, NC, where Army Special Forces
(Green Berets) has its hq; most of training was conducted at Eglin Air Force
Base in Fla; planners are convinced there was no security leak; Simons was
chosen to lead mission because of his special experience in intelligence; senior
mil men of all 4 services were determined that, since N Vietnam had shown no
disposition for POW exch, effort had to be made to free US POWs forcibly;
convinced that White House would never permit widening of war through amphibious
landing, argued that job could be done by special teams using surprise to
overwhelm local guards and extricate prisoners by helicopter; Laird approved
plan in August; Manor was chosen to command group, which included about 80 men;
notes work of SOG, Studies and Operations Group, which has been involved in
sending intelligence teams into N Vietnam and elsewhere; other details; some
members of group being greeted by their families at Ft Bragg illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              413 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 52 words

US bombs supply routes in Laos and Cambodia; Govt rushes reinforcements to Puok
and Kompong Cham; US planes continue reconnaissance operations; Amb Bunker and S
Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu meet, presumbably to discuss recent raids; no
major ground actions involving Amer forces reptd; 1 Amer killed NE of Siagon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              414 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 38 words

Central African Pres Bokassa brings from S Vietnam his long-lost 17-yr-old
daughter Martine, born to Nguyen Thi Hue while Bokassa was serving in French
garrison in Saigon; he lost contact with her and mother when he left country

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              415 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 3

LENGTH: 38 words

D Schoenbrun, in comment recalling his eyewitness observations of US bombing in
'67 and holding that raids conducted then and now are ineffectual, says peace
talks are only 'target' air power can 'destroy effectively'; cartoon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              416 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

N Vietnamese delegation calls news conf to give details in further denial of
assertions in Washington that only mil targets below 19th parallel were
attacked; spokesman says 49 civilians were killed, 40 wounded in raids; says
Shrike missiles were used; French Govt allows anti-Amer street demonstration to
take place in Paris for 1st time since peace talks began; deplores raids

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              417 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 17 words

Army helicopter downed; 2 Amers killed, 3 wounded; battlefield action is light;
clash reptd near Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              418 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 139 words

35-yr-old Bolivian B Mendoza y Amor Flores, who describes self as surrealist
painter and foe of hypocrisy and superstition, hurls self, brandishing kife,
toward Pope at Manila airport mins after Philippine Pres Marcos welcomed Pope;
subdued by Bishop Galvin and held by police; incident illus; Pope's program for
1st day of visit goes off without change; earlier, Pope stopped at Teheran where
he spoke with Shah of Iran and flew to E Pakistan to visit cyclone victims;
before reaching Manila, he sent peace and goodwill messages to Saigon and Hanoi;
at airport ceremony upon departure from Rome, he brushed aside Ital press
criticism of trip; illus with Premier Colombo at Rome; map shows itinerary;
Pope, flying over S Vietnamese territory, sends peace and goodwill messages to N
Vietnamese Pres Ton Duc Thang and to Nguyen Van Thieu

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              419 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

S Vietnamese command repts 33 Vietcong killed in clash north of Saigon; says
Govt troops destroyed 30 bunkers and 19 sampans in Rungsat special zone; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              420 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 179 words

Asst Sec Henkin acknowledges US aircraft struck mil targets near Hanoi recently
during POW rescue mission; says US planes used 'appropriate ordnance'; refuses
to describe ordnance; Defense Dept later announces Shrike missiles, designed to
neutralize missile batteries, were launched near POW camp during mission;
Defense Sec Laird statements recalled; Pres Nixon is quoted as having said air
raid was carried out on mil installation near camp to keep N Vietnamese
helicopters pinned downed before rescue mission; Henkin attempts to draw
distinction between 'protective' operations surrounding mission and wider
bombings of variety of Communist targets; N Vietnamese announcements concerning
mission and air raids recalled; details on Henkin statements; mystery deepens as
to whereabouts of prisoners believed to have been at camp; Henkin refuses to say
if commandos took back N Vietnamese prisoners; announces returning helicopters
picked up 2 downed US pilots in Laos; repts US air raids against N Vietnam were
timed to coincide with attacks on enemy targets in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              421 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          November 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 47 words

45 of 229 aboard DC-8, most of whom were mil personnel bound for Vietnam, killed
as chartered DC-8 on flight from Tacoma, Washington, crashes on take-off from
Anchorage Internatl Airport; illus; survivors and witnesses describe crash;
crash is 3d of chartered craft in recent wks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              422 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Comment on air raids and rescue mission; reaction in Cong and elsewhere
discussed; Defense Sec Laird and Sen Fulbright illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              423 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 66 words

Article on black soldiers contentions that equal opportunity within services is
often more of a cliche than a fact; some instances of racial bias and tensions
noted; illus; graph shows that blacks, who constitute 11.2% of US population,
constitute only 2.1% of officer corps, 9.3% of all servicemen, 10.3% of all
enlisted men, 13.6% of all NCOs and have suffered 12.7% of mil fatalities in
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              424 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

Ed noting statements by Defense Sec Laird and Henkin on prisoner of war rescue
mission, says credibility problem goes well beyond mission to related issue of
US air raids and Vietnamization policy; says Rogers assurances that neither
mission nor raids will affect peace talks are difficult to credit in present
circumstances

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              425 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

Brit cartoons on air raids in N Vietnam and their effect on peace talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              426 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

T Wicker comment on air raids and rescue mission queries where Vietnamization is
taking US; says increased US air raids will hardly improve N Vietnam's
willingness to bargain in talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              427 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 14 words

Former Pres Johnson illus with S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky at Johnson
ranch

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              428 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 20 words

USAF transport carrying 73 S Vietnamese (soldiers and their families) and 6 Amer
crewmen has been missing for 3 days

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              429 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

World conf on Indochina opens in Stockholm; condemnation of US air raids as new
'crime of aggression' is included in statement adopted by nearly 300 delegates
from 16 countries, including US and N Vietnam; Prof S Peck scores Vietnamization
policy, s; Congressman-elect Dellums says his attendance at conf demonstrates
peace forces of US are becoming increasingly effective, s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              430 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 18 words

Cambodian arty pounds suspected Communist hideout near Kompong Trabek after
commando unit is hit by Vietcong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              431 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Article on US missions to rescue downed pilots, directed by 3d Aerospace Rescue
and Recovery Group and said to be more complex than recent US rescue mission
aimed at Amer POWs in N Vietnam; most pilots are downed in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              432 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 119 words

Pope, in broadcast message to Asia from Manila, warns continent against what he
terms militant and aggressive atheism; deplores 'situations of incomplete
development or of unequal distribution'; calls for peaceful coexistence and
correction of injustice; message follows condemnation of 'atheistic Communism'
by pan-Asian bishops' conf, Manila, in motion sponsored by Nationalist Chinese
Cardinal Yu Pin; Pope reptdly rewrote message after hard anti-Communist line
emerged at conf but did not once use word 'Communism'; illus; Pope inaugurates
facilities of Radio Veritas, 6-yr-old Cath broadcasting center in Manila that
beams shortwave programs to areas ranging from Siberia to Vietnam, broadcast
message, Manila

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              433 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 30, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 181 words

Sen Fulbright charges Defense Dept has displaced State Dept as primary
formulator of US foreign policy, particularly in SE Asia, TV int; describes
allied incursion into Cambodia as 'essentially a Defense Dept decision;' says
State Dept played secondary role at best; accuses Laird of misrepresentations
when he testified before Sen com on extent of bombing raids; says those in
Defense Dept 'misrepresent the facts...obviously he (Laird) did and they do it
all the time;' Laird is not available for comment; Henkin says Laird responded
to all questions of Sens and gave 'factual rept' of what happened; Fulbright
says Rogers role in making foreign policy has become 'subsidiary', and
diplomatic complications involved in raid such as POW rescue mission are seldom
considered; Nguyen Cao Ky predicts N Vietnam, in dry season just beginning in
Indochina, will launch major mil campaigns in northern provs, TV int; Fulbright
says Rogers role in making foreign policy has become 'subsidiary', and
diplomatic complications involved in raid such as rescue mission are seldom
considered, TV int

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              434 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 30, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 135 words

Soviet Communist party Gen Sec Brezhnev expresses optimism about chances for
settlement, TV s; cites recent UN votes as indication that Arabs are
overwhelmingly backed by world opinion; says internatl isolation of aggressor is
becoming increasingly evident; stresses need for nonmil means to end Israeli
occupation of Arab territories seized in '67 war; mildness of Soviet comments in
recent wks seen possibly reflecting delicate nature of diplomatic maneuvering
taking place in various capitals and at UN; Brezhev scores US for raids, TV s,
USSR; describes Washington's 1st explanations for raids as 'impudent attempts...
to legalize...banditry, and usurp for the US the right...to do unimpeded
whatever it pleases'; Brezhnev says USSR seeks to improve relations with W Ger,
natl TV s; praises French-USSR ties

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              435 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 30, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 131 words

Comment says wide publicity given POW rescue mission has virtually submerged
questions of whether mission and air raids violated '68 understanding; says
Nixon Adm officials, in private, marvel at Defense Sec Laird's ability to divert
pub attention from issue and put Sen critics of bombing on defensive; notes
little attention has been paid to inconsistencies in official versions of
incidents; cites Nixon Adm position that rescue mission was humanitarian act and
raids were legitimate reprisal for downing of reconnaissance plane; notes some
officials, in private, and former members of Johnson Adm contend raids violate
terms of understanding; says some Congressional quarters are concerned Pres
Nixon seeks to stretch understanding to limit and may conduct massive bombing
raids

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              436 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 30, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 38 words

US command announces US fighter-bomber attacks N Vietnamese AA position; says
site is 5 1/2 mi N of buffer zone, near Laotian border; terms raid 'protective
reaction'; sources say US plane was not fired on but was threatened

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              437 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 30, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 63 words

USN repts allied raiding party recently attacked Vietcong prison camp in Mekong
Delta about same time US unit staged POW rescue mission in N Vietnam; repts 19
Vietnamese were freed; spokesman says allied team escaped without casualties and
took 2 Vietcong as prisoners; details on raid; US mil spokesmen rept increased
fighting over weekend, causing at least 20 Amer casualties

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              438 of 438 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 30, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 3

LENGTH: 31 words

Lr endorsed by group of MIT faculty members cites rescue mission and air raids
in saying that Pres Nixon's 'announced and demonstrated strategy' entails
expanding war in Vietnam; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
