
                               1 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 203 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says S Vietnamese thrust into Laos attained
'biggest victory ever' for S Vietnamese armed forces, news conf, S Vietnamese
Army base at Dongha; insists operation achieved its objectives; news conf said
to be clearly called in effort to offset widespread belief that S Vietnamese
were defeated in their campaign and other reptd results; Nguyen Van Thieu lauds
S Vietnamese troops; emphasizes operation was S Vietnamese operation, taken on
Vietnamese initiative and only 'supplemented' by US air power; says S Vietnamese
decided when to end operation; says he has no knowledge of repts that US air
support will continue for S Vietnamese raids into Laos only for 7 more days;
announces start of 3-day raid; says US only has responsibility of providing
support to all S Vietnamese mil operations; says his army has capability of
attacking N Vietnam 'under some form' whether or not US provides air support;
says he sees no mistakes in Laos incursion; mentions some 'technical
difficultes'; says he thinks 'very fast withdrawal' of S Vietnamese troops was
'good thing'; S Vietnamese paratrooper says enemy was doped with 'no fear'
medicine; Nguyen Van Thieu talking to Hoang Xuan Lam illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 171 words

House Dems, in caucus vote, pass resolution, 138 to 62, calling for end of US
involvement in Indochina by start of '73; resolution goes further than some Dem
Reprs, including Carl Albert, originally wanted; falls short of demands of
leading doves, who pushed for total withdrawals from SE Asia by end of this yr;
Repr Teno Roncalio says 'everyone is reasonably unhappy' with resolution, which
represents compromise; Dems voted 101 to 100 to substitute compromise for more
stringent proposal for withdrawal of troops this yr; Bella Abzug and Ronald
Dellums term caucus action 'victory for Nixon'; Repr Gerald Ford lauds
resolution as strengthening Pres Nixon in 'courageous course he is pursuing';
Dem action is viewed more generally as major step in forcing Nixon to step up
his efforts to end war; Repr Sam Gibbons comments; backers of resolution, in
forcing issue to vote in caucus, had to overcome earlier opposition of Reprs
Olin Teague, Thomas Morgan and Albert; Morgan and Albert say they are satisfied
with compromise

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 158 words

Lt Wm L Calley sentenced to life imprisonment at hard labor for murders of
Mylai, S Vietnam; jury also orders Calley's dismissal from Army and forfeiture
of his pay and allowances, although he will retain his officer's status and
continue to be paid until his case is revd; if sentence is allowed to stand,
Calley will be eligible for parole after serving 10 yrs; Col C H Ford reads
sentence; Col R W Kennedy closes ct; courtroom scene described; about 100
persons wait for Calley's appearance outside ct; Mrs H Crochet says she brought
'8 concerned citizens' to Ft Benning to demand Calley's freedom; G W Latimer
appeals immediately to Talbott for deferment of confinement; says Talbott
promises to consider his appeal and gives assurances that Calley will not be
transferred immediately to Ft Leavenworth; appeal process noted; Latimer says he
hopes Pres Nixon will set aside sentence; says he feels Calley was dealt 'awful
rap'; Calley illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 221 words

24th Soviet party cong begins sanctioned 'debate' on main rept by party leader L
I Brezhnev, apparently remaining unsympathetic to pleas of some Soviet
intellectuals for more creative freedom and for further exchanges of ideas with
West; nearly 5,000 delegates attend session; Politburo member Pyotr Y Shelest
warns that 'ideologists of imperialism' are waging anti-Soviet and
anti-Communist campaign; maintains that Soviet authorities must not 'put up with
any fuzziness in ideology and any grayness in literature and art'; says Soviet
creative artists 'must defend interests of socialist country and its people and
bring crushing blow on bourgeois ideology'; V V Grishin, head of Moscow regional
party orgn, maintains that 'entire enormous apparatus of imperial propaganda' is
aimed at 'splitting socialist soc from within and of instilling in consciousness
of Soviet people, especially youth, bourgeois ideology and morals'; Pyotr
Masherov scores Chinese as slanderers of 'our Leninist party'; N Vietnamese
leader Le Duan avoids getting involved in Chinese-USSR dispute; Le Duan says
both USSR and Communist China have aided N Vietnam; is given hon of being 1st
chief of foreign delegation to s; pledges Vietnamese people will 'resolutely
struggle until final victory' until US gives up its 'aggressive intentions';
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 18 words

2 Amer helicopters shot down while flying cover for Laotian convoy trying to
reach Pnompenh up Mekong River

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

Pres Nguyen Van Thieu announces 'new phase' in S Vietnamese effort to disrupt Ho
Chi Minh Trail, news conf, Dongha; says US helicopters transport small unit of S
Vietnamese troops to attack enemy supply area designated as 611

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 109 words

S Vietnamese troops begin sweeping operation in gen region where Mylai massacre
occurred 3 yrs ago that may leave 16,000 people homeless; Amer sources say no US
mil forces, either ground or air, participate; operation has caused deep fear
among refugee officials; sources say operation violates S Vietnamese Govt
directives, which require clearance in advance for mil operations that will
'generate refugees'; operation takes place in Quangngai Prov, 1 of most insecure
in country; undisclosed number of refugees has already resulted from sweep; mil
sources indicate Laotian operation has led to increased enemy activity in prov;
details on new sweep

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 39 words

S Vietnamese statistics on Laotian operation have created controversy; Amers
tacitly accept figures, although some are so obviously exaggerated as to be
meaningless; S Vietnamese statistics discussed; system of 'body count' discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

White House press sec says Dem resolution to pullout of Vietnam by '73 appears
to support Pres Nixon's policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 7; (UPI)

LENGTH: 36 words

Vice Pres Agnew describes Sen James Fulbright as frustrated Pres candidate who
curries favor with news media and feeds N Vietnam's hope for divided US,
statement replying to Fulbright s criticizing Laos operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 175 words

Reprs B Eckhardt, B Rosenthal, J Dow and A Mikva, with aid of some Vietnam
veterans, seek to prevail upon House Armed Services Com to conduct pub inquiry
into alleged Amer war crimes in Vietnam; hold news conf; Repr F E Hebert seeks
in turn to prevent group from holding its own informal inquiry if com does not
proceed with pub hearings; 1 purpose of news conf is to let 6 veterans give
brief statements describing various acts of torture and killing of civilians
that they say they witnessed; veterans are associated with Citizens Comm of
Inquiry into US War Crimes in Vietnam; J Rifkin, serving as comm spokesman, says
Mylai is 'only the tip of the iceberg' and that Calley is being 'scapegoated';
Eckhardt wrote Hebert early in March to propose com hold pub hearings; Hebert
wrote to Eckhardt saying subcom staff would consider specific allegations;
Eckhardt interprets Hebert statement as assurance that com plans hearings;
Hebert says he only promised allegations would be studied; S Noetzel, at news
conf, tells of atrocities done by Amers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says he was confident justice would punish
those guilty of killings at Mylai, news conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 2

LENGTH: 54 words

Ed says Lt William L Calley jury wisely rejects 'barbarism' of capital
punishment in sentencing Calley to life imprisonment for murders at Mylai; says
Calley's incarceration cannot atone for wider and persisting war crimes against
civilians in Indochina; urges investigation into conduct of war; urges end to
Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 79 words

Enemy troops attack and burn most of Ducduc, dist capital in northern part of S
Vietnam; inflict heavy casualties on civilians and their militia; attack is 2d
heavy enemy blow in area S of Danang; new S Vietnamese attack on N Vietnamese
supply lines in Laos is completed by about 200 to 300 men, flown across border
by US helicopters; 200 S Vietnamese civilians rept killed or wounded in assault
on Ducduc; 18 militiamen reptd killed, 36 wounded; other details on attack; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 1, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 6

LENGTH: 73 words

South Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, in Quotation of Day about South
Vietnamese invasion of Laos, says 'As a general, as a combatant, let me say I am
proud of you, I am proud of your performance. This is the biggest victory ever.
You have caused a psychological breakdown to the Communists, you have hurt their
morale seriously. This year you will achieve more victories. Thanks to these
victories, we will be able to shorten the war'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 183 words

Saigon command repts 2-day battle in central highlands in which N Vietnamese
regiment stormed into S Vietnamese Fire Base 6 and then was pushed out again;
repts bodies of 280 N Vietnamese soldiers, most of them killed by air strikes,
were found by S Vietnamese troops who retook base; S Vietnamese forces reptdly
lost 20 men killed and 25 wounded in attack; mil sources speculate attack and
other recent enemy actions were effort to show that enemy was not badly hurt by
Laotian operation; 2 US helicopters downed while supporting S Vietnamese at fire
base; field repts say S Vietnamese commando unit that was recently airlifted
into Laos has returned to northernmost S Vietnam; official S Vietnamese
spokesman insists unit is still in Laos and has found bodies of 85 N Vietnamese
killed by air strikes; details on recent action; map; illus; S Vietnamese
commando unit, airlifted into Laos previously to strike at N Vietnamese base
area, returned to S Vietnam; official Saigon spokesmen deny they have returned;
insist they found bodies of many N Vietnamese soldiers and large cache of
supplies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 128 words

HR, 293-99, votes to continue draft until June '73; major provisions of bill
include raising required civilian service of conscientious objectors from 2 yrs
to 3, giving Pres authority to abolish undergrad deferments and exempting men if
member of immediate family had been killed, disabled or listed as missing;
rejects number of amendments, including one to bar assignment of draftees to
Indochina without their consent; votes $2.68-billion increase in armed forces
pay and other benefits; Repr W F Ryan's amendment to force withdrawal of all US
troops from Indochina by end of '71, fails to get 20 supporters required for
recorded vote; Repr J R Rarick amendment to draft legis prohibiting murder
indictment of soldier for combat incident is rejected on voice vote

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 247 words

Reprs J J Flynt and P M Landrum, conservative Dems from Ga, announce they will
vote against extension of draft because they can no longer approve of sending
Amers to fight in undeclared war US does not have will to win or end; Sen H
Scott scores some Dem critics of Pres Nixon's policy; conviction of Lt W L
Calley Jr, who was convicted of murder in connection with alleged massacre at
Mylai in '68, said to appear to introduce new element in Vietnam debate, with
ironic effect of bringing hawks and doves together in opposition to war; House
doves cheer shift of John J Flynt and Landrum; Flynt calls for 'realistic
approach' and 'hard new look' at what war is doing to US; blames war for
division in US; Landrum notes it is 1st time he publicly states his opposition
to war; Flynt says he has received messages from his constituents with common
theme that if Calley is to be treated in way he is, young men should not be
compelled to fight in Vietnam; Sen Repubs demonstrate increasing sensitivity to
developing of Dem position in favor of total withdrawal by end of '72 and rising
criticism of Nixon policy; Sens R Taft, L Weicker, W Brock, G Beall, C Hansen
and W Saxbe score Nixon's critics; Sen W Fulbright raises questions of whether
under principles laid down in Nuremberg trials, such officials as former Pres L
B Johnson, Gen W C Westmoreland and Gen C W Abrams should not also be brought to
trial, TV int; says he does not advocate such a course; notes war crimes issue

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 171 words

Charges that possibility of S Vietnamese offshore oil reserves is influencing US
policy continue to be made among wide spectrum of war opponents; charge that US
may seek to prolong its mil presence in order to protect Amer oil interests is
becoming muted; new critics argue US oil cos are being encouraged to develop
possible Vietnamese oil reserves as part of 'econ Vietnamization' process and to
enhance pol position of S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu and Vice Pres Nguyen
Cao Ky; accusations grow even though Saigon Govt has again postponed calling for
bids on offshore oil concessions; Saigon sources rept postponement is result of
pol furor oil issue has raised in Vietnam and US; comments of speakers at Amer
Friends Service Com seminar noted; State Dept officials say it is true US seeks
to encourage investment in S Vietnam to help its econ development; many oil cos
have shown interest in country's offshore potential resources, notably Amer 'big
five' oil cos; Gulf Oil, Standard Oil (NJ) and Texaco comment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Article on plight of Amer infantrymen who have been patrolling Khesanh area of S
Vietnam since Jan 30; infantrymen feel they are 'forgotten men'; their comments
noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 82 words

Max Frankel says verdict in Lt W L Calley trial and confusion over Laos invasion
have combined to produce new phase of Indochina debate in Washington; says
central element of debate is issue of date for final US disengagement; says it
is clear from polls and discussions in Cong that US is becoming increasingly
united in its desire to quit Indochina sooner rather than later and, for growing
segment of population, regardless of consequences in Vietnam; discusses Nixon
stand on withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 31 words

US command repts 58 Amers killed, 542 wounded in combat last wk; S Vietnamese hq
announces 756 S Vietnamese killed, 1,726 wounded last wk; allied commands rept
3,574 enemy killed last wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 42 words

Cambodian convoy carrying vital petroleum and ammunition arrives safely at port
near Pnompenh after having been delayed for 2 days by Vietcong gunners; attacks
by S Vietnamese-Cambodian force, aided by US air support, enabled convoy to
arrive safely

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 18 words

N Vietnamese forces launch heavy attack around Luang Prabang, Laos, recapture
strategic hilltop position

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

More than 400 student presidents and coll eds sign open lr to Pres Nixon
condemning his Vietnam war policies and charging Adm 'seriously misinterprets
the mood of both the campus and the countryside'; statement is signed by largest
number of student leaders to sign such a protest against war; some schools
represented listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 35 words

Vietnam Veterans Against the War stages peace rally on Wall St; 1 speaker says
all Amers are 'guilty' for having allowed war to continue; says 'United States
of Amer' is 'real guilty party' in Lt W L Calley case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 3

LENGTH: 110 words

Vice Pres Agnew calls critics of war 'home-front snipers' and accuses them of
having fostered negative attitude toward Amer combat veterans, s, VA Volunteer
Service meeting; says war has been described almost daily as worthless and
immoral by some 'leading members of the US Sen, prestigious columnists and news
commentators, academic figures' and others; says Pres Nixon, most of Cong and
great majority of other Amers feel that soldiers have 'served their country
honorably and well'; charges critics of Vietnam war foster negative attitude
toward returning veterans, further complicating their readjustment to civilian
life; makes other comments; Agnew illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 47 words

FBI confirms that it has questioned relatives of Amer POWs about liaison com;
Dir J E Hoover says com was investigated to see if it was in violation of
Foreign Agents Registration Act; another bur spokesman says investigation was
terminated in Dec, '70, without any prosecutions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 197 words

Pub and private sectors in US, in variety of ways, express growing opposition to
conviction and sentencing of Lt W L Calley for murders at Mylai, S Vietnam; more
than 1,200 telegrams delivered to Ft Benning courthouse, thousands of lrs
delivered to Calley's apartment; radio stations rept thousands of calls
denouncing verdict; Vice Pres Agnew refuses to comment specifically on case, but
says conditions during mil operation are not 'subject to Monday morning
quarterback judgments'; Indiana Gov E Whitcomb orders all state flags flown at
half-staff to protest conviction and sentencing; comments on conviction; Utah
Gov C Rampton scores verdict and sentence; Ga Gov J Carter proclaims April 5
'Amer Fighting Men's Day' in state and urges residents to display flag and drive
with headlights on; Ark Sen and House approve resolution asking Pres Nixon to
grant Calley exec clemency; Kan Sen adopts resolution that Calley be freed;
similar resolution is passed in Tex Sen and introduced in Tex House; support for
Calley from several individuals noted; soldiers and veterans complain of
verdict; Stafford County, Va, draft bd resigns in protest over case; marches
planned in some cities

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Saigon authorities ban April 4 issues of Time and Newsweek from sale in S
Vietnam for articles considered 'hostile to natl security'; action marks 2d wk
in row that magazines have been banned

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 23 words

NJ Sen passes resolution asking Pres Nixon to speed up rev of Lt William
Calley's case; Calley is convicted of murders at Mylai, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 2, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 6

LENGTH: 38 words

Pvt Peter Kucharik, in Quotation of Day about serving in South Vietnam, says 'I
never thought that the bush would be like this. My friends at home told me the
war was nearly over and it wasn't as bad out here as it used to be'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 110 words

Lt William L Calley, convicted of murders at Mylai, S Vietnam, spends his 1st
day out of stockade greeting parade of visitors that includes Alabama Gov
Wallace, who will appear at Columbus, Ga, rally for Calley; Wallace is
accompanied by his wife and 8 members of Alabama Legislature; talks alone with
Calley for about 15 mins; says he does not criticize ct-martial, but says Pres
Nixon should grant Calley full pardon; makes other comments; at rally, more than
3,500 hear Wallace and Lt Gov Maddox again express their belief that Calley
should be pardoned; scene at Calley's apartment described; Calley is visited by
Major K Raby; Wallace and Calley illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 45 words

US helicopters fly out of Quangtri as US closes down its support role for
Laotian operation; Khesanh is reptd almost deserted; a few hundred Amers remain
at Langvei; little combat action reptd; enemy gunners shell Ducduc; 1 person
killed, 6 wounded in explosion in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 4

LENGTH: 74 words

GI Press Service ed Robert Wilkinson says he will go to Vietnam to investigate
effect of Army directive confiscating antiwar literature addressed to soldiers
in Vietnam; says he will try to determine how many antiwar mailings have been
intercepted by Army under directive; says he will be accompanied by several
attys; HR subcom recently sent Defense Sec Melvin Laird lr stating directive
violates postal laws and asking that it be rescinded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 45 words

Congressmen receive mail and telegrams on Lt William L Calley case; messages
from South are heavy, are moderate or light from elsewhere; virtually all
messages take Calley's side; Cong aides comment; Calley was convicted of
murdering 22 civilians in Mylai, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 147 words

Pres Nixon's order releasing Calley from stockade continues to receive
widespread pub and private support; protests against conviction for murder of 22
civilians in Mylai, S Vietnam, and sentence mount across country; various
protest actions noted; Calley's family issues statement on verdict; statement
thanks people who have given their support and expresses appreciation for Nixon
order; Rainwater lauds Nixon; former Army Capt R F Marasco, who allegedly fired
fatal shots in controversial Green Beret slaying of suspected S Vietnamese
double agent 2 yrs ago, says he is 'incensed' by verdict, TV int; former Atty
Gen R Clark says he does not believe Calley deserves Pres clemency because of
the 'emotion of the moment'; Mitchell says he is concerned about 'whole
picture'; Dr B Spock says conviction is 'ultimately hypocritical'; members of
several draft bds resign in protest

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 59 words

Repub Reprs R Lawrence Coughlin, Marvin L Esch, Gilbert Gude, F Bradford Morse
and Charles A Mosher send lr to their House colleagues urging Cong action to end
war; lr says US has fulfilled its commitment to S Vietnam and should leave; says
Cong and Pres Nixon are in agreement on goal of US policy; lauds Nixon for
substantially reducing number of troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 28 words

Western White House says telegrams continue to pour in at rate of 100 to 1
favoring clemency for Lt William Calley, convicted of murdering civilians in
Mylai, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 72 words

Gen William C Westmoreland says he is surprised at outcry following Lt William L
Calley conviction, news conf; says it is 'absurd' to accuse him of sharing
guilt; says it was clearly known by troops that they were to avoid civilian
casualties at all costs; says Army has obligation to punish atrocities; admits
many civilians have been killed in Vietnam War, but puts responsibility on
troops 'led' by inexperienced lts and sgts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 33 words

Brig Gen H B Hester (ret) lr, noting Yale U Pres Kingman Brewster's recent
comment on moral responsibility for spread of Vietnam War, scores US policy;
holds Nixon Adm tries to silence 'moral note'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 115 words

Anthony Lewis, noting figures on civilian casualties and refugees, queries
whether US goals in Vietnam War justify use of mil means to attain them, 1st
part of survey on war; says Lt William Calley verdict raises for millions of
Amers 'terrible questions' about responsibility for things that have happened in
war in last 6 yrs; notes difficulty of defining 'war crimes'; says its seems
unlikely that Pres Nixon can go on much longer showing little or no sensitivity
to human cost of war; says more and more Amers want to stop killing all over
Indochina; says concerns of Amers must have serious impact on Nixon's pol
options; comments on Sen Edward M Kennedy subcom estimates on refugees

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 2

LENGTH: 79 words

War Resisters League aide David McReynolds urges audience at City Hall Pk, NYC,
rally to participate in April 24 Vietnam antiwar rally in Washington; predicts
'several thousands will be arrested' as demonstrators use 'nonviolent tactics'
to close down 'war agencies' of US; SCLC program dir H Williams holds blacks in
South would be better off without school integration because integration has
turned out to mean resegregation for students and elimination of black teachers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 30 words

Pvt M A Schwartz, convicted of murdering 12 Vietnamese women and children near
Danang in Feb, '70, released from Portsmouth, NH, naval prison; was sentenced to
life imprisonment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 162 words

Former Capt R F Marasco, 1 of 8 Green Berets who were charged but never tried in
slaying 2 yrs ago of Thai Khac Chuyen, S Vietnamese suspected to have been
double agent, says he shot and killed Thai Khac Chuyen on 'oblique yet very,
very clear orders' from CIA, int; says it was his responsibility to 'eliminate
him with extreme prejudice'; says 'elimination' was approved up and down chain
of command; refuses to divulge names of other persons involved; says he admits
complicity out of sense of anger over conviction of Lt W L Calley Jr, who was
convicted on charges of premeditated murder stemming from alleged massacre in
'68 in village of Mylai; Marasco's statements coincide with publication of novel
based on incident involving agent; authors of novel are Robin Moore, and Henry
Rothblatt, atty who represented several Green Berets; case recalled; Marasco
corroborates details of case; Marasco illus; CIA says it has no comment to make
concerning Marasco's statement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 203 words

White House announces Pres Nixon will personally rev and decide Calley case
'before any final sentence is carried out'; Army Lt W L Calley Jr has been
sentenced for murder of at least 22 S Vietnamese civilians at Mylai; Nixon's
decision raises possibility that case could reach final decision much earlier
than 4 or 5 yrs that might be consumed in rev process; John D Ehrlichman, lawyer
who is Nixon's chief domestic adviser, announces decision; says decision arose
from Nixon's judgment that case, 'having captured the attention of the Amer
people to the degree that it has,' requires 'more than the technical rev'
provided by Code of Mil Justice; says decision adds another qualitative
'ingredient' to rev process; says Nixon is 'trying to be very scrupulous not to
interfere' with judicial process; says Nixon has right to rev under his const
authority as Comdr in Chief of armed forces; says Nixon will begin rev only
before sentence is put into operation at any level of mil appeals procedure;
details on appeals process; Ehrlichman says Nixon made decision only after
careful consultation with Mitchell, Laird and lawyers in Cabinet; says other
alternatives were debated; makes other statements; Ehrlichman illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 42 words

Central Conf of Amer Rabbis calls on Pres Nixon to withdraw all Amer mil forces
from Vietnam by end of this yr; orgn's exec bd condemns 'unspeakable tragedy' of
war; orgn pres Rabbi R B Gittelsohn accuses Nixon of 'playing word games' with
Amer people

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 18 words

Curfew hrs for Amer servicemen in Saigon have been readjusted to conform with
existing Vietnamese curfew

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 197 words

Intelligence repts reaching Washington indicate continuing N Vietnamese buildup
N of buffer zone and new enemy troop movements in Laos, Cambodia and northern
part of S Vietnam; Amer intelligence specialists say N Vietnamese retain
capability of maintaining, at least until dry season ends next mo, hit-and-run
operations throughout Indochina; White House and Defense Dept interpret recent
attacks as attempt to disguise losses suffered during S Vietnamese incursion in
Laos; civilian intelligence specialists are inclined to regard hit-and-run
operations as designed to keep Saigon Govt and US off-balance throughout
Indochina; at root of difference of interpretation is disagreement on damage
suffered by N Vietnamese in Laos; disagreement over N Vietnamese plans adds to
differences in Adm over N Vietnamese intentions and capabilities; intelligence
officials outside White House now say allies may have been faulty in
underestimating N Vietnam's capacity to respond to Laotian drive; US civilian
intelligence experts rept N Vietnam is engaged in major new effort to streamline
its pol and econ insts as part of what Amer analysts regard as plans for
indefinite pursuit of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

200 ad people from NYC gather at Yale Univ to discuss strategy on 'unselling'
Vietnam war to Amer people; hear speakers on diverse topics related to war;
roles of Ira Nerkin and David McCall in effort noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 153 words

Accts by Atty Gen Guido Berro, recently freed by Uruguay's Tupamaros after being
held for 13 days, strongly suggest Tupamaros are using tunnels under Montevideo
for communications and spying hideouts and jails for hostages; Berro repts he
talked to hostage Amb Geoffrey Jackson who, he repts, spends most of time naked
or wearing shorts because of intense heat; says all prisoners are kept
blindfolded at all times except when confined in cells, are drugged and kept
unconscious in some cases; describes Jackson's jail as 'deep cellar with noisy
ventilators'; Tupamaros have largely ignored countryside, announcing they will
use Montevideo streets and houses in same way Natl Liberation Front has used
jungles and countryside of Vietnam; UTE, Govt agency administering elec power
and all communications, believed to be infiltrated; Berro kidnapping by
Tupamaros dressed in uniforms of UTE telephone repairmen cited

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 1

LENGTH: 148 words

Harvard Univ administrators have been meeting almost continuosly with students
since disruption of Vietnam pro-war teach-in to express their concern over need
to protect free speech; Dean John T Dunlop says disruption was most serious
thing to have happened at Harvard since he has been there; most faculty members
seem to concur in Dunlop's judgment that disruption violated principle of free
expression; students seem to be less upset, but adm is trying to make them take
incident more seriously; Faculty Council recently endorsed 'declaration of free
speech' condemning incident; Profs E O Reischauer and E Mendelsohn comment on
incident; majority of students hold disruption was deplorable both as immoral
act and as tactical blunder in terms of antiwar movement; there is absence of
student demands for leniency or amnesty in connection with punishment for those
who caused disruption

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Harvard Univ admrs and faculty members voice major concern over disruption of
Mar 26 Vietnam pro-war teach-in; meet continuously with students to impress upon
them need to protect freedom of speech; 18-member Faculty Council endorses
'declaration of free speech,' scores incident

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 56, Column 3

LENGTH: 42 words

Verdict in Lt William L Calley trial said to bring home Vietnam War's anguish to
Amer pub; questions relating to war raised by verdict noted; views on war of
some Amers discussed; Calley has been convicted of murdering civilians in Mylai,
S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 56, Column 3; (GP)

LENGTH: 62 words

Gallup Poll finds 79% of Amers disapprove of Lt W L Calley's conviction for
murders in Mylai, S Vietnam; finding is based on nationwide telephone survey of
522 adults and was commissioned by Newsweek (pub); majority of those int hold
Calley is scapegoat; poll finds 83% support Pres Nixon's order releasing Calley
from stockade; questions asked in poll and results listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 57, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

William M Kunstler, who has served as defense counsel for many antiwar groups,
accepts Notre Dame Univ's '71 Senior Fellow Award with call to end Vietnam War
now, s, award ceremony

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 57, Column 5

LENGTH: 21 words

Wounded US soldiers at Memphis Veterans Hospital are bitter over Lt William
Calley conviction for murders at Mylai, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 65 words

Comment on Pres Nixon's dilemma concerning Vietnam War; effect of Laotian
operation on Nixon's Sen critics noted; James W Fulbright's comments and
switching of stands by Phil Landrum and John Flynt discussed; Nixon not expected
to alter his policy; comment on renewed pressures on Nixon to end Amer
involvement in Indochina; speculation on how he will justify results of Laotian
incursion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

Amer mil officers, Saigon, doubt that Communist attacks in S Vietnam can be
explained as 'revenge' for Laotian operations; see attacks as indication that
enemy was not too badly hurt by mil action; note continuing shipment of supplies
along Ho Chi Minh Trail; enemy damage to S Vietnamese soldiers discussed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 124 words

Ed says outcry over Lt William V Calley conviction does not alter correctness of
judgment reached by jury; says Pres Nixon's intervention in case is 'unfortunate
interference with the process of mil justice'; notes 'precipitous manner' in
which Nixon acted; says announcement that Nixon will make final decision creates
'prejudicial atmosphere' affecting intermediate steps in appeals process; says
'it is all too clear' Nixon bowed to pub pressure; scores Vice Pres Agnew's
recent remarks on trial; lauds jury; says task of Nixon and other pol leaders is
to address themselves to issues Calley trial has brought into focus: question of
responsibility at higher levels for acts committed at Mylai and elsewhere and
problem of ending Vietnam War

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 23 words

James Reston says Lt William V Calley case indicates US has been corrupted by
Vietnam War; says reputation of US is at issue now; cartoon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 0

LENGTH: 32 words

Com for Peace and New Priorities ad calls for grassroots support for push in
Cong to approve resolution setting Dec 31, '71 as firm date for complete
withdrawal of US troops from Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 19 words

Article on treatment of wounded US soldiers at combat station in Khesanh, S
Vietnam; some medics comment; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

Illus of US soldier taking cover during mortar attack on outpost near Langvei, S
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 223 words

Mil spokesmen rept S Vietnamese troops repulse another fierce attack on Fire
Base 6; S Vietnamese officials rept 242 N Vietnamese killed in latest assault;
base has changed hands twice in 4-day battle; US arty fire and bombing support S
Vietnamese defenders; S Vietnamese losses put at 7 killed and 22 wounded; 1,437
enemy have been killed in 4-day battle; S Vietnamese losses for battle put at 68
killed and 104 wounded; informed sources say they are much higher, with more
than 200 killed, wounded or missing in 1st 2 days of battle; details on battle;
some mil quarters are skeptical of S Vietnamese repts of number of enemy troops
killed in battle; US bombers continue their attacks on Ho Chi Minh Trail;
intelligence repts say N Vietnamese are redoubling efforts to get men and
supplies through to S Vietnam; US command repts 4 Amers killed, 6 wounded in
accident involving arty near Camlo; enemy shells Ducduc, but inflicts few
casualties; N Vietnamese repts say Vietcong forces say they have killed more
than 1,000 allied troops in attacks on about 100 positions in S Vietnam in last
wk; last Amers pull out of base near Laotian border; US bn near Khesanh is
expected to move back to Quangtri in few days; map; US bombers continue attacks
on Ho Chi Minh Trail; N Vietnam reptdly redoubles efforts to get men and
supplies through

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 57, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

M Schwartz returns to his W Va home; says he wants to return to Vietnam; his
case is in appeal stage

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 100 words

US officials are disturbed by lack of information from Amer advisers in field
concerning real state of pacification in Vietnam; problem was pointed up
recently when, according to pacification official, Amer aide in field described
corruption, incompetence and other shortcomings in carrying out program; aide
did not bring defects to attention of hq until he submitted his final rept; case
was outlined in memo sent out in Feb by Richard Funkhouser, deputy for Civil
Operations and Rural Development Support in Mil Region III, area which includes
Saigon; details on aide's rept and Funkhouser's memo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 30 words

S Vietnamese Gen Hoang Xuan Lam says enemy gunners damaged 608 US helicopters
and downed 104 during Laotian operation, rept; says about 450 Amers were killed
in support of operation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 6 words

Article on local scene in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 151 words

Sr US officials regard US-USSR relations as in 'indeterminate state' in which
minor irritants often tend to overshadow major pol issues; see 2 nations on at
least 4 issues, SALT talks, Berlin, Mideast and Vietnam, widely separated; find
party leader Leonid Brezhnev and Min Gromyko ss to Soviet party cong cautious
and suggesting that USSR is interested in improving ties, but question
inference, particularly in Gromyko s, that US is to blame for stalemates in SALT
talks, Berlin negotiations and Mideast talks; White House and State Dept have
analyzed ss; Kissinger ordered immediate White House analysis of Gromyko's;
situation on major issues summarized; officials say preparation of Pres Nixon's
coming s on war is 1 reason for urgent US interest in recent ss by USSR leaders;
Adm still hopes USSR will play positive role in settlement of war; is resigned
to continued USSR support for N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 57 words

Sens John S Cooper and Frank Church say they plan new amendment that will ask
Pres Nixon to set date for total withdrawal from Vietnam of all US forces, TV
int; say measure will give Nixon negotiating tool; doubt if McGovern-Hatfield
amendment will be passed by Cong; Cooper says McGovern-Hatfield amendment does
not solve certain problems

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Anthony Lewis, in 2d part of series, says patience of Amer people with Vietnam
War diminishes; holds Laotian operation suggests there is no foreseeable time
when S Vietnamese forces can be expected to carry whole mil burden themselves;
says logical conclusion from all this would be to change US policy; says change
would be accomplished by Pres Nixon setting fixed date for withdrawal of all US
forces; says it is possible Nixon will resist 'logic of the battlefield and of
the Amer conscience'; says Nixon may order aggressive tactic

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 85 words

Professional Amer and S Vietnamese soldiers who have assessed favorably recent
operations in Laos have been unpleasantly surprised by last wk's heavy enemy
attacks in S Vietnam; claims of immediate success Saigon made for Laotian
operation were deflated last wk by 3 enemy raids; attacks strike hard blow to
many Amer soldiers; details on raids, which are said to give N Vietnam
psychological and pol victory, on Laotian and Cambodian operations, and on
action in U Minh Forest and near Khesanh; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 6

LENGTH: 44 words

Sen J W Fulbright, in Quotation of Day about US view of communism, says 'When it
comes to anti-Communism, as we have noted in Vietnam and elsewhere, the United
States is highly susceptible, rather like a drug addict, and the world is full
of ideological pushers'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

US command announces reduction of 4,600 Amer troops, dropping total number of
troops in Vietnam to 301,900; other reductions lower total to 300,000 or less

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 144 words

S Vietnamese Sens Tran Quang Thuan and Ton That Niem predict Gen Duong Van Minh
could win pres election if voting were free and honest, int; are members of
Sen's electoral comm; say Duong Van Minh could defeat Pres Nguyen Van Thieu;
have spent last 10 days in Washington meeting with members of Cong, Adm
officials and others in effort to obtain US support for free elections; will
conf with Sec Gen Thant; do not predict whether or when Duong Van Minh will
proclaim his candidacy; Sen Stevenson introduces resolution calling on Pres
Nixon to 'implement a policy of strict neutrality' in S Vietnamese elections;
resolution also provides for creation of comm consisting of 5 Sens and 5 Reprs
and special staff to oversee activities of US Govt and its citizens during
campaign; is supported by several Sens, including Mansfield, Humphrey, Muskie,
McGovern and Kennedy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

US officers complain S Vietnamese forces pulling back after their retreat from
Laos left ammunition at bases in NW corner of S Vietnam; S Vietnamese send
trucks to carry ammunition toward Quangtri

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 11 words

S Vietnamese commandos stage another raid against Ho Chi Minh Trail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Peasants of hamlet of Phuqui have returned home 2 yrs after having been forced
from their huts during Amer mil sweep; their lives are disrupted and many are
bitter and hostile toward S Vietnamese Govt; conditions in hamlet discussed;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 8

LENGTH: 30 words

Baseball season opens, Washington, DC; Sgt D L Pitzer, former Vietnam POW,
officiates as substitute for Pres Nixon; illus; Defense Sec Melvin R Laird reads
message from Nixon; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

Ed says Pres Nixon is tempted to accent positive as he draws up balance sheet on
Laotian invasion for his rept to nation on further Amer troop withdrawals; urges
realistic assessment; says there were clearly few gains in invasion; notes debit
side of operation; holds S Vietnamese Govt now confronts reality that there is
no mil solution to its problems

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Repr Paul N McCloskey, who leaves for fact-finding tour of Vietnam, int;
comments on war; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 4

LENGTH: 25 words

Don Luce, describing conditions in S Vietnam, urges end to war now; makes
several proposals, including immediate withdrawal of all US troops; cartoon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 6, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 55 words

Fire Base 6 is under heavy shelling; withstood recent wave of N Vietnamese
ground attacks; Maj Gen Ngo Dzu says base is vital to security of central
highlands; says it is encircled by enemy; details on action at and near base;
Saigon command says 1,914 N Vietnamese and 61 S Vietnamese have been killed in
fighting at base; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 7, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 89 words

200 S Vietnamese commandos are landed in Laos behind smoke screen for 10-hr
attack on base area on Ho Chi Minh Trail; raiders, transported by US
helicopters, rept finding bodies of 15 N Vietnamese soldiers apparently killed
by US air strikes; rept destroying some supplies; other details on raid; last US
troops pull out of Khesanh; N Vietnamese forces keep up pressure against S
Vietnamese frontier post in central highlands; Saigon mil spokesman repts 56
enemy killed in enemy attack on S Vietnamese troops about 300 mi N of Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 7, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 21 words

Cambodians reptdly kill over 130 Vietcong soldiers in battle across from Kompong
Cham; put their losses at 6 killed, 34 wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 7, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 13 words

N Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces overrun 7 Govt positions in northern Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 7, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 249 words

Group of liberal House Dems announces plans to conduct pub, informal hearings
into 'command responsibility' for US 'war atrocities' in Vietnam; Repr Ronald
Dellums says group proceeds with plans for 4 days of hearings in Cong hearing
room because of refusal of Cong leadership and com chmn to conduct full-scale
Cong inquiry into Amer war crimes, news conf; Reprs Abzug, Conyers and Mitchell
join in move; move may provoke confrontation with House leadership over how to
proceed with war crimes issue that has come to fore in Cong with Lt William
Calley's conviction; Dellums says he has received permission from Speaker Albert
to use Caucus Room for war crimes hearings, which will begin April 26; Albert
says he cannot recall granting permission for use of room; Reprs, who are doves,
see in hearings opportunity to crystalize pub opinion against war by
highlighting what Abzug calls 'sickening realities' of US policy; some Reprs
said to have reservations about hearings; pressure on Cong doves for war crimes
hearings has come from Citizens Commission of Inquiry on US War Crimes in
Vietnam and Vietnam Veterans Against the War; R Bartek and G Heyward, West Point
grads who have served in war, are present at news conf; will offer themselves as
witnesses at hearings; Sen Hatfield, as step toward promoting inquiry into
'moral consequences' of US actions in war, introduces into Cong Record 900 pages
of testimony taken earlier this yr by veterans group at war crimes hearing in
Detroit

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 7, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

6 former soldiers, members of veterans group, tell legislators in Albany, NY of
their 'war crimes' in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 7, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 44 words

Army spokesman says 81 US soldiers have been charged with crimes in Vietnam
similar to that for which Lt William Calley was convicted; says of 81 men, 38
were convicted for premeditated murder of civilians, 20 were convicted for
lesser crimes and 23 were acquitted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 7, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 43 words

Sen Vance Hartke, in Paris, says US could end its involvement in Vietnam war by
setting date for withdrawal by end of yr; makes statement after talks with 4
delegations attending peace talks; notes Communist proposals on troop
withdrawals and other matters

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 7, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 41 words

Article on location of US troops throughout S Vietnam; some details on their
activities; illus; map; US soldiers in Vietnam await Pres Nixon s on
withdrawals; about 100,000 US soldiers are still actual combat troops; roles of
other troops noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 7, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 4

LENGTH: 42 words

Former S Vietnamese Min Ho Thong Minh lr, noting James Reston's March 26 (39:1)
column, says re-election of Pres Nguyen Van Thieu would mean prolongation and
intensification of Vietnam War that might cost Pres Nixon very dearly in '72
Pres election

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 7, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 277 words

Sen George Aiken predicts Pres Nixon will announce in his televised s schedule
that will lead to removal of all Amer forces from Vietnam by sometime next yr;
makes prediction after he and 9 other Repub Sens have dinner with Defense Sec
Melvin Laird and Sen Jacob Javits's home; 10 Sens, most of whom are on record in
favor of deadline for end to US involvement, tell Laird that Nixon should offer
some sign that end to Amer participation is in sight; Aiken notes that in last 2
wks Nixon, without any publicity, has speeded withdrawals by almost 50%;
predicts Nixon will announce future monthly withdrawal rate of 18,000 men;
little likelihood seen that Nixon will set terminal date for US participation;
Defense Dept spokesman says Aiken is correct in that more than 4,000 men have
been withdrawn in each of last 2 wks; says recent acceleration 'has really no
meaning' because pace of withdrawals has always been faster at end of withdrawal
period; says it certainly should not be taken to portend future schedule; Sens
Scott, Cooper, Cook, Mathias, Percy, Stevens, Weicker and Schweiker are other
Sens who attend dinner; Nixon Adm officials begin developing argument that Dem
proposal for fixed deadline for troop withdrawals would endanger the release of
Amer POWs; Asst Sec Nutter says linking prisoner issue to such pol
considerations as troop withdrawals would have effect of making prisoners
hostages in negotiations and would endanger course of future withdrawals by US,
testimony to House subcom; Deputy Asst Sec Sullivan says N Vietnamese use Amer
POWs to 'bargain' for pol and mil concessions; NY TV and radio stations that
will carry Nixon s listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 7, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 176 words

Saigon and Washington have put into effect most ambitious and costly
pacification program yet planned; plan reptdly costs US more than $1-billion and
S Vietnam an undisclosed sum; would greatly expand pacification activities;
lists as 'top priority' for yr 'neutralization' of Vietcong pol apparatus; Adm
sources decline to discuss plan because of its confidential character; plan has
been in operation since March 1; is subject of wide controversy among US
officials, some of whom term it unrealistic and artificial; calls for expansion
of civilian antiguerrilla combat orgn in rural areas, establishment of elaborate
'people's intelligence network' to inform on enemy and elimination of 14,400
Vietcong agents under expansion of Operation Phoenix; other details on plan,
which has been endorsed by Gen Creighton Abrams and approved by Pres Nguyen Van
Thieu; criticisms of plan by some US officials noted; over-all concept of
pacification, as expressed in plan, consists of 3 objectives of 'local
self-defense, local self govt and local self-developme nt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 226 words

Pres Nixon schedules withdrawal of 100,000 more Amer soldiers from Vietnam by
Dec 1, TV and radio s; 184,000 Amers will be left in war zone 11 mos before '72
Pres election; Nixon asks to be held accountable in election if he fails in his
further goal of ending Amer involvement in war; says Laotian operation proved
even more damaging to N Vietnam's offensive capacities than move into Cambodia
last yr; says Vietnamization has succeeded; shows charts on withdrawals; refuses
to accede to demands that he set date for final disengagement; says objective
remains of hanging on long enough to give S Vietnamese 'reasonable chance to
survive as a free people'; says hasty withdrawal would amt to 'consciously'
turning S Vietnam over to Communists; portrays himself as determined to close
out war 'not meanly, but nobly'; pleads for patience to realize respectful end;
asks country not to be diverted by news of 'isolated acts of cruelty'; does not
directly refer to Calley; asks that Laotian operation be looked at 'in
perspective' and that his judgments be accepted in place of 'understandable
speculation' that all policies receive; acknowledges heavy casualties among S
Vietnamese in Laos and does not directly call operation a success; makes other
comments on operation; discusses withdrawals; says pacification is succeeding;
other details on s; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 57 words

Pres Nixon text; Nixon says if US announces it will leave Vietnam regardless of
what enemy does, it will throw away principal bargaining counter to win release
of Amer POWs; illus; Nixon says presentation of posthumous Medal of Hon awards
is the hardest thing that a Pres has to do; cites recent presentation to family
of Marine Sgt K Taylor

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 43 words

Spokesman for Hanoi delegation to Paris talks says N Vietnam agrees to resume
talks after 3-wk interruption; says his delegation has informed US that it
accepts proposal to attend next session; observers rept Vietcong to be in
agreement with N Vietnamese

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 44 words

S Vietnamese Govt says 100,000 US soldiers who will be phased out by Dec 1 will
be 'gradually replaced' by S Vietnamese troops, communique; thanks US for its
aid; sampling of opinion among Amer soldiers shows widespread skepticism
concerning Pres Nixon announcement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 8

LENGTH: 21 words

Pres Nixon, before most recent Vietnam troop withdrawal announcement, ordered
withdrawal of 260,000 Amer soldiers in 4 stages

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 186 words

Pres Nixon s is greeted with praise by Repubs and criticism by Dem doves;
underlying initial Cong reaction is disappointment that Nixon does not go
further in defining goal of total withdrawal; Dems and some Repubs hold Nixon
succeeds in somewhat muting Vietnam debate, but fails to reestablish pol
initiative on war issue; Sen Aiken expresses disappointment that Nixon does not
accelerate withdrawals; says he has 'feeling' Nixon will accelerate withdrawals
next Dec so he can meet or beat Dem goal of withdrawing all troops by end of
'72; Scott describes s as 'continuation and acceleration' of Nixon's plan to end
US involvement in war; Sen Hughes says s is 'disappointing in the extreme'; Sen
McGovern says Nixon still tries to convince Amers 'tragic blunder represents
Amer's finest hr'; Sen Muskie, expressing disappointment at s, says Nixon
announces slight increase in withdrawals but gives no indication when US
involvement will end; Sen; Hatfield says s fails to meet even 'least of our
expectations'; comments of Sens Mathias and Church not ed; illus of fuel being
destroyed at Khesanh as last Amers leave

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 2

LENGTH: 84 words

Sr US mil planners generally believe Pres Nixon's announcement of new
withdrawals from Vietnam makes it clear '72 will be riskiest yr in war since
disengagement started 2 yrs ago; say dwindling number of Amer servicemen in war
zone will be increasingly jeopardized and S Vietnam's ability to handle major
share of its own defense will be tested for 1st time since Amer buildup started
in mid-'65; see temptation for N Vietnam to try major offensive next yr; details
on opinions of planners and officials

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 8 words

Local scene in Gianghia, S Vietnam, described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 82 words

Heavy fighting reptd around Fire Bases 6 and Lonely, both besieged and in
central highlands; Saigon hq repts nearly 400 N Vietnamese killed in day-long
fighting, most of them by air strikes; S Vietnamese losses put at 14 killed and
51 wounded; details on action; more than score of enemy troops reptdly penetrate
2 hamlets NE of Ducduc; explosion rips through mil hosp in Danang, killing 1 S
Vietnamese soldier, wounding 20 others; US command repts 19 Amers wounded in 5
rocket attacks in area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

Phila Quakers rebuke Pres Nixon for coupling references to his Quaker heritage
with defense of his Indochina war policy, lr to him; Nixon, in Mar 9 int with C
L Sulzberger, labeled himself 'deeply committed pacifist' because of his
Quakerism and at same time defended strong mil posture abroad; Phila Quakers
urge him to make 'no further distortion' of Quakers' 'historic and deeply felt
conviction'; differences between Phila Quakers and Quakerism practiced in Calif,
where Nixon is member, noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 62 words

Luang Prabang, Laos becomes armed camp with N Vietnamese troops pressing city's
strongest threat; nearly all necessities for residents are brought in by air; 3
bns of Govt troops have been sent in to reinforce garrison; US aid workers
complete air strip on south side of town; new enemy attacks feared, possibily
just before or during Pimai, Laotian new yr on Apr 15; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Ed on Pres Nixon's s; says Nixon pledge to end US involvement in Vietnam will be
welcomed even more than his 'small acceleration' of withdrawal rate; says Nixon
leaves many ambiguities; says he opens no new doors to negotiated pol settlement
that remains only way to end war as well as US involvement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 5

LENGTH: 14 words

Lr comments on case of Capt H B Levy, who refused to go to Vietnam in antiwar
protest

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 3

LENGTH: 40 words

Rear Adm E C Outlaw (ret), telling of his involvement in Vietnam war in its
early stages, says US has not won war because it has not tried to win; urges
immediate end to war; comments on Lt William Calley case; says Calley should be
pardoned

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 8, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 6

LENGTH: 46 words

Pres R M Nixon, in Quotation of Day about ending American involvement in Vietnam
war, says 'In my campaign for the Presidency, I pledged to end American
involvement in this war.  I am keeping that pledge, And I expect to be held
accountable by the American people if I fail'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 156 words

Nixon Adm sources hold mil, pol and econ situation in Cambodia has been
deteriorating over past 2 mos; rept Communist forces now on offensive; S
Vietnamese forces fighting to take enemy supply bases since Feb 4 meet stiff
resistance and suffer heavy casualties; most enemy casualties have been
inflicted by Amer aircraft; controversy over Laotian incursion seen obscuring
situation in Cambodia; relative obscurity of Communists recapturing strategic
Pich Nil pass on Route 4 cited; map; pol analysts rept student and intellectural
groups in Pnompenh are increasingly critical of Govt, demand reforms; econ
situation is bleak; mil sources in Washington rept S Vietnamese have met
uncommonly sharp enemy resistance; S Vietnam contends its forces have killed
more than 4,200 enemy soldiers since start of Cambodian operation, but mil
sources in Washington say figure has been inflated; most casualties have been
inflicted by Amer aircraft

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 68 words

US command repts 88 Amers were killed in combat last wk, highest toll for wk in
nearly 10 mos; says 33 died in enemy attack on arty base 50 mi S of Danang;
repts 347 Amers wounded last wk; S Vietnamese and enemy casualties listed; at
least 1 Amer soldier killed, perhaps a dozen injured when bomb destroys Saigon
night club jammed with servicemen; 1 S Vietnamese killed, at least 3 other
injured in explosion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 150 words

Sens Hugh Scott, Robert Griffin and Robert Byrd say Pres Nixon indicated at
private meeting yesterday he intends to withdraw all US troops from Vietnam by
specific date; White House vehemently denies it; White House press sec says
Nixon has definite plan for concluding Amer involvement in war, but says it
would be incorrect to say Nixon has at this time set on a specific date;
comments of 3 Sens noted; Scott illus; White House to produce set of statistics
to support Nixon assertion that S Vietnamese casualties have dropped; Pentagon
takes available official S Vietnamese figures showing there were 21,833 S
Vietnamese killed in combat in '69, 23,346 killed in '70; White House aide says
Nixon based his statement on comparision of number of S Vietnamese killed in 1st
2 mos of '69 and 1st 2 mos of '70; another aide says statement is based on
comparision of casualties for all '68 and all '70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 205 words

Secret session is held to formally select Soviet Communist party's Central Com;
newly elected com, which usually has 190 voting members and about 160
alternatives, will meet soon to name party Politburo and Secretariat, which in
effect have total power in USSR; party leader Leonid Brezhnev and other top
officials presumably choose Politburo and Secretariat members before start of
cong; no changes are expected in Politburo and Secretariat but Central Com,
which has functioned as rubber stamp for Politburo's actions under Brezhnev's
leadership, is expected to have some new members; Premier Kosygin repts to cong
on debate on econ policy; party delegates back full support for Indochinese
Communist, calls on all parties to protest 'aggressive policies' of US; Cong
affirms its support for peaceful Middle East settlement based on Nov '67 UN
resolution, statement; calls on all countries to press Israel and charges US
with 'hypocritically expressing desire for peace while in fact encouraging
Israeli ultras'; Premier Kosygin, in rept to cong on debate on econ policy,
asserts that discussion shows that cong 'unanimously endorses this majestic,
scientifically relevant program of socioeconomic and cultural construction'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 78 words

Max Frankel comments on Pres Nixon's s on Vietnam; says there is gen agreement
in Washington that Nixon gives a little ground to all factions that have been
'tugging' at his policy; says it is also agreed Nixon yields nothing of his
freedom to keep on improvising tactics as he gradually withdraws from war; notes
opinions of Sens Griffin, Aiken and Scott on s; notes several theories offered
to explain ambiguities in s, including those pertaining to '72 election

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 54 words

UPI bur mgr Catherine M Webb and Japanese cameraman Toshiichi Suzuki listed as
missing after they disappear during battle in area of Pich Nil Pass during
battle between Cambodian and N Vietnamese troops; Cambodian driver-translator,
free-lance photographer and a 5th man believed to be an interpreter for Suzuki
also missing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 60 words

N Vietnamese and Vietcong score Pres Nixon's announcement of continuing US troop
withdrawals, Paris talks session; insist Vietnam War will continue until US sets
date for total withdrawal; session is dominated by debate over Nixon s and new
proposal by S Vietnamese for POW exch, which Communists spurn; Communist
delegates deride Nixon repts of gains in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 33 words

Repr Ogden R Reid, in lrs to Defense Sec Melvin Laird and AID Admr Dr J A
Hannah, charges that treatment of Communist prisoners on island of Con Son
represents continuing violation of Geneva Conv

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 7

LENGTH: 51 words

Pres Nixon's troop withdrawal announcement creates little stir in Saigon; Amer
officials say Amb Ellsworth Bunker and S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu are in
full agreement on figure of 100,000; S Vietnamese Foreign Min offers comment on
announcement; opposition politicians are divided on withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 113 words

N Vietnamese gunners shell Amer helicopter base in central highlands; no
casualties or damage reptd; S Vietnamese kill 5 N Vietnamese when S Vietnamese
patrol ambushes guerrilla mortar crew 240 mi NE of Saigon; 5 rockets hit Danang
air base; US command repts loss of 3 helicopters, 1 downed W of Danang, 1 in
Cambodia, 1 along Laotian border; official spokesman repts official end of S
Vietnamese operation in Laos; Khesanh is now deserted; N Vietnamese troops,
reptdly equipped with weapons brought by elephant from Cambodia, lay down hail
of fire around Fire Base 6 to keep reinforcements from reaching S Vietnamese
defenders; Amer helicopter pilots rept killing 3 elephants

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 222 words

Enlistment of TV newsman John A Scali as Pres Nixon special consultant on
foreign affairs information for pub seen start of White House drive to improve
Nixon's credibility; White House also seeks 'name' journalist from newspaper or
magazine to team up with Scali, preferably as domestic affairs expert; hope is
that both newsmen, 1 in broadcast area and other in print journalism, can shift
to Nixon whatever credibility they may have gained among their colleagues; some
White House aides privately contend that effort to shift players and thereby
improve Nixon's image is self-deluding; speculation that Navy Sec Chafee, Repub
who has run well in RI may challenge Sen Pell in '72; Office of Mgt and Budget
officials reptdly unhappy over Adm failure to persuade USAF to consider cheaper
alternative to proposed B-1 bomber; search for successor to A Venable as
Minority Business Enterprise Office dir has sparked internal dispute; Commerce
Sec M Stans is said to favor elevation to Deputy Dir Leanse, who is white, when
Venable, black, leaves May 1; dept blacks object; want Stans to pick black they
recommend; Nixon statement that Vietnamization has succeeded because of success
of Laotian operation compared with Vice Pres Agnew statement that 'most
knowledgeable people' realize operation cannot be fully assessed at this time

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 129 words

Ed says Pres Nixon's restatement of his Vietnam policy is 'essentially a pol
document'; says newly accelerated withdrawal rate, if continued, will reduce
Amer forces to about 25,000 by '72 election; notes Nixon statement that he
expects to be held accountable to Amer people if he fails to end war by
election; says nation can agree with objective of giving S Vietnamese
'reasonable chance' to 'survive as a free people'; says failure to achieve pol
settlement before Amer departure is likely to involve greater risks still as war
goes on; says Nixon unfortunately advances no new thoughts on how pol settlement
can be achieved; says major effort to assure free elections in S Vietnam,
combined with exploration of new paths in Paris talks, might end war before Nov,
'72

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

James Reston comments on Pres Nixon s on Vietnam and questions raised by it;
urges response from N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 6

LENGTH: 23 words

James Burnham, in comment on Lt William Calley case, notes Vietnam War has been
called 'TV war' because so much of it has been televised

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 9, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

Wall St analysts note that stock mkt's failure to decline after Pres Nixon's s
on troop withdrawal from Vietnam offers proof of mkt's internal strength;
forecasts of mkt's future detailed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

Repr Paul N McCloskey, arriving in Saigon for 4-day visit to S Vietnam, charges
Pres Nixon has stepped up air war over Laos while trying to gain votes by
reducing US casualties among US ground forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 58 words

US command apologizes to CBS for memo to information officers charging that
Morley Safer, co-host of CBS TV show 60 Mins who is in Vietnam to do story on
Vietnamization, has 'ulterior motive' and seeks evidence to criticize S
Vietnamese training and plans feature on 'fragging' incidents; says corrective,
but not disciplinary action has been taken

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 92 words

N Vietnamese commandos reptdly defy hail of bombs and napalm in attempt to
penetrate Fire Base 6, but are repulsed; 12 N Vietnamese reptd killed; US lt,
who was missing since base was overrun March 31, returns to base; US mil sources
say enemy attacks this spring are on broader scale than they have been
previously; S Vietnamese hq repts its forces kill 25 N Vietnamese at Fire Base
Lonely; Dakto and Holloway air bases are shelled; B-52s bomb in attempt to lift
siege of Fire Base 6; other action reptd; attack on truck convoy near Fire Base
6 illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 111 words

About 8,000 Cambodian montagnards who sought refuge in S Vietnam after
Vietnamese Communists captured their native regions last yr suffer from hunger
and neglect although ample Amer funds have been allocated for them; Maj Kpa-Doh
says S Vietnamese Govt has supplied almost no aid to refugees; Min Pham Quang
Dan agrees aid to montagnards is far from sufficient; official S Vietnamese,
Cambodian and Amer sources say neglect of montagnards is result of widespread
indifference of govts involved to fate of montagnards, whom many consider
racially inferior; Pham Quang Dan urges US pressure on local officials; makes
other comments; details on plight of montagnards

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 19 words

Enemy mortar battery breaks up rally and awards ceremony for Vietcong defectors
in Vithanh; 7 civilians wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

Lr suggests Communist 'bloodbath' would follow precipitate or total US
withdrawal from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Lr suggests US withdrawal from war would open number of mil options to S Vietnam
and thus increase leverage on N Vietnam to negotiate

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 12 words

Excerpts from ed on Vietnam war published in 4 religious publications

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Anthony Lewis, discussing Pres Nixon's s on Vietnam, says events of last 2 wks
reveal Nixon's 'moral insensitivity'; says Nixon policy is to go on fighting and
killing in war that US does not want and is giving up; says limits of
credibility of Amers concerning Cambodia and Laos have been reached

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 3

LENGTH: 50 words

Yale Law School Deputy Dean B Marshall comments on Lt William Calley case and
reaction to it; says Pres Nixon should assume personal responsibility for
Calley's punishment; says act of expiation that should accompany any diminution
of Calley's punishment is immediate cessation of Vietnam War by US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 6

LENGTH: 53 words

James Reston Jr urges that those refusing induction on pol and moral grounds be
offered easy and respectable alternative, that similar alternative be given
those now in prison for refusing induction, that selective conscientious
objection be legalized and that no draftee be sent to Vietnam without his
consent; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 10, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 73 words

Survey of views of US Army officers on Lt William Calley case; Lt Calley was
convicted of murdering at least 22 S Vietnamese civilians at Mylai; many
officers are in state of anguish and alarm over case; several hold case is
isolated incident in complex war understood by few at home; many believe case
has been catalyst for those elements of pub opinion that abuse and disparage
Army; none excuses Calley; details on views of officers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 144 words

N Vietnamese mil comdr, in article in N Vietnamese Army newspaper, contends S
Vietnamese operation in Laos met with 'defeat' because of mistaken reliance on
Amer air power, tanks and arty on wrong terrain; US intelligence specialists say
article appears to have been written by Vo Nguyen Giap or 1 of his associates;
article also seems to presage move by N Vietnamese to resume selective use of
large-scale units in war, practice virtually abandoned by enemy after '68 Tet
offensive; Amer analysts say N Vietnam, since Laotian campaign, has stepped up
use of main force units; article says Communist forces, during Laotian campaign,
were able to 'swing many blows' in Laos, Cambodia and S Vietnam; rejects
arguments offered in US that Laotian campaign was less than successful because
of faulty intelligence, bad weather and other reasons; other details on article

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

G Faure's Requiem performed at Palm Sunday and Good Friday services, Saigon, S
Vietnam, by choir of Amer soldiers and airmen, Vietnamese boys and girls, and
Western civilians stationed in Saigon; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6

LENGTH: 156 words

Natl Liberation Front, pol arm of Vietcong, broadcasts nightly what it says are
voices of S Vietnamese soldiers taken prisoner during recent S Vietnamese
operation in Laos; prisoners assert how badly they were beaten in Laos and
accuse US pilots of exploiting and betraying them; not many families in Saigon
admit they listen to broadcasts because it is illegal to listen to Communist
broadcasts in S Vietnam; it is believed many S Vietnamese listen to broadcasts
in hope of gaining news of their relatives; most important voice to be heard so
far purports to be that of Col Nguyen Van Tho, who says S Vietnamese troops were
'miserably defeated' in Laos; S Vietnamese Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says if Nguyen
Van Tho really makes statement, it is because he is under pressure; says Saigon
Govt should protest such treatment of POWs by Communists; Vietnamese mil
spokesman denies Nguyen Van Tho was captured in Laos; details on broadcasts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 45 words

Sen Mike Gravel announces War No More, nonprofit corp to generate pub pressure
against Vietnam War, will begin broadcast campaign next wk on West Coast, news
conf; calls Vietnamization program 'plan to keep on our involvement for decades
until we win'; discusses campaign

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 103 words

US command announces 2 USAF fighter-bombers attack radar-controlled AA guns
inside N Vietnam and destroy 2 of them in 21st 'protective reaction' strike over
N Vietnam this yr; strike is carried out 30 mi N of buffer zone after enemy guns
fire at US observation aircraft flying over Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos; map; USAF
planes strike in N Vietnam after N Vietnamese guns fire at US observation
aircraft flying over Ho Chi Minh Trail; S Vietnamese jets join B-52s in bombing
N Vietnamese troops trying to overrun Fire Base 6; other action reptd; 5
Vietnamese civilians injured in terrorist attack on minibus in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

Amer Natl Red Cross says it has received more than 72,5000 lrs protesting
treatment of Amer POWs in N Vietnam; lrs are in response to article in Reader's
Digest describing conditions under which many POWs are held

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 29 words

N Vietnamese voters will elect new Natl Assembly tomorrow from list of 522
candidates nominated by Communist party and 7 independents; election is 1st in N
Vietnam in 7 yrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

M Frankel comments on Pres Nixon s on Vietnam; notes some of Nixon's critics are
skeptical of his objectives and tactics; Nixon illus; chart shows number of US
troops in Vietnam between '61 and Dec, '71

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 29 words

Comment pn Lt William Calley case and Pres Nixon's intervention; notes questions
that are raised; cartoon; Calley has been convicted of murdering civilians at
Mylai, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 25 words

Ad by Vietnam Peace Parade Com and Peoples' Coalition for Peace and Justice
urges support for forthcoming antiwar protests in Washington and elsewhere

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 106 words

Ed on Pres Nixon's s on Vietnam; says Nixon's announced withdrawal program falls
far short of mark of total withdrawal; says there is little evidence to back
claim that Vietnamization has succeeded; says Laotian operation ended
ingloriously; notes S Vietnamese troops still fight in Cambodia; says prospect
is for more danger ahead in and from Laos and Cambodia; notes step-up in enemy
activity in S Vietnam; says longer withdrawal continues, more hopeless lot of
prisoners will be and weaker US bargaining position becomes; urges negotiated
pol settlement; says lot of Amer POWs becomes more hopeless the longer US
withdrawal continues

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

James Reston offers view that Amers have forgotten Easter but kept the parade,
that they have replaced old individualism and its idea that each individual is
sacred and different with new individualism of materialism and egotism; says
'solid foundation of decency' in US is major factor behind cry to end Vietnam
War; says outcry to free Lt William Calley indicates moral confusion of age

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 86 words

US pilots who fly regularly over Ho Chi Minh Trail rept traffic is moving freely
along enemy supply network; say N Vietnamese trucks drive northward and
southward; say AA fire is back to level at which it was before Laotian operation
began; say Tchepone is bristling with AA arty; say that in operation, enemy
troops were massed and brought into open for 1st time to offer concentrated
targets for bombing; forward air controllers say that during operation, traffic
increased on trail in area S of operation; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 45 words

S Vietnamese defenders at Fire Base 6 expect heavy battle; base is protected by
about 5,000 to 6,000 S Vietnamese; is surrounded by 5,000 enemy; US helicopter
shot down while dropping supplies at base; 11 other aircraft forced to turn
back; mil situation discussed; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (WST)

LENGTH: 23 words

New N Vietnamese Natl Assembly will elect Cabinet as well as Pres, which could
provide changes in Govt leadership; details on elections

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 205 words

Study group of White House Conf on Youth issues rept on foreign policy charging
policy has become frozen in 'reflexive anti-Communism' leading to embroilment in
Vietnam, a distorted sense of natl interest and div and ferment at home; holds
Pres must adopt policy of 'complete consultation' with Sen about any mil
commitments abroad; holds US must 'admit mistakes openly instead of making vain
attempts to rectify errors in judgment under guise of saving country from
defeat'; rept to be considered by upcoming conf; urges that UN make effort to
prevent member nations from damaging environment; urges replacing draft with
all-volunteer army; recommends both hs and coll students should share in educ
decisions and governance; urges that judges be selected with 1st consideration
being given to their sensitivity to variety of community problems and soc causes
of crime and their objectivity and legal knowledge; recommends special
assistance in form of counseling and other services be given to students still
in school but who want to drop out; recommends that Amer history textbooks used
in schools and colls clearly reflect nation's diverse racial and ethnic
heritage; proposes commodity tax on corps expending natural resources

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7

LENGTH: 89 words

New hearings on Vietnam War, directed to moral and humanitarian questions raised
by US role, will be held concurrently in Sen and House later this mo; Sen Subcom
on Refugees, headed by Sen Kennedy, and House Subcom on Foreign Operations and
Freedom of Information, headed by Repr Moorhead, will hold hearings, which are
separate from hearings on US policy that Sen and House panels may also call this
mo; Cong aide and Repr Reid comment on new hearings; Cong sources say Sec of
State Rogers has declined to appear before Kennedy subcom

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 20 words

US bomber fires Shrike missile at N Vietnamese radar positions; US command says
plane was supporting air missions in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

Vice Pres Agnew says potentially harmful right-wing protest would follow
immediate withdrawal of US troops from Vietnam, int with San Diego Union (pub)
editors

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 7; (UPI)

LENGTH: 59 words

Sen Robert Dole says Pres Nixon will have trouble winning re-election in '72 if
war is still going on at present level next yr, int; says he expects Nixon's
Vietnamization program to allow withdrawal of all but residual Amer mil force
and eliminate Amer casualties; predicts voters will accept that as redemption of
Nixon's pledge to end US involvement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 56 words

6 persons, including Luth min, arrested at RC Cathedral of the Immaculate
Conception, Syracuse, NY, after walking down aisle during Easter mass carrying
wooden cross with Vietnamese peasant's hat attached; demonstrators allegedly
members of 'Freedom Encampment,' who plan pilgrimage from Buffalo to NYC and
Washington to protest war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 26 words

Lr objects to James Reston comment (Feb 28,IV,13:4) comparing Soviet willingness
to remove missiles from Cuba with US reluctance to withdraw from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 4

LENGTH: 18 words

Lr scores Vice Pres Agnew's remarks concerning Vietnam War critics; notes
opposition to war is widespread

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 4

LENGTH: 11 words

Lr scores Hester's April 3 lr; supports US role in Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 5

LENGTH: 15 words

Lr lauds Lt William Calley jury; backs proposal for comm to evaluate nature of
Vietnam War

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 51 words

N Vietnamese vote for 420 Natl Assembly seats; Premier Pham Van Dong comments on
elections; says N Vietnamese elections for Natl Assembly are victory for
Vietnamese people locked in struggle with US; details on elections; illus of
Pham Van Dong, Pres Ton Duc Thang and Natl Assembly chmn Truong Chin voting

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 12, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Easter scene, Paris, Rome, London, NYC and at US fire base, S Vietnam, illus;
NYC; traditional 5th Av Easter Parade described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 13, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

Mil judicial records show 22 Amer servicemen, including Lt William Calley, who
have been convicted of premeditated murder of Vietnamese citizens were all
sentenced to life in prison; 21 of sentences have been reduced on mil appeal;
longest sentence given final approval was 35 yrs, most terms were cut to 5 to 10
yrs; sentences for 247 other crimes against Vietnamese citizens have been
consistently reduced by rev authorities; details on some cases

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 13, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Enemy forces increase pressure on S Vietnamese troops in eastern Cambodia,
primarily in area between Kompong Cham and S Vietnamese border on Route 7; S
Vietnamese have have not changed their position since Feb 23 when their
commanding gen was killed in helicopter crash; Lt Gen Nguyen Van Minh's staff,
currently in charge, refuse to discuss Cambodian front during their command's
indecision over its next move; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 13, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 127 words

3 wks of heavy fighting in area S of Pleiku has left pacification program and
score of hamlets in ruins in dist of Phunhon; Amer advisers endure 12-hr siege
of dist hq compound; say another attack could come at any time; some enemy
troops have withdrawn from area for resupply; 5,000 enemy troops press attacks
on Fire Base 6, 80 mi to north; Amer advisers and Vietnamese officials in
Phunhon and in mil hq in Pleiku believe that both areas of attack are part of
single N Vietnamese campaign to show they have not been hurt by Laotian
operation; believe campaign is also aimed at Govt efforts to extend control over
montagnard villagers; Amer officials believe pacification program has been
crippled in Phunhon area; details on conditions and mil action in area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 13, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 37 words

White House announces pilot program to inform low-income Vietnam war veterans of
benefits available under GI Bill; program will be carried out by Natl League of
Cities and US Mayors Conf under $1,016,375 grant from OEO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 13, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

Ed says Pres Nixon, in his s, appeared 'painfully aware' how tenuous has become
confidence of Amer people in their leadership; says crisis of confidence cannot
be blamed on any 1 cause, not even Vietnam War, nor on any individual; says it
is inevitable consequence of failure of leadership to speak truth to Amer people
however distasteful truth may be; notes 'sugar-coating' of some unpleasant
realities connected with war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 13, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Tom Wicker, noting that Amers have turned massively against Vietnam war since
Laotian operation, says it is likely reaction to Lt William Calley case
confirmed Pres Nixon in his apparent belief that US 'defeat' in war would lead
to right-wing recriminations; discusses Nixon s; says Nixon has consistently
conducted himself and spoken to nation in fashion more apt to increase
recriminations than to diminish them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 13, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 173 words

Amer mil sources say US planes are dropping 7 1/2-ton bombs on N Vietnamese
troops attacking Fire Base 6; bombs, employed in past mostly to blast out jungle
growth and clear landing spaces for helicopters, have been adapted for use
against troops because they explode laterally; mil spokesman says biggest
antipersonnel bombs used until now by USAF weigh 2,000 lbs and were infrequently
used; most allied bombs weigh 500 lbs; B-52s strike for 6th successive day at
enemy positions near base; US helicopters fly in supplies for base; details on
action at base; US helicopter gunship kills elephant in elephant supply train
near Fire Base Lonely; Lt Gen M S Davison says total of about 7,500 Amer combat
troops will remain after May 1 in Saigon and its 11 surrounding provs; US
command announces N Vietnamese recently downed US helicopter 90 mi S of Danang,
then ambushed inf force trying to reach survivors; repts 11 Amers killed, 8
wounded; map; illus; US command says 296,500 Amers were in S Vietnam as of April
8, drop of 5,000 during wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 14, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

US command soon will downgrade its command system in S Vietnam's 2 middle
regions to reflect US Army's transition from combat role to support and advisory
function; move will abolish 2 Field Force commands that direct Amer combat
operations and mil assistance programs in Mil Regions II and III; Field Force
commands will be replaced by 'regional assistance commands'; new structure will
not affect troop withdrawals and does not represent change in Army's
disengagement policy; essentially similar system is already being used in Mil
Region IV; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 14, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 104 words

S Vietnamese natl police force is quickly expanding in size and influence in
Saigon, largely because of increased Amer financial support and organizational
change that has moved police command to highest levels of Govt; rept submitted
to Pres Nixon last yr citing ineffectiveness of police noted; US officials
stress police must play vital role in program against Vietcong pol officials;
Pres Nguyen Van Thieu's recent apptmt of Maj Gen Tran Thanh Phong to new post of
Natl Police Command noted; change allows Nguyen Van Thieu to assume more direct
control of police; growth and activities of police force discussed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 14, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 120 words

Defense Sec Laird says US will maintain naval and air presence in SE Asia after
US ground troops have been withdrawn from Indochina, news conf; says presence is
required if US is to maintain policy of 'realistic deterrence'; refuses to
discuss question of whether air and naval units will continue to fight in S
Vietnam after withdrawal of Amer troops; emphasizes Amer security force will
remain behind to protect US support troops and that they might become involved
in defense combat; refuses to say whether Adm plans to leave residual force of
Amer troops in S Vietnam for indefinite period; Laird repeats his forecast that
combat responsibility in S Vietnam will be turned over to S Vietnamese sometime
this summer

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 14, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 57 words

Repr Paul N McCloskey says most Amers he has met in S Vietnam feel US can leave
by end of yr; concludes visit; says only conceivable reason for staying beyond
end of yr would be to provide helicopter support; says there seems to be no need
for combat troops; says he could not see much evidence that S Vietnamese want to
conduct war alone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 14, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 183 words

ASNE Freedom of Information Com urges ASNE to press for natl law to shield
reporters from ct orders, fines and jail sentences aimed at forcing them to
reveal news sources; scores use of subpoenas by cts and prosecutors; lauds Atty
Gen Mitchell's guidelines for curbing use of subpoenas but agrees with Mitchell
suggestion that only legis will provide ultimate protection; backs bills
sponsored by Reprs Koch and Whalen; notes some recent improvements in White
House policy on news confs; Com repts 'raw censorship' by US Defense Dept of
news about Laotian operation; W Phillippi, who acted as 1-man subcom on mil
information, revs conflict between newsmen and mil command over news blackout;
says lesson learned in unsuccessful raid on Sontay, N Vietnam, to free war
prisoners, that 'getting the bad news out as quickly as possible' was best
policy, apparently was not applied in Laos; Phillippi says it was 2 wks before
Defense Sec Melvin Laird gave permission for newsmen to use helicopters to fly
into Laos to cover operations; says newsmen were right in saying action amounted
to censorship

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 14, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 59, Column 5

LENGTH: 46 words

Leonard S Silk article on outlook for econ following windup of Vietnam war;
notes Joint Cong Econ Com calls for conversion program not stressing defense
spending; quotes late Prof J M Clark on developments following World War I; Pres
Nixon's troop withdrawal announcement noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 14, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 66 words

S Vietnamese reinforcements reach Fire Base 6, easing pressure on it; S
Vietnamese spokesman repts vanguard of reinforcements meets no opposition; enemy
forces may be resupplying; B-52s bomb near base; 2 US planes drop 2 more 7
1/2-ton bombs; details on situation at base; small-scale fighting reptd
elsewhere in S Vietnam; 2 US fighter-bombers attack 2 N Vietnamese missile sites
in Laos; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 15, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 111 words

N Vietnamese troops use flamethrowers against S Vietnamese forces in heavy
fighting on 2 sides of Fire Base 6; siege of base begins 3d wk; some S
Vietnamese defenders attempt to flee base on landing skids of US helicopter
lifting out Amer advisers; 1 Amer adviser reptd killed, another missing in
latest fighting; S Vietnamese spokesman says N Vietnamese use flamethrowers for
1st time; no reason is announced for lifting out of 4 Amer advisers; 1 adviser
remains; 96 enemy killed in 16 hrs of fighting; other details on siege; enemy
gunners fire 2 rockets into S Vietnamese hq base at Tancanh, 7 mi NE of Fire
Base 6; 8 S Vietnamese bns are committed to siege; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 15, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 250 words

Pres Nixon announces relaxation of 20-yr old trade embargo with Communist China;
says US exports will be ltd to nonstrategic items and notes imports of
designated goods from China will also be permitted; will rev list of goods being
prepared for him by inter-agency group and Natl Security Council; cites other
proposals to aid trade, including relaxation of currency controls to permit use
of dollars by Chinese; White House press sec Ziegler says Nixon made final
decision to relax restriction 2 wks ago but says timing of announcement was
greatly influenced by recent events in Peking; Cong reactions to decision seen
generally favorable; officials regard immediate expansion of Chinese-US trade
unlikely but believe it could reach several hundred million dollars over next
decade; assumptions are that trade will be placed on same basis as that with
USSR; Ziegler says announcement is not related to discussions in Adm on US stand
in autumn on issue of Chinese representation in UN; says Chinese Nationalists
had been informed of decision when Nixon conferred with Amb Chow Shu-kai; says
US oil cos may supply fuel to ships proceeding to and from mainland China,
except on Chinese-owned or Chinese-chartered carriers bound to or from N
Vietnam, N Korea and Cuba; says US ships may carry Chinese cargoes between
non-Chinese ports and US-owned carriers flying foreign flags may call at Chinese
ports; announces US is prepared to expedite visas for visitors or groups of
visitors from Communist China

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 15, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 99 words

Mil officers say US command used 7 1/2-ton bombs in central highlands this wk
primarily to clear jungle canopy from N Vietnamese storage areas near Laotian
border, but also to kill enemy soldiers who might be nearby; concussive effect
of bombs is so great that anyone within 4,500 feet of blast who is not killed
may suffer serious injury; effect is less severe in heavy jungle; 24 B-52
missions have been flown since Fire Base 6 was overrun March 31; missions
involved 3 or more of six of 7 1/2-ton bomb strikes have been made;
fighter-bombers have staged up to 60 tactical strikes around base

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 15, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 18 words

3d Marine Amphibious Force is deactivated at ceremony in Danang; some details on
its role in Vietnam War

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 15, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Sen Foreign Relations Com announces it will begin its long-scheduled hearings on
how to end Vietnam war; no Adm official has agreed to testify; Sec of State
Rogers has not replied to invitation, Defense Sec Melvin Laird has declined
invitation on ground he has to go into hosp for operation; com will start
hearings with testimony from Sen sponsors of various legis proposals to end or
limit US involvement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 15, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 192 words

Vice Pres Agnew says that monetary costs of controlling pollution will be
nothing compared to costs of not curbing it, Natl Pollution Control Conf; says
major advantage is that Amers are united in believing that pollution problem
must be solved; Agnew rejects suggestion from his friend J Walter Jones, that he
engage in table tennis match with Chinese Defense Min Lin Pao as contribution
toward world peace; Common Cause has brought time on TV stations in all major US
cities to respond to Pres Nixon s; John W Gardner aide says natl networks
refused to sell or give time to orgn for program; Gardner will open and close
program; Dem party considers idea of having 7 Pres hopefuls appear on its
rebuttal broadcast on ABC April 22; Sen Edward M Kennedy has been telling
friends and newsmen that he will not be candidate in '72 pres election; his wife
says he is keeping his options open; comment on split between Alsop bros who, in
their columns, have backed US policy in Indochina war; recent Stewart Alsop
column called Laotian venture a 'mil failure in Laos and a pol disaster in the
US'; Joseph Alsop, in his columns, scores critics of US policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 15, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

SCLC calls for total withdrawal of US troops from Vietnam; Rev R D Abernathy
says orgn wants all Amer troops withdrawn by end of August

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 15, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 5

LENGTH: 17 words

Lr takes issue with March 31 lr lauding Pres Nixon and asking that he be
supported on Vietnam policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 15, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 5

LENGTH: 25 words

Lr, commenting on Outlaw article, blames former Pres John F Kennedy and Lyndon B
Johnson for Vietnam war; says Pres Nixon attempts to bring it to close

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 16, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 110 words

Repub Sens Case, Mathias and Brooke charge in Sen that Pres Nixon has not gone
far enough on his plans for disengagement from the war; hint they will join Cong
forces seeking to impose withdrawal deadline by law; Sen Saxbe, returned from
trip to Vietnam, says US is getting out faster than is generally realized;
concerned that withdrawal deadline would telegraph US intentions to N Vietnam; 3
Sens also question whether Adm is committed to total withdrawal of troops; Case
suggests compromise may be possible on McGovern-Hatfield bill setting deadline
of Dec 31, '71; says he was advised by bill co-sponsors that withdrawal deadline
is subject to adjustment

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 16, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 95 words

Xuan Thuy, chief of N Vietnamese delegation at peace talks, returns to Paris
conf after 7-wk absence; reiterates past Communist demands; Amb Bruce says Xuan
Thuy offers nothing new; says US is ready to negotiate a timetable for
withdrawal as part of an overall settlement but problem arises from N Vietnamese
refusal to consider necessary and similar mutual action; N Vietnamese and
Vietcong reprs, asked for views on effect of improved US-China relations, stress
support they have received from China in the past and express confidence it will
continue; Xuan Thuy illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 16, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 90 words

S Vietnamese troops backed by US planes open drive in area of Fire Base Lonely
against N Vietnamese on the attack there for 15 days; are attempting to track
down and destroy a N Vietnamese rgt in southern part of Central Highlands;
Communist forces carry out heavy shelling along Route 7, fire shells and rockets
at S Vietnamese command post near Kandol Chrum; S Vietnamese command says 74
enemy troops were killed, 3 of its troops are missing and 25 wounded; US
helicopter supporting S Vietnamese operation shot down, crew rescued; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 16, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 131 words

Vice Pres Agnew grants request for mass rally on West Lawn of Capitol, lr to
Philip J Hirschkop, atty for Natl Peace Action Coalition, coordinator of mass
demonstration set for Apr 24; says he waives anti-assembly statute because of
group assurances they will provide 2,000 marshals to keep order; coalition aide
Jerry Gordon calls Agnew decision a 'historic breakthrough', expresses
gratification with cooperation group is getting from Adm officials; Agnew, in lr
to John K Mallory, official of Vietnam Veterans Against the War, grants request
to hold hr-long demonstration at Capitol on Apr 19; denies request for Apr 23
rally because it would interfere with advance plans for Apr 24 rally; decision
marks 1st time that permission has been given for mass gathering on Capitol
grounds

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 16, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Film Breathing Together: Revolution of the Electric Family revd; called montage
of events, personalities and reactions relating to Chicago 7 trial, with A
Hoffman and J Rubin as stars

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 16, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

11 persons arrested when War Tax Resistance (orgn) demonstration against taxes
in support of war in Vietnam ended in sit-in outside IRS offices, 120 Church St,
NYC

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 16, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 8

LENGTH: 27 words

Steve Wattenmaker, campus coordinator for Student Mobilization Com, is inducted
into Army, NYC, but pledges to organize servicemen to press for prompt end to
war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 16, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 1

LENGTH: 123 words

Ed lauds signs Communist China moves to re-establish long-severed external
contacts; compares situation with that of USSR in mid-50s and suggests various
specific lines of action; suggests it might act to defuse tensions surrounding
Taiwan; says it could announce an end to armed hostilities, propose resumption
of trade and exch of people without giving up its position that Taiwan is part
of China; notes US restrictions on trade with Communist China should be no more
onerous than those applied to USSR and E Eur; hails moves taken by Pres Nixon;
says 1 area of special interest to US would be China's readiness to help speed a
negotiated settlement of the Vietnam war; suggests more flexible US attitude
toward Communist Chinese in UN

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 16, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

J Reston repts China experts in Washington see current shift in Chinese tone
hopeful and significant but regard it as tactical move rather than basic change
in policy; experts suggest attitude is motivated more toward minimizing USSR
influence in settlements following Vietnam war than developing new friendliness
toward US; notes Peking has real chance this yr to get votes for UN membership;
quotes late Sec Dulles '50 statement backing Communists admission if they prove
ability to govern China

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 65 words

Large force of S Vietnamese reptdly head for enemy stronghold in Ashau Valley;
no rept of fighting yet between enemy and Amer troops who reopened old arty
post, Fire Base Fury, at southern end of Ashau Valley; Ashau Valley described as
key enemy stronghold since Mar '66 when US troops were forced to abandon it;
Nguyen Van Thieu to decorate S Vietnamese veterans of fighting in Laos; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 195 words

Pres Nixon says US air power will continue to be used against 'N Vietnam and its
forces' as long as a single Amer POW is held, int with ASNE panel attended by
1,025 eds and wives; statement is 1st time Nixon directly linked air power use
to release of POWs; Nixon also says a residual US force will have to stay in S
Vietnam until S Vietnamese can develop capability of self-defense; says he will
announce further troop withdrawals in Oct, but White House press office later
says he meant to say mid-November; declines to set a date for total withdrawal;
says he has not yet given up hope for progress in peace talks but warns Hanoi
'moment of truth' is approaching; says he understands moral concern Americans
have about war, but warns that if US fails and Communists take over, 'bloodbath
that would follow would be a blot on this nations's history'; says he prepared
to take additional steps to improve contracts with China but stresses need for 1
step at a time, says next move is 'up to them'; says he told his daughter Tricia
he hoped some day she would be able to go to China; says he would like to go;
int is broadcast on radio; telecast ruled out by White House

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 61 words

Reprs McCloskey and Waldie, in S Vietnam, score Operation Phoenix, designed to
weed out and punish Vietcong pol leaders and agents in the civilian population;
produce directive to Amer advisers to program that they are unauthorized to
engage in assassination; say operation, however, violates due proces in
internment and conviction process; Reprs leave for Hong Kong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

Jury chosen, Ft McPherson, Ga, to try Capt Eugene M Kotouc on charges of maiming
and assaulting a Vietcong suspect near Mylai in '68

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3

LENGTH: 26 words

S Vietnamese fly 400 fresh troops to Fire Base 6; N Vietnamese appear to be
reinforcing their men; enemy continues firing mortar shells and rockets; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Fed Dist Ct, Washington, grants Justice Dept injunction barring Vietnam Veterans
Against the War from sleeping overnight on Washington Monument grounds during 5
days of demonstrations beginning Apr 19; refuses to bar group from holding march
near White House

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

N Vietnamese press repr at Paris talks Nguyen Than Le says China's policy of
supporting N Vietanm's cause is invariable and without limit; discounts any
possibility of a change in China'a attitude as result of current warming of
US-China relations; charges Nixon with 'sophistry' in contending that announcing
a withdrawal date would deprive US of bargaining counter to win release of Amer
POWs; says goal of talks is freedom of all POWs; says N Vietnam has no interest
in keeping POWs; says Nixon invents pretexts not to withdraw from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 8

LENGTH: 48 words

ABC poll shows 77% of 3,000 persons polled believe Lt William Calley was singled
out for punishment although others were involved including his superior
officers; 81% believe other similar incidents occurred; 24% agree with verdict
of guilty on charges of murdering Vietnamese civilians

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 53 words

Lr by Drs Paul A Redstone and Vasiliki Moskos scores plan in recently revealed
new US-Vietnam pacification program to use 'children of both sexes over the age
of 7 in supporting units' for an expanded civilian anti-guerrilla combat orgn in
rural areas; fears long-range implications of such training on developing child

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 17, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 5

LENGTH: 74 words

Sen Hatfield, in lr, says printing cost of inserting testimony of Vietnam war
veterans into Congressional Record is about 5,000, not $40,000, as reptd on Apr
7; says that figuring the cost of the war at $14-billion this yr, US spends
about $26,000 a minute in Indochina and it does not seem unreasonable to devote
less than a minute's cost of the war in order to record what veterans have to
say about the 'tragic dimensions of our involvement'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 83 words

US Army, in its recruitment drive, offers 'Eur option,' likely way to avoid both
draft and Vietnam; if recruit enlists in one of combat arms, inf, arty or
armored forces, Army will, if he so requests, guarantee him 16 mos in Eur,
usually meaning Ger, after which he would have to go where Army sends him, but
it would be fair gamble that Vietnam war would be over; to qualify for option,
enlistee must commit himself to at least 1 more yr of service time than a
draftee; recruiting poster illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 130 words

Gen Abrams says new S Vietnamese incursion into Laos from Ashau Valley could not
be ruled out, news conf, Hue; says total of 10,000 Vietnamese and US troops are
available for current Ashau operation; says number of Amers supporting campaign
will be fewer than the 9,000 who remained in S Vietnam around Khesanh to support
previous incursion into Laos; hesitates to characterize Ashau campaign either as
a series of small raids or as a massive sweep; declines to speculate on US air
support should such an incursion take place; US B-52s fly missions in area
between Hue and Ashau; Pres Nguyen Van Thieu, in Hue for 'victory' ceremonies
for S Vietnamese force that went into Laos in Feb and Mar, announces that the
new Ashau operation, called Lam Son 720, began on Apr 14; illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 105 words

Pakistan radio says troops 'secured' Chuadanga, moving into town without firing
shot; repts other mil successes, including ambush of an alleged Indian supply
column near Benapol; claims infiltrators were killed and Indian mil supplies
captured; furor arises in W Pakistan over remarks by US Amb to India Keating,
who reptdly said E Pakistan problem is concern of world community and not merely
Pakistan's internal affair; Pakistani People's party holds it 'surprising that a
govt that insisted upon its right to intervene in Vietnam should be caviling at
Pakistan's right to restore order to an integral part of her territory'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

N Vietnamese spokesman at Paris conf scores Pres Nixon refusal in radio int to
set date for withdrawal until all US POWs are released

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Activities of mil policemen in Saigon discussed; tour with MP Capt Earl V Perdue
described; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 48, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

175 members of World War I Overseas Fliers hold reunion, Washington; include
Reed G Landis, Charles B D'Olive, Maj Gen Leigh Wade and ex-Sen Holland; some
comment on experiences; recall role of Baron von Richthofen; adopt resolution
urging N Vietnam to release names of downed US pilots; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 50, Column 1

LENGTH: 185 words

Sen Edmund Muskie makes 2-day visit to NH; calls visit fruitful, with turnouts
and crowd response good; he and backers fear fragmentation of '72 Dem Pres
primary vote if Sens George McGovern, Harold Hughes and Henry Jackson appear on
ballot; Jackson seen particularly worrisome because of appeal of his foreign
policy conservatism to N H Dems; Muskie renews contact with key party leaders
and demonstrates to young people and Eugene McCarthy backers that his liberalism
is as genuine as McGovern's; has begun setting up pol staff; NY Dem Natl
Committeeman John P English will be key man; Muskie, pressed for answer as to
whether he favors continued US financing of S Vietnamese army after an Amer
pullout, ways he has not yet thought the question through, int, Manchester, NJ;
has stopped defending his earlier support of the war, and instead begins answers
with admission that he misunderstood the situation and was wrong; agrees to
appear in Providence, RI, at 1st of series of bipartisan antiwar rallies
organized by A K Lowenstein; urges FBI Dir Hoover's resignation; Muskie illus at
Phillips Exeter Acad

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 64, Column 1

LENGTH: 86 words

UAW pres Leonard Woodcock urges end to Vietnam war but says UAW does not
officially back Apr 23 antiwar demonstration in Washington, s, St Louis, to
unionists and students gathered to set up an antiwar coalition; says best way to
end war is through day-to-day effort to change thinking of Congressmen who could
end war by voting to cut off mil funds; meeting organized by Teamster Joint
Council 13 and Teamsters vp Harold Gibbons; Woodcock also says it is unrealistic
to expect Amer workers to strike against the war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

J J O'Connor comments on furor over CBS TV documentary Selling of the Pentagon;
suggests that while program was strong TV fare it might have stirred relatively
tame response if pub in newspaper or magazine; says that factors in controversy
include greater power of TV and fact that while print media are relatively safe
from Govt interference under their long-established 1st Amendment rights, TV
stations are licensed by FCC and have to appear before FCC or Cong when
complaints are made against them; comments on TV reptg of Vietnam war and
reasons for 'credibility gap' when Adm makes statements on war progress

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 14 words

Comment on difficulties of achiev ng S Vietnamese pacification program aims;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 47 words

Comment on difficult moral as well as mil problems posed by US air bombing of N
Vietnam because of civilian presence; bombing is becoming substitute for
effective fighting forces on ground; strategic and tactical bombing discussed;
effects of use of 15,000-lb bombs described; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

Ed on Pres Nixon s to ASNE notes that 17 yrs ago he made s to ASNE urging US
troops be sent into Indochina to prevent a Communist takeover there; calls
conditions he set forth in present s counterproductive and not compatible with a
program of 'total withdrawal' from Vietnam; says Nixon bombing threat is not a
practical way to secure release of POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 145 words

J Reston on current 'fantasy about the world of Washington' notes one day's
White House statement intended to impress Hanoi contradicts next day's statement
intended to impress the peace movement; cites a Nixon foreign-policy adviser who
said that the only man in Washington who has a good idea about Vietnam is Sen
Aiken, who said 'Let's say we've won and come home'; Reston says that is what US
is doing, only slower than many people prefer; comments on statements on Vietnam
war abetted by press and TV; cites view of M Muggeridge that news itself is
becoming a kind of 'Newsak'; says editors are as baffled in trying to separate
fact from propaganda as anyone else; comments on new atmosphere in Washington in
regard to China; comments on indications in Washington that change is coming,
with officials moving more with facts than with old opinions of politicians

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 3

LENGTH: 31 words

Russell Baker on irony of watching Capt Robert F Marasco, former Green Beret
officer, recount his killing of a Vietnamese man under alleged CIA orders while
int on D Cavett TV show

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 0

LENGTH: 89 words

R W Apple Jr article on Repr Paul N McCloskey Jr and his plan to challenge Pres
Nixon's re-election in effort to end Vietnam war; says McCloskey still hopes
someone else will make challenge; notes difficulties he would face in primaries
of Repub party, which is far less receptive to insurgency than Dem party; also
notes differences and similarities in McCloskey's situation and that of ex-Sen
McCarthy in '68 Dem primaries; discusses HR career and evolution of pol views
from position of Nixon supporter to 1 of opposition; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 18, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 10; Page 1, Column 0

LENGTH: 18 words

E J Kahn Jr 2d article on recent tour discusses Taiwan, Hong Kong, S Vietnam,
Thailand, and Singapore; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 100 words

1st contingents of expected total of 1,500 Vietnam veterans begin arriving,
Washington, DC, in preparation for wk-long series of antiwar protests named
Operation Dewey Canyon Three; Vietnam Veterans Against the War to conduct
demonstrations at Govt agencies; Ramsey Clark, atty for group, to appeal
injunction against group using Fed grounds as sleeping area; group organizer
John F Kerry comments; group denied permit to hold memorial service at Tomb of
Unknown Soldier to hon Amer and Indochinese war dead; gets Govt permit to use
Potomac Pk as assembly site for week-long series of antiwar protests

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 43 words

Repr McCloskey calls on Pres Nixon to end policy of deliberate destruction of
Laotian villages by calling for halt to bombing throughout Indochina, TV int on
return from Vietnam; says he will challenge Nixon for Pres in '72 primaries if
he does not order halt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

S Korea Min Choi Kyu-Hah says S Korea plans to withdraw 13,000 to 15,000 of its
troops from S Vietnam before end of yr, news conf, Seoul, S Korea

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 25 words

US patrol ambushed 31 mi NW of Saigon in closest large-scale fighting near
capital so far in '71; 2 Amers killed, 34 wounded; 29 enemy reptd killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 88 words

S Vietnam Vice Pres Ky, appearing at impromptu press conf, Saigon, scores US Sen
McGovern who has sought information concerning charges that Ky is involved in
opium smuggling; charges US is supplying S Vietnam with obsolete aircraft; holds
A-37 trainer 'is for women'; says it will be 15 or 20 yrs before S Vietnam can
defend itself; says current pace of US troops withdrawals is 'reasonable';
questions meaning of Vietnamization program; says there is 'good possibility' he
will run for pres against Nguyen Van Theeu in Oct

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 12 words

S Vietnam's residents int on attitude to approaching pres election; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 95 words

Over 100 students and men from 62 univs meet with Air Force Acad students and
officials, Colo Springs; many find that they have much in common because they
are from same generation, despite differences in pol views; discussing
US-Caribbean ties, strongly favor 'liberal position' in foreign policy
recommendations; discuss Lt William Calley case; talks with profs and cadets
indicate that majority view is that Calley is guilty of murdering S Vietnamese
civilians as charged and that Army acted correctly in prosecuting him; opinions
divided on other aspects of case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 32 words

Sen Jackson, in Detroit, says Dems in '72 should make econ, not Vietnam, key pol
campaign issue; charges Pres Nixon has failed to take 'dynamic and innovative
steps to reverse unemployment'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 4

LENGTH: 16 words

Chester L Cooper series on problems in achieving a genuinely free election in S
Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Joint US-Vietnamese invasion of Ashau Valley set to start from operation's
forward command post south of Quangtri; commander of operation is Brig Gen Vu
Van Giai; in keeping with US command policy of playing down US involvement in
joint operations, US officers say Amers will only have 'support role'; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 19, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 6

LENGTH: 36 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky, in Quotation of Day about Sen George
McGovern, says 'The day he comes here, I will kick him out. He doesn't need to
say, 'Get out of Vietnam.' I will kick him out personally'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 20, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 62 words

S Vietnam troops reptdly push through Ashau Valley in preparation for allied
drive; US planes bomb enemy positions in valley; S Vietnamese patrols scouting
valley have made no significant contact with enemy forces; US command repts 2
fighter-bombers seeking to protect planes bombing Ho Chi Minh Trail fired
missile at enemy missile site in upper Laotiam Panhandle; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 20, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 15 words

Number of US forces in Vietnam at 287,600, close to Pres Nixon's May 1 target of
284,000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 20, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 32 words

Bitter campaigns by US troops in Ashau Valley, S Vietnam, in the past recalled;
illus of '69 fighting to take Hamburger Hill, so named because of number of
troops slain in repeated assaults

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 20, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 3

LENGTH: 42 words

S Vietnam's Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky says S Vietnam should work to achieve pol
resolution of war, not press for a mil victory over Communists, news conf; seeks
to build up his all-but-declared candidacy against Pres Nguyen Van Thieu in ss
and statements

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 20, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 43 words

US Army transfers Lt Col Frank Miller, commander of helicopter bn, because he
criticized Laos incursion and allowed TV crew to film helicopters using napalm
on enemy positions; told TV newsman that incursion failed to destroy Hanoi's
supply distribution base

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 20, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 8

LENGTH: 84 words

About 1,000 Vietnam veterans begin a wk-long antiwar demonstration in Washington
with march from Arlington Cemetery to the Capitol steps; US Appeals Ct grants
them right to camp out for week on Mall parkland in downtown area as long as
they maintain sanitary facilities and cause no damage; veterans begin arriving
in small groups from as far away as Calif, spend night camping out on Fed
parkland near Potomac; are barred from Arlington Cemetery when they attempt to
lay wreaths hon dead soldiers; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 20, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 5

LENGTH: 19 words

Lr says Sen Fulbright's outrage at US policy in Indochina has blinded him to
different situation in Middle East

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 20, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 4

LENGTH: 34 words

Chester L Cooper series; says non-Communist, pro-peace opponent to S Vietnamese
pres Nguyen Van Thieu may have an even chance in election; cartoons of Nguyen
Cao Ky, Duong Van Minh and Nguyen Van Thieu

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 21, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 112 words

10th Bulgarian party cong opens; Soviet party leader Brezhnev and other leaders
attend; Bulgarian party chief Zhivkov, in opening s, lauds Bulgarian-Soviet
relations; says Bulgaria is making efforts at govt level to normalize relations
with Peking 'in spite of serious ideological and pol differences'; pledges to
improve nation's econ growth, now highest in world after Japan; stresses efforts
to combine collective farming with food processing; attacks US and China, but
moderately; condemns China's slanderous inventions' against Moscow; scores US
policy in Middle East; uses terms 'criminal, agressive and adventurist' in
referring to US role in Indochina; illus illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 21, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 48 words

Defense Dept repts 209 'fragging' incidents among US troops in '70 compared to
96 in '69; fragging is hurling of a fragmentation grenade by one Amer serviceman
against another; dept releases figures after Sen Mansfield tells Sen about
murder of an officer by an enlisted man by fragging

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 21, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Allied reconnaissance in Ashau Valley enters 2d wk with no rept of any major
clash with enemy; US and S Vietnamese bns have reptdly moved into the valley;
minor clashes reptd elsewhere

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 21, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Chief Justice Burger reinstates Fed Dist Ct ban against overnight camping on the
Mall by demonstrating Vietnam veterans; Ramsey Clark to seek decision by full
Sup Ct to overrule Burger's order; Govt, because of lateness of decision,
decides not to seek removal of veterans at night

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 21, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 157 words

Sen Foreign Relations Com opens hearings on 'how to end the war'; about 150
members of Vietnam Veterans Against the War in audience applaud antiwar ss; Sen
Fulbright says purpose of hearings is to give Nixon advice on how to accomplish
his goal, stated in Apr 7 s, of 'total Amer withdrawal from Vietnam'; Sens
McGovern, Hatfield and Hartke score Adm policy as ambiguous; contend it will not
assure total withdrawal of US troops; com is under pressure to rept a specific
proposal to end or limit the war; veterans hiss Sen Case, who suggests
withdrawal by middle of '72 as more realistic; Adm critics note that Communists,
at Paris conf, have repeatedly expressed willingness to open talks on POWs once
US has set a withdrawal deadline; say this stand offers greater promise of
securing safe withdrawal of prisoners; Sen Cooper is lone com dissenter; says
deadline imposed by Cong would intrude on President's power and leave the war
unsettled

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 21, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 114 words

White House Conf on Youth holds 'Indochina caucus'; lists 'people's peace
treaty' to end the war as its highest priority; other high priorities are total
withdrawal of US troops by end of '71 and immediate end of US bombing in
Indochina; 'peoples peace treaty' was initiated in Dec by Natl Student Assn;
biggest unofficial meeting, attended by 400 delegates; Sec Morton to s on
environment; Manpower Inc head Elmer Winter, who is adult member of White House
Conf on Youth study group on unemployment, repts panel's biggest concern is lack
of summer jobs for young people; says panel will ask Nixon to mobilize Govt,
business and labor to hire youths this summer; snow storm continues

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 21, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 5

LENGTH: 20 words

Reply to Brig Gen Hester's Apr 3 lr denies Vietnam war is 'immoral'; says US
helps Asians to fight for their freedom

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 21, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 148 words

Refugee situation in non-Communist areas of Indochina surveyed by H Kamm; tens
of thousands of people found to be still homeless from war to which they see no
end; US financial support on behalf of refugees discussed; air warfare,
Communist tactics forcing entire villages to move into areas more firmly under
their control and large mil drives cited among factors causing displacements;
plight of uprooted Montagnard and Meo mt tribesmen stressed; notes work of Sen
Kennedy's subcom in focusing attention on refugees; S Vietnam has estimated
5-million refugees out of a population of 17-million; air war held to be major
cause of mass displacement; Amers seem to have stopped forcible relocation of
civilian population of an area but practice has been renewed by S Vietnamese;
some Amer civil officials score US failure to halt practice; illus; map
indicates refugee population; chart

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 119 words

Official rept prepared by US customs adviser Joseph R Kvoriak finds that
smuggling at Tansonnhut Airport in Saigon has grown to such overwhelming
dimensions that sole function of customs at airport seems to be to assist
smugglers to bring in their contraband, including dangerous drugs, without
hinderance; US customs advisers in Vietnam head James E Townsend says that
conditions at airport freely allow smuggling of dangerous drugs, including
heroin, and that this has become grave problem due to increasing numbers of Amer
servicemen using heroin; smuggling includes such commodities as gold; rept says
minimum of $3.5-million is lost to Govt through connivivance of customs
officials; other rept details;; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 214 words

Repr McCloskey charges that US State Dept has deliberately concealed extent to
which Amer planes had bombed villages in northern Laos, Sen Subcom on Refugees;
says newsmen covering war were threatened with reprisals if they wrote articles
critical of Laotian Govt; says Tammy Arbuckle (Washington Star) was told he
would be killed if caught by secret police in Laos; says other newsmen also
voiced fear of reprisals; Sen Edward Kennedy holds there is a direct
relationship between growth of Laotian refugees and increases in US bombing in
area; charges US mil activities contribute to a 'bloodbath' and 'agony' among
rapidly growing number of civilians in Indochina; disputes pacification program
dir William E Colby assertion of improvement in refugee problem; McCloskey bases
his views on recent visit he made to Laos; makes pub copy of rept on ints with
over 200 refugees from 96 villages in Plaine des Jarres area in which 75% state
their homes were damaged by bombing attacks, 76% claim attacks were made in '69;
US State Dept maintained in '70 that US bombing operations in northern Laos were
carefully controlled to avoid hitting villages; hearing packed with Vietnam
veterans who groan at Deputy Asst sec Dennis Doolin assertion that mil is under
orders to protect civilians

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 46 words

US helicopters fly about 1,500 S Vietnamese marines to landing zones N of Ashau
Valley in Dakrong River valley; little enemy resistance reptd; Brig Gen Vu Van
Giai and US adviser Lt Col D Walz comment on plans for operation; enemy reptdly
has 10,000 men in Ashau Valley; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 9 words

Illus of sec of Fire Base 6 after battle, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 11 words

USN plane fires rocket at AA missile site in Mugia Pass, N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 73 words

Check of US Senators' offices shows flood of angry lrs protesting Lt Calley
conviction on chargws of murdering Vietnamese civilians has subsided and Cong is
now receiving lrs from small minority in support of trial and verdict and
agreeing with prosecutor, Capt Aubrey Daniel, who protested Pres Nixon's
intervention; Sen Mathias, for example, at first got 450 pro-Calley messages,
but the next 250 messages said that justice was done

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 2

LENGTH: 108 words

White House Youth conf emerges as anti-Adm, anti-Establishment and dovish
despite diversity of delegates; approves, 450-155, resolution urging Pres Nixon
to immediately halt Us mil action and to withdraw all US forces and logistical
support from Vietnam by Dec 31; minority resolution backing gradual withdrawal
and Adm 'Vietnamization' plan defeated; preamble read by K Rux charges that high
ideals upon which country was founded have never been reality for all peoples
from beginning to present day; urges Govt and other power structures to respond
swiftly; Sen Brock immediately denounces statement, s; other recommendations
listed; conf ends

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 2

LENGTH: 147 words

US Sup Ct declines to overrule Chief Justice Burger's order barring camping by
Vietnam antiwar veterans on Mall; Govt, however, does not arrest 900 or so
veterans camping on Mall; Justice Dept issues 'interpretation' of Burger order
that veterans are free to remain overnight on Mall but not to sleep; veterans
agree to risk arrest by sleeping on Mall; Natl Pk Service police, responsible
for mall, are reluctant to make arrests; Nixon will miss Apr 24 demonstration
and also wk-long demonstration of Mayday Tribe, group threatening to stop
functioning of govt if war does not end May 1; makes plans to go to Camp David
or Calif; Press Sec Ziegler denies he seeks to avoid antiwar demonstration; 16
HR Dems offer to let veterans sleep in their offices; Sens, including Kennedy
and McGovern, visit encampment and urge Adm to permit it to remain; illus of
Repr S Chisholm with veterans

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 3

LENGTH: 180 words

Prof Gottfried Haberler lr on Apr 1 ed holds US balance-of-payments deficit
would become greater and 'flow of dollars' to Eur would be larger if Eur
countries took protectionist measures to reduce US exports to Eur; says ed
scores US policy of benign neglect while advocating main point made by
proponents of passive approach that US must give priority to concerns about
domestic econ; notes ed recommends practical steps to reduce payments deficit to
make clear US determination to solve problem it creates for others; says
proposals include inflation curbs and expenditure increases or tax reductions;
holds deficit spending on such scale would hardly strengthen confidence of
foreign central banks in integrity of dollar even if higher interest rates,
caused by larger budget deficit, should decrease capital flows from US to Eur or
induce capital flows from Eur to US; says early end to war in Indochina should
not be influenced by balance-of-payments considerations in light of possible
Communist takeover of S Vietnam; says Nixon Adm has cut outflow of expenditures
for war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 5

LENGTH: 20 words

Lr asks if US is withdrawing men from Vietnam at rate of 10,000 to 14,000 a mo,
why are the draft calls at 15,000 or more

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              260 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 5

LENGTH: 18 words

Natl Peace Action Coalition ad quotes I F Stone appeal for support of Apr 24
Vietnam antiwar demonstration

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              261 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 22, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 83, Column 3

LENGTH: 132 words

Former FCC chmn Paul A Porter urges permanent award of licenses to TV and radio
stations as part of proposed 'bill of rights' for broadcasting, s, Peabody
Awards luncheon; CBS documentary Selling of the Pentagon receives special prize;
says broadcasting has 'reached a state of maturity where it can be trusted';
says fact that airways belong to the people should not support groups seeking to
hinder free expression of views or responsible journalism; ABC pres Leonard H
Goldenson rejects demands by Repub Natl Com and Dem Natl Com to inspect ABC News
logs on coverage of Vietnam war, lrs to com chmn Sen Dole and chmn Lawrence F
O'Brien; NBC pres Julian Goodman assails FCC investigations of broadcasting
fairness; says agency is out of touch with realities of broadcasting (J Gould
rept)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              262 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 171 words

US Dist Ct Judge George L Hart dissolves injunction against camping on Mall by
Vietman veterans; scores Justice Dept for having sought ban and, after affirming
it at Sup Ct, failing to enforce it; also reduces charges against 110 veterans
arrested for protesting on Sup Ct steps; 700 veterans and as many supporters
conduct candlelight march, hail decision; repts that Pres Nixon ordered Justice
Dept to be tolerant with veterans are not confirmed; 150 veterans accompany
their chief spokesman, John F Kerry, a former USN officer, to Sen Foreign
Relations Com; Kerry tells com that too few Sens take 'gutsy' stand on war and
too many leaders are intimidated by supposed Communist threat in Vietnam; says
veterans feel betrayed and misused by Adm; asks, 'How do you ask a man to be the
last to die in Vietnam? How do you ask a man to be the last to die for a
mistake?'; illus; People's Coalition for Peace says Justice Dept granted them
pe"72 ;3" using sec of W Potomac pk on 24-hr basis as long as they did not sleep
there

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              263 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 164 words

HR, 319-67, approves $5.5-billion econ development bill embracing crash program
to create jobs for unemployed; bill would authorize $2-billion to help depressed
areas build pub works, providing construction jobs for unemployed; seen set back
for Pres Nixon's fed revenue sharing proposal; is modeled after law enacted in
Kennedy Adm but later abandoned; would provide Fed grants to areas with actual
or threatened unemployment rates of at least 6%; would also authorize grants to
areas with unusually severe unemployment among Vietnam war veterans; HR,
262-128, rejects Repub leaders' move to delete pub works provision from overall
bill; leaders warn that Nixon might veto bill; argue that pub service jobs would
fail to solve unemployment problem in such fields as aerospace and defense
industries; in related development, HR Labor subcom approves bill that would
provide $4-billion over next 5 yrs to create pub service jobs; sponsors estimate
bill would create up to 500,000 jobs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              264 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 7 words

Biog sketch; full name is John Forbes Kerry

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              265 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 16 words

Excerpts from Dem Sens broadcast in reply to Pres Nixon Apr 7 s on troops
withdrawal from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              266 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 20 words

Vietnam casualty rept for wk; 56 Amers killed, 195 wounded; 494 S Vietnamese
killed, 1,562 wounded; 2,791 enemy killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              267 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Sens Buckley, Saxbe, Hansen and Taft defend Pres Nixon Vietnam troops withdrawal
policy, ss, Sen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              268 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Communist delegates at Paris peace talks, before opening of session, hail
antiwar demonstrators in US; at session, charge Pres Nixon pledged in Apr 7 s to
keep US troops in Vietnam indefinitely

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              269 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 86 words

US State Dept aide William H Sullivan denies Repr McCloskey's charge that Amer
bombing is major cause of civilian refugees in Laos, Sen Judiciary Subcom on
Refugees; contends 'prime cause' of refugees is constant mil pressure from N
Vietnamese; claims Amer bombing has been carefully controlled to avoid populated
areas; Sen Edward Kennedy challenges claim; says US bombing has contributed to
at least 75% of refugees in Laos; Fred Branfman, former volunteer and free-lance
writer in Laos, supports McCloskey's charge

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              270 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 63 words

US fighter-bombers strike 3 times at missile and antiaircraft sites in N
Vietnam; 1 mission flies 185 mi into N Vietnam to strike sites around an air
base; action is 1 of deepest penetrations by US bombers since last summer; US
command says 'protective reaction' strike followed N Vietnamese firing on a USN
reconaissance plane, presumably on a mission to photograph a MIG base

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              271 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 2

LENGTH: 53 words

More S Vietnamese troops airlifted into Dakrong River area north of Ashau Valley
where search for enemy troop and supply concentrations continue; troop-carrying
helicopters meet small-arms fire; Vu Van Giai says there are are no S Vietnamese
or US arty bases in the valley, although some are within range of it; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              272 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 13 words

Pres Nixon makes posthumous awards to families of 3 soldiers killed in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              273 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 3

LENGTH: 26 words

Books on US involvement in Vietnam revd: Roots of Involvement, by Marvin Kalb
and Elie Abel; America's Asia, edited by Edward Friedman and Mark Selden revd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              274 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 3

LENGTH: 30 words

Jan Barry article on why veterans protest war; Barry, a founder of Vietnam
Veterans Against the War, received an apptmt from Vietnam to West Point from
which he resigned; cartoon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              275 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 23, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

6 Dem Sens respond on TV to Pres Nixon's Apr 7 s on Vietnam troop withdrawals;
ABC granted time for reply in response to request by Dem Natl Chmn O'Brien; Sens
Humphrey, McGovern, Hughes, Bayh and Muskie urge Nixon to establish terminal
date; say US had done as much for S Vietnam as could be reasonably asked; Sen
Jackson says Nixon should not announce a deadline publicly but should have a
date firmly in mind

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              276 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 175 words

Vietnam War veterans, ending wk of antiwar demonstrations, discard their medals
by throwing them over a fence erected in front of the Capitol; illus; White
House sets tone of forbearance toward other antiwar demonstrators who will
protest on Apr 24 in 4th protest since Nixon took office; does not expect
violence; veterans testify at Cong 'special ad hoc' hearing held in Sen Office
Bldg attended by Sens McGovern, Mondale and Hart and by Repr Vanik; Dale Grenada
testimony on warfare against civilians noted; VFW comdr Herbert Rainwater says
demonstrators are not typical veterans; veterans demonstrate on steps of Ct to
protest Ct's decision upholding an injunction against their sleeping on the
Mall; 106 arrested; serious charge of obstructing justice lessened; events at wk
of veterans' demonstrations revd; thousands of civilians join 600 active duty
servicemen in memorial service 'for all Indochina war dead', Washington Natl
Cathedral; hear Repr Drinan urge a $50-billion reparations to be paid over next
5 yrs to 'all peoples of Indochina'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              277 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 203 words

Sec of State Rogers says US hopes that new contacts with China will become 'new
chapter' in relations and not just 'new page,' as Chou suggested, news conf,
Washington; says US initiatives toward improving ties were not begun with idea
of irritating USSR in any way; says that if Russians are irritated, they have
expressed no such views to US; says he supposes that it is possible China could
encourage N Vietnam to negotiate peaceful settlement in Indochina if US-Chinese
relations improve; cites hope that US 'can begin to have some trade' with
Communist China; says rev of US policy toward UN admission of Communists is
actively under way and being discussed with many other govts; lauds press
coverage of developing relationship between Peking and Washington and, in doing
so, appears to be gently rebuking Vice Pres Agnew; other State Dept officials
rept that Chinese diplomats in number of foreign capitals have recently adopted
increasingly sociable attitude toward Amers; says repts of new Soviet strategic
nuclear deployment emphasize need for including offensive weapons in any accord
on strategic arms limitation; Rogers announces he will visit UAR, Jordan,
Lebanon and Saudi Arabia as well as Israel; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              278 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 22 words

US command says attack by USN jets on enemy AA defenses at Quanlang airfield may
have damaged 1 or 2 MIG-21 planes on the ground

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              279 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 50 words

US command announces start of 7th phase of Pres Nixon's Vietnam troop withdrawal
program a wk early; troop cutbacks are from 10,000 to 15,000 ahead of schedule;
allied search for enemy troop and supply concentrations in and around Ashau
Valley goes into 11th day with no significant contact reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              280 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 121 words

E B Carson, former Marine lt, testifies that his unit penetrated nearly 5 mi
inside Laotian territory in Feb, '69, as part of a 2-wk 'interdiction and
ambush' mission, special 1-day hearing held by group of Cong members to hear
testimony from some of the Vietnam veterans in Washington to protest war; says
operation involved 1,500 US marines and was later reptd by mil command in Saigon
as having taken place entirely within Quangtri Prov, S Vietnam; says his men
were told not to talk with newsmen about incursion which did violate neutrality
of Laos provided for in '54 and '62 Geneva accords; Sec Laird, in May '70, 1 yr
after operation, did testify that US forces had made brief incursions into Laos
on ltd missions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              281 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 43 words

League of Red Cross Socs asks N Vietnam Red Cross Soc to specify what kind of
supplies it would like to obtain from a $200-thousand donation by UNICEF; UNICEF
asked league to make inquiry because N Vietnamese Govt refuses to have any
dealings with UNICEF

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              282 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 106 words

Overseas Press Club of Amer pays special tribute to about 25 newsmen and women
missing while reptg on fighting in Indochina since '65; Polk Award presented to
Anthony Lewis for article in Times Magazine and to Times financial-business news
sec and Op-Ed Page; Amb George Bush denounces recent harassment of foreign
diplomatic missions; asserts that all law-abiding Amers condemn 'tactics of
outlaws' and that oppression of Soviet Jews cannot be relieved through violence
in US; Soviet Embassy condemns bombing of Amtorg office; police reptdly seek
Jewish Defense League pres Rabbi Meir Kahane for questioning in connection with
incident

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              283 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 100 words

Organizers of NYC contingent of Apr 24 demonstration expect many 'first time'
protesters from the suburbs, trade unions and new pol groups to offset drop in
student involvement in Vietnam war protests; groups mobilize to transport as
many as 100,000 marchers; ranks will include more older people and more who are
either city working class or 'establishment' suburban; in contrast to previous
yrs, a high proportion of buses transporting demonstrators is coming from small
towns on LI and in Conn, Westchester County and northern NJ; illus of
demonstrators pitching tents near Washington Monument

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              284 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

Comment on changing sentiment on Vietnam war in San Diego, Calif; developing
antiwar feeling is a significant development in San Diego, dominated by the mil
and conservative pol

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              285 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 61 words

USAF says Alfred H Hubbard, identified in recent TV int as a Vietnam veteran and
a former USAF capt and pilot, actually had been a sgt with no record of service
in Vietnam; Hubbard, again on TV, says he posed as an officer to give himself
'an image' in the antiwar movement; says he is ending his role as imposter
because 'we came to Washington to tell the truth'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              286 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Ed lauds reversal of Adm policy on Vietnam veteran's orderly encampment on the
Mall; says demonstrators should be allowed to have their say, even if it is not
heard or heeded by the Adm

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              287 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 24, 1971, Saturday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 5

LENGTH: 38 words

Prof Ernest R May lr says press did not notice difference between Pres Nixon's
Apr 7 Vietnam s and past ss; says Nixon's rhetoric is different; notes he made
no threats, set no conditions for troops withdrawal, other differences

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              288 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 105 words

Anthropologist, Dr Gerald C Hickey, who has spent 10 yrs in S Vietnam doing
research on S Vietnamese and Montagnards, to testify May 13 before Sen Foreign
Relations Com on displaced persons; in int, Saigon, says war can be ended only
by Vietnamese themselves, through pol accommodation between S Vietnamese Govt
and numerous pol movements that exist in S Vietnam; says accommodation would
lead to coalition govt that would include Natl Liberation Front; says greatest
failing of US advisers in S Vietnam since '54 is that they never cared about the
ordinary people and that they projected own values on S Vietnamese; Hickey illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              289 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

US planes bomb 2 N Vietnam missile sites NW of Donghoi and SW of Hatinh; attacks
described as 'protective reaction'; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              290 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 50 words

UN Under Sec Paul G Hoffman says he thinks most Amers want US forces out of
Vietnam and that div in US over war is 'somewhat artificial'; holds there is
only small pct of Amers who do not believe in dissent; in 80th birthday int,
calls 12 yrs with UN development program 'best yrs of my life'; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              291 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 7; (UPI)

LENGTH: 27 words

Atty Gen Mitchell says he is relieved that Vietnam antiwar protest was peaceful
but persists in warning of likelihood of violence in next 2 wks of
demonstrations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              292 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 58, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

Vietnam antiwar marcher Charles Hughes int; came to Washington from Chicago;
tells of change of attitude on war; he had voted for Pres Nixon; demonstration
is 1st in which he participated

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              293 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 58, Column 4

LENGTH: 61 words

San Francisco demonstration; active duty servicemen lead march of thousands of
Vietnam antiwar protesters; later rally of over 150,000 in Golden Gate Pk marred
by militants who seize control of speakers' platform; Repr McCloskey leaves
rally without speaking; Mayor Alioto calls marchers 'loyal Amers' and says
'their cause is just'; longshoremen also join protest

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              294 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 58, Column 6

LENGTH: 33 words

M Frankel comments on how Washington calmly absorbs Vietnam antiwar
demonstrations; says marching minority now feels itself becoming a natl
majority; notes good cheer and self-discipline of marchers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              295 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

7 US soldiers killed, 12 wounded in booby trap explosion, 26 mi SE of Quangngai,
S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              296 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 67, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

US Appeals Ct, NYC, upholds '70 dismissals of separate suits by Salvatore
Orlando and Pfc Malcolm A Berk challenging const of Vietnam war; holds Cong has
acted in tandem with Pres in supporting war, that combined power of legis and
exec branches is beyond reach of judiciary

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              297 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Comment on antiwar demonstrations and sponsoring orgns, Natl Peace Action
Coalition, People's Coalition for Peace and Justice and Vietnam Veterans Against
the War

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              298 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 23 words

Texts of statements made during the demonstrations against war in Vietnam,
Washington, DC, including those by John F Kerry and Sen Hartke

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              299 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2

LENGTH: 29 words

Comment on S Vietnam Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky's threat to 'kick out' Sen McGovern
'the day he comes'; comments on preparations for S Vietnam pres election
campaign; cartoon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              300 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 2

LENGTH: 75 words

Ed notes Sen Foreign Relations Com hearings on proposals to end the war in the
face of Pres Nixon's evident intention to continue US involvement until S
Vietnamese have attained capacity to defend themselves; says US sacrifice of
45,000 Amers killed, spending of over $125-billion needed at home and training
and equipping of S Vietnamese Army have more than fulfilled any reasonable
obligation to S Vietnam; urges Nixon to end all involvement in war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              301 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 226 words

J Reston article on increasingly significant role that Sec Rogers is playing in
Nixon Adm's foreign policy planning especially in Middle East; notes that
Nixon's foreign policy adviser Kissinger was deeply involved in Middle East
during Syrian incursion into Jordan but that he has since left development of
peace talks to Rogers and Asst Sec Sisco; contends assignment has not been easy
for Rogers because of Israel's belief that State Dept is full of Arabists and
because of pro-Israel lobby, which is critical of Rogers whenever he attempts to
work out compromise; contends that Israelis view Rogers so eager to produce
settlement that he has proposed terms that jeopardize Israel's security and
interfere with chances for compromise settlement; holds Rogers has not been
pleased with efforts of Israeli officials to lobby with US Sens against his
policy, action that forced him to have secret meeting with Sen to counteract Min
Eban's influence; maintains that Rogers has continually been insisting to Nixon
that time for settlement is ripe, and Nixon has finally allowed him to make trip
to area to pursue his inquiries personally; contends that trip is critical
mission for Rogers because he would like to complete his work at State Dept
before end of Nixon's 1st term or before if Sup Ct apptmt were available; also
cites role in post-Vietnam policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              302 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12, Column 0

LENGTH: 62 words

Stewart Alsop lr on Emmet J Hughes article on pol history of '60s ascribing to
him 'newly militant writings' and linking them to visits with Pres advisor Henry
J Kissinger; takes issue with Hughes comments on his views on Vietnam war; cites
his own attack on Laotian operation as a mil failure and pol disaster; denies
his views were dictated by Kissinger; Hughes replies

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              303 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22, Column 0

LENGTH: 46 words

Robert Woll article on Repr William R Anderson, naval hero from Tenn Bible Belt,
and how he changed from hawk to dove on Vietnam War and came to defense of
Berrigans and to attack FBI dir Hoover over his charges against them; Anderson
illus after visiting Berrigans in prison

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              304 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Section 6; Page 36, Column 0

LENGTH: 18 words

Lrs laud Neil Sheehan Mar 28 essay-rev on possible US Vietnam war crimes in
examination of books on subject

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              305 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1971, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Estimated 200,000 rally in Vietnam antiwar protest, Washington; rally leaders
put turnout at 500,000; estimated 156,000 demonstrate in San Francisco;
Washington rally sponsored by Natl Peace Action Coalition and People's Coalition
for Peace and Justice; 2 dozen speakers in Washington include David Livingston,
Repr Bella Abzug, John F Kerry, Ernest Gruening and Mrs Coretta S King; Pres
Nixon is in Camp David; illus of demonstration; map of march route

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              306 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 39 words

N Vietnamese attack S Vietnamese combat base at Hoanganh, make other attacks on
US units in central and northern coastal region of S Vietnam; 7 Amers killed, 60
wounded; 32 S Vietnamese killed, 119 wounded; enemy loses 54 men; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              307 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 127 words

6 US veterans of war discuss various aspects of war, D Susskind TV discussion;
charge US Govt betrayed them and agree that conflict is a racial war; ex-USMC Lt
Robert O Muller says that he found, when in Vietnam, 'that our reasons for being
there were totally false'; disputes contentions that Amers are fighting for
Vietnamese self-determination; says US tells S Vietnamese 'you will be dead
before you will be red'; all agree that S Vietnamese troops are not good combat
soldiers and will lose war when Amers leave; agree that both marijuana and hard
drugs are offered for sale on nearly every st; say S Vietnamese politicians
profit from sales; other veterans in program besides Muller are B Britt, Charles
Knight, Stephen McDonough and Steven Uzzi; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              308 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Official secrecy surrounds US-S Vietnam mil operation in Ashau Valley area for
past 12 days; 101st Div assigns escort officers to newsmen trying to int div
soldiers, reptdly to help but in effect keeping people from talking; helicopter
pilots repts getting special orders for 1st time not to let newsmen hitch rides
unless with escort; US Army seen intent on avoiding a bad press

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              309 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 73 words

Banquet, Peking, marks 1st anniv of summit conf of Indochinese regimes at war
with US and its allies; Prince Norodom Sihanouk is host; others attending
listed; Indochina spokesmen denounce US presence in Indochina, pledge mutual
support and affirm continuation of their fight until victory and expulsion of
the US from Indochina; Chinese Premier Chou En-lai stresses Chinese support for
these aims; omits any harsh invectives against US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              310 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 5

LENGTH: 75 words

Most helicopter pilot trainees in Ft Rucker, Ala, expect to be in combat
situation in Vietnam this yr or next; training described; by US Defense Dept
definition, helicopter crews are 'support' and not 'combat' troops; many
trainees reveal misgivings about war in ints; some who have already been in
combat, commenting on Lt William Calley case, detail incidents where helicopters
killed many villagers; many trainees and grads found eager for combat

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              311 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 2

LENGTH: 61 words

Ed on Vietnam antiwar demonstration notes growing antiwar sentiment in US and
varied cross-sec of Amers who participated; calls Pres Nixon absence from
Washington a counter-demonstration and a calculated way of his saying he did not
care to hear the demonstrators' message; says it is the responsibility of
leadership in dem countries to listen to dissident voices

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              312 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 3

LENGTH: 45 words

Maj Gen J H Cushman, in lr, denies contention in Burke Marshall Apr 10 article
that 'our war in Indochina is based on killing civilians'; says 'solemn and
repeated orders' to US troops have always been to take every possible measure to
keep civilians from harm; drawing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CRITICAL REVIEWS & APPRAISALS

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAMS & DRAWINGS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              313 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

A Lewis on Vietnam war as setting example of lawlessness; says Pres Johnson took
US into war in disregard of const requirement that Cong declare war; says Cong
and pub were tricked into war at time of purported Tonkin Gulf episode and that
US continues to wage a war without clear authority; notes organized antiwar
action by some US lawyers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              314 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 26, 1971, Monday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

Sec Resor arrives in Saigon to study problem of drug addiction among Amer
servicemen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              315 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 226 words

Pres Nixon holds that despite 'sense of despair' in some elements of population,
there is no reason to lose 'confidence' in econ, s, US C of C; says he will
continue to reject counsel of those who would 'legislate' econ growth or who
'advocate total repression of econ freedom of businessmen and working men';
cheered lustily when he stresses need for more pride in free enterprise system;
says he will continue to use powers of his office to elicit 'responsible'
behavior from business and labor on prices and wages; says that on balance he
finds much cause for cheer in econ picture; notes decline in inflation rate and
increase in productivity; holds there is no reason to lose 'confidence' in US
foreign policy aims; says US intends to disengage itself from Vietnam but will
reject counsel of 'new isolationists' whose prescriptions for quick withdrawal
would increase prospects of 'a Communist take-over' and lessen prospects of 'a
lasting peace'; describing Amer as nation with 'conscience', holds present
welfare system is demeaning and says his welfare reform program would guarantee
an income floor for every needy family with dependent children; emphasizes that
his proposals would require employable recipients to take jobs or accept job
training; stresses there is no reason to lose confidence in nation's sense of
concern for poor; illus; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              316 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

US troop strength in Vietnam is down to 281,400, lowest since July '66

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              317 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

Vietcong mil forces document urges US troops to stop fighting or desert;
document is read by Vietcong spokesman at Paris peace talks Duong Dinh Thao,
news conf; spokesman says some US soldiers fight in Vietcong ranks; excerpts
from document; US Defense Dept repts no knowledge of Amer deserters fighting
with Vietcong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              318 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

People's Coalition begins wk-long Vietnam antiwar 'people's lobby' directed at
Cong and the Fed Govt; illus; in 4th wave of protest, scheduled to begin on
weekend, Mayday Tribe promises to disrupt Govt activity; young lobbyists wander
through halls of Cong, Sen bldgs and around the Capitol; occupy offices of Sens
Scott and Tower; Sen Stennis locks door against them; 25 scattered arrests
reptd; 40 of 104 demonstrators held for blocking NJ tpk stay in jail until they
can get $50 required for bail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              319 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

US Pentagon spokesman repts N Vietnamese MIG fighters have darted into southern
Laos in past few wks 'on several occasions to threaten US aircraft'; says he
knows of no instance in which enemy fighters have actually fired on Amer
aircraft

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              320 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 111 words

Capt Eugene M Kotouc ct-martial, Ft McPherson, Ga; ex-soldier Fred J Widmer
testifies Kotouc cut off part of finger of Vietcong suspect he questioned a few
hrs after mass killings at Mylai; 3 other former soldiers testify they saw
incident but only Widmer positively identifies Kotouc as one who committed
alleged offense; Kotouc counsel Robert C Crosby says Koutouc will testify
incident was accident; 1 witness testifies Vietnam natl police executed the
Vietcong suspect later the same day of the incident; Kotouc also charged with
cutting a prisoner on the neck during the same episode; witnesses who saw the
cutting unable to pick out Kotouc in ct; Kotouc por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              321 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 16 words

Total US combat deaths in Vietnam at 44,974 as of Apr 17; total wounded is
297,771 as of Apr 17

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              322 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6

LENGTH: 167 words

Edgar Snow, in rept in Life on int with Chmn Mao Tse-tung, says Mao would
welcome visit by Pres Nixon, would like to talk with him either as Pres or as a
tourist; repts Mao believes there can be mutual respect and equality between
Chinese and Amer people; says foreign diplomats in Peking were aware last yr
that 'go-betweens' were delivering messages from Washington to Peking Govt; says
purport, among other things, was to assure Chinese leaders US wants to end
impasse in relations, to bring Communists into UN and to enter into diplomatic
relations; was also to assure China that Nixon was 'firmly determined' to
withdraw from Vietnam as speedily as possible; says he disapproved to
maltreatment of purged party members during cultural revolution in '67 and '68,
corroborated foreigners rept of chaotic conditions during that time; repts Mao
thinks China should learn to decentralize in Amer manner, spread responsibility
and wealth among the states; describes conditions under which Mao granted int

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              323 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 52 words

VA Admr Donald Johnson repts good progress in treating addicts among Vietnam war
veterans seeking rehabilitation, Sen com; repts 5 drug treatment centers for
veterans have been opened and 13 more will be opened in coming yr; Sen Hartke
says some studies indicate a heroin addiction rate of 10% to 1p% among troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              324 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

T Wicker says antiwar rallies are not causing Nixon Adm to change its basic
course; says Nixon aims at 'Korean solution,' where S Vietnam would survive as a
non-Communist state, even with an authoritative regime, bolstered by US mil aid;
says Nixon policy is not responsive to antiwar sentiments of a growing part of
the population and risks violation of principle of govt by consent of the
governed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              325 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 56 words

Enemy shelling destroys ammunition dump, Quinhon, in 3d day of wave of attacks
through much of S Vietnam; 10 S Vietnamese soldiers killed, 26 wounded; 18
civilians killed; 3 airfields are among allied installations shelled during the
day; enemy stages ground attacks in areas from Mekong Delta to Danang; details
on other action; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              326 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 27, 1971, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 306 words

Recommendation of special Pres comm that US support Communist Chinese seat in
UN, but without expulsion of Nationalists, happens to coincide with apparent
thaw in ties; some US officials known to believe Peking would not now make
Nationalists expulsion a condition for accepting membership; comm stresses issue
is not matter for question of dual representation for 1 China, but provision of
2 seats for 2 govts; Nixon Adm officials disclose that Rumania has served as
principal channel in conveying to Chinese US desires and intentions concerning
an improved relationship; Nixon White House conf in Oct with Pres Ceausescu
linked; officials say Deputy Premier Radulescu conveyed US hopes when he met
with Chou in Peking in Nov and again in Mar; State Dept formally acknowledges
'number of other govts' have relayed Nixon's hopes, but spokesman declines to
identify them; Rumania and France reliably reptd to be among them; spokesman, C
W Bray 3d, comments on Edgar Snow int with Mao pub in Life magazine; Press Sec
Ziegler confirms rept in Life that Nixon said he would like to travel to China
sometime; will not discuss whether Nixon would accept inv; comm under Henry
Cabot Lodge presents recommendations including urging small UN members to
renounce their voting and election privileges while retaining all other rights
as members in an associate status; suggests membership for 'firmly established
govts' might apply in time to 2 Gers, 2 vietnams and 2 Koreas; comm proposes
establishing in UN a special 'exec com' composed of US, USSR and 3 or 4 other
members to follow world developments and rept on them to periodic meetings of
Security Council; proposes US cooperate in peace-keeping forces through
development of contingents for UN peace reserve and sea transport facilities;
several comm members listed; Lodge and Nixon illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              327 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 28, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 246 words

Sec Rogers calls on Communist China to begin to play a 'constructive rather than
disruptive role' in SE Asia, s, SEATO min council meeting, London; says policy
of US is to draw Peking into direct involvement in an Asia 'that respects and
accommodates pol diversity'; SEATO mins, for 1st time, refer to China in their
talks as something less than an expansionist aggressor bent on subversion of
area; diplomatic observers in London interpret Sec Rogers bid to Communist China
as invitation to China to use its influence with Hanoi to bring about negotiated
solution of Vietnam war; Rogers reptdly tells Asian allies at meeting that
majority of Amers back Pres Nixon policy of gradual disengagement; several
speakers at conf welcome Chinese overtures to US but Australian repr Leslie Bury
is cautious; Rogers calls admission of table tennis team and selected newsmen
small welcome the Chinese overture'; France, 8th member of orgn, does not
participate in annual meetings; S Vietnam Min Tran Van Lam addresses session as
repr of state covered by treaty protocol; Rogers and other members of his party
attend formal dinner given by Queen Elizabeth; Rogers and Sec Douglas-Home
illus; Rogers reptdly says US will decide within mo on position it will take at
UN in fall on Chinese representation issue; Douglas-Home reptdly says GB is also
reviewing its policy; Rogers says N Vietnamese no longer have 'large and safe'
sanctuaries in Laos or Cambodia following allied invasions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              328 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 28, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 67 words

Mil judge directs verdict of acquittal on charge of cutting a Vietnam prisoner
on the neck in Capt Eugene M Kotouc trial, lets stand finger-cutting charge;
affidavit by Kotouc says incident was an accident; judge blocks detailed
examination that deals with alleged mistreatments of prisoners; says he will
fully explore the matter in his instructions to the ct when both sides finish
their presentations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              329 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 28, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 74 words

Saigon Govt orders US writer, Don Luce, who reported on 'tiger cages' in Con Son
prison, to leave country before May 16; Luce was told by S Vietnamese Natl Press
Center last Oct that his press credentials would not be renewed because of his
trip to Con Son; Luce feared he would be forced to leave S Vietnam in Feb, but
intervention of several Congressmen and indignation among Amer newsmen in Saigon
helped him get an extension of his visa

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              330 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 28, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 50 words

Allied installations shelled for 4th consecutive day, Vietnam; minor damages and
casualties result in most instances; US analysts say captured enemy documents
indicate more intensified shelling could be expected in coming wks to mark
several important holidays; scattered ground fighting reptd; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              331 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 28, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 28 words

Cambodian Govt troops returning to Pnompenh from fighting on Ho Chi Minh Trail
engage in fighting with enemy soldiers attacking mil communications center at
Ang Snoul

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              332 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 28, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 97 words

People's Coalition members protesting Vietnam War lobby at Washington draft hq;
4 allowed to enter to talk with hq employes; another group of protesters later
blocks entrance to hq; illus; some demonstrators held after spending night at
Sen Scott's office; protesters conduct series of demonstrations at Capitol and
other Govt bldgs, including interruptions of debate on the Sen floor and
demonstrations in the offices of individual Congressmen; 1,400 DC Natl Guard
members told to rept for training to be available if militants attempt to block
traffic and shut down Govt offices

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              333 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 28, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 6

LENGTH: 61 words

33 religious leaders, representing virtually all major US faiths, issue
statement calling for 3-day period of 'repentance and renewal' over Indochina
war; statement calls for period of fasting and prayer on May 1 and asks that ch
bells be rung from noon to 1 PM; declares increasing number of citizens are
recognizing their personal implication in war; signers listed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              334 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 28, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 1

LENGTH: 99 words

Ed questions anomalies and inconsistencies revealed in survey of what happened
to 21 US soldiers, other than Lt William Calley, convicted of murder of
Vietnamese; questions whether chain of command has been vigilant enough in
trying to prevent massacres like Mylai; urges trials of 2 of Calley's superiors
go forward; says it was wrong for Army to close cases of still higher officers;
notes further problem of prosecuting ex-soldiers whose wartime crimes are not
discovered until they have returned to civilian life; suggests additional legis
and perhaps a special tribunal to close gap in law

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              335 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 28, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Sulzberger comment discusses Boer War as Britain's 'Vietnam,' for hurting Brit
reputation for morality and causing great domestic controversy; recalls that as
result Afrikaners or Boers gained pol power, turned S Africa into ind repub and
eventually withdrew from Brit Commonwealth

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              336 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 28, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 4

LENGTH: 79 words

Ishwer C Ojha and Daniel Tretiak article on changing US-Communist China
relations says relations remained sour after US troops withdrew from Cambodia
and may have improved after defeat of US-backed S Vietnamese invasion of S Laos,
because reptd abstention of US troops from invasion may have indicated change of
US policy; notes potential significance to internatl stability of Chinese-US
rapprochement, with bipolarity of past being replaced by tripolar internatl
system

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              337 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 28, 1971, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 116 words

Sec Laird says USSR has resumed construction at one or more of four ABM sites on
outskirts of Moscow after break of about three yrs, news conf; says USSR may be
preparing to deploy an improved interceptor; confirms repts that USSR may be
deploying multiple warheads on some SS-9s and warns that if USSR continues to
build up offensive and defensive weapons and that if no arms control agreement
is reached, he may be forced to ask Cong to expand US ICBM arsenal; shows
reconnaissance photo of surfaced Soviet missile sub near Honolulu; insists US
equips S Vietnam only to defend itself, not to invade N Vietnam; reiterates
intention to leave office at end of term, but denies he will run for Cong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              338 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 275 words

Sec Rogers says US would 'very much favor' exch of journalists, students and
professional people with Communist China in near future, taped TV int, London;
says Pres Nixon visit to China might well be possible if US-China relations
continue to improve and China begins complying with rules of internatl law but
is 'down rd a piece'; says visit would not be practical now; says US is
encouraged by Chinese overtures to outside world but that basic Chinese policy
has not changed; says it is not US policy to irritate USSR by improved
Chinese-US ties; communique on SEATO conf, London, does not mention China,
despite intensive discussion of its policies, reflecting skepticism by several
Asian members about true motives behind Chinese gestures toward improved
relations with US; declines to say what position US will take in Assembly this
fall on UN representation issue but says US favors more normal Chinese relations
with rest of world; says Communist China is still expansionist despite its
recent friendly gestures, that it would like to have greater influence in
Indochina; SEATO mins communique says their Govts are pleased by trend of mil
developments in Indochina over past yr; recognize need for allied incursions,
laud 'firm determination' of Cambodians; Rogers attends final session; mins
issue communique adopted without debate or revision; some conf participants link
lack of usual debate or need for revision to shared realization that orgn is
ineffective; communique praises increased capacity of S Vietnam to defend
itself, backs allied invasions of Laos and Cambodia; Sec Rogers confs with Amb
Bruce, London, reptdly on POWs issue

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              339 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 124 words

May Day Tribe members charge Sen Foreign Relations Com with 'lack of initiative'
in ending the Vietnam war, 90-min session with com which invited group to
testify after group attempted to force way into com hearing room 2 days ago; com
members, including Sens Javits and Fulbright, warn that group's planned
disruption of capital next wk will be 'counterproductive'; group organizer C C
Marshall says 'people have no way to vote' on war; group member Mrs Susan
Gregory, in exch with Sen Scott about Mrs Gregory's speaking to Mrs Nguyen Thi
Binh in Paris, calls Scott 'paranoid'; 200 members of People's Coalition
arrested for blocking sidewalk; Repr Ichord says HR Internal Security Com will
probe People's Coalition and Peace Action Coalition

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              340 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

Ashau Valley operation, S Vietnam, enters 3d wk; no major contact with enemy
reptd so far

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              341 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 19 words

2 USN jets attack N Vietnamese AA sites 110 mi NW of demilitarized zone after
enemy gunners reptdly fired on them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              342 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

USSR Defense Min newspaper, in analysis of recent Laotian incursion, says S
Vietnamese suffered heavy losses because Amer advisers underestimated opposing
forces in area and were caught by surprise by tanks and heavy arty; article does
not mention that operation was directed against N Vietnamese; says Cambodian
incursion was more successful because 'liberation forces' in Cambodia were less
experienced than those in Laos and because US ground troops were committed to
battle; claims Laotian operation demonstrated 'bankruptcy' of Nixon Adm
Vietnamization program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              343 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 50 words

Sec Laird says he has been assured that ships of neutral nations are available
to evacuate POWs of both sides if N Vietnam would agree to transfer POWs to
third countries, s, Air Force Assn, Washington; urges that all sick, wounded and
long-term POWs be sent to neutral countries for duration of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              344 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 144 words

Ex-Army Sgt Danny S Notley tells unofficial HR com probing possible war crimes
that he took part in killing of about 30 Vietnamese men, women and children in
Truong Khanh, near Mylai, in Apr '69; says alleged massacre was committed by
members of 11th Brigade of Americal Div; says he has not talked about alleged
massacre before in pub; he and other former div members give unsworn testimony;
voluntary appearances arranged by Citizens Comm of Inquiry Into US War Crimes in
Vietnam; Repr Ronald V Dellums heads HR com; Army spokesman says so far no rept
of alleged massacre had been received from Notley or any other source; says Army
will attempt to contact him and get a statement; brigade comdr Col Jack L
Treadwell denies knowledge of incident; former bn comdr Lt Col Donald F Hanson
indicates he is awared aware of but declines comment; hearing illus; maps

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              345 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

Capt Eugene Kotouc testifies in his court-martial trial; describes
finger-maiming incident, which he insists was an accident; says he was trying to
intimidate Vietcong prisoner; Army surgeon testifies it would take considerable
force to sever a finger; testimony ends

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              346 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 1

LENGTH: 25 words

R Baker satirical article on Jim Dandy, Asst Sec of State for Balderdash and
Guff, who for the last 8 yrs has concocted reasons on why US is in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              347 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1971, Thursday

SECTION: Page 48, Column 5

LENGTH: 56 words

Sen Bayh says Pres Nixon, in attack on 'new isolationists' in US, perhaps meant
'those of us who feel that the best way to get our prisoners out of captivity
and to stop the killing is to negotiate our way out of Vietnam, not shoot our
way out', s, Village Ind Dems, NYC; attacks Nixon for criticizing without
specifying whom he means

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              348 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 162 words

N Vietnamese delegate Xuan Thuy, in Paris talks, invites US to open negotiations
'this very day, or tomorrow, or another day' on setting a date for withdrawal of
all US troops; implies that settlement of withdrawal date will lead to early
repatriation of all POWs; Vietcong repr Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh says 'S Vietnamese
people and its armed forces are disposed to cease fire on Amer soldiers who do
not undertake hostile actions toward them'; Amb Bruce sees nothing new in Xuan
Thuy proposal; says US is prepared to discuss withdrawal of all external forces,
including those of N Vietnam; says Vietcong offer amounts to bid not to fire on
'any Amer troops that desert to their cause'; proposes N Vietnam name a neutral
country or some internatl orgn to insure that POWs of both sides get 'humane
treatment'; S Vietnamese repr Pham Dan Lam offers transfer of 1,200 N Vietnamese
POWs to 'temporary detention' in neutral country named by N Vietnam; Mrs Nguyen
Thi Binh illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              349 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 385 words

Pres Nixon says residual force of US troops will stay in Vietnam indefinitely,
'no matter how long it takes', if Hanoi refuses to release POWs, TV news conf;
says he will not set a firm date for total withdrawal until he gets not just the
'promise' to discuss the release of POWs, but a 'commitment' to release them;
statement seen as response to statement by Xuan Thuy at Paris peace talks
calling for immediate talks with US to fix a timetable for withdrawal of US
troops; Nixon also says he will keep US troops in Vietnam until S Vietnam seems
capable of defending itself; says that without regard to what Hanoi will do, US
will unilaterally repatriate 540 N Vietnamese sick and wounded POWs; defends his
policy of gradual withdrawal as only policy able to give S Vietnamese capability
of self-determinatio n and able to assure 'youthful protesters themselves
lasting peace in their time'; says he thinks use of Amer forces in future
operations in Laos or Cambodia is 'quite remote' and will be 'completely remote'
by the time US troops drop to 184,000 on Dec 17; speaks respectfully of
demonstrators but maintains strict defense of his policies; earlier, White House
press sec Ziegler, commenting on N Vietnamese proposal in Paris talks, says
Communists had been 'unwilling to discuss or negotiate a cease-fire' as proposed
by Nixon last autumn; other officials say US will discuss standstill cease-fire
but, in line with Pres policy, it will not negotiate troops withdrawal as long
as fighting is in progress; also say Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh statement that Vietcong
forces will refrain from firing on US troops who are not hostile is 'not
credible'; Nixon defends as correct and well-intentioned his order that Lt Wm
Calley be released from stockade pending appeal of his conviction; says he has
not decided on US position regarding Communist China's admission to UN, says
speculation on his course might imperil progress being made in new Chinese-US
contacts; criticizes State Dept suggestion that Nationalist Govt might negotiate
with Communist Govt as completely unrealistic; says he will follow Ct ruling
upholding busing despite his adherence to principle of neighborhood schools;
reiterates opposition to busing in de facto segregated areas but says he expects
Ct will rule on const of such segregation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              350 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 440 words

US Repr Ford charges Sens Muskie and Fulbright with undermining US support for
Israel, s, Amer-Israel Pub Affairs Com meeting attended by 150 Reprs and 250
Jewish leaders; says 2 have weakened bipartisan support for Israel and have
'facilitated' anti-Israel pressures of USSR; cites statements that Muskie made
to Premier Kosygin during visit to Moscow and Fulbright's recent s at Yale U in
which he declared that Israel is resorting to 'Communist-bating humbuggery' in
seeking US support; goes beyond pro-Israeli generalities in attacking 2 men;
says Muskie should have told Kosygin that if USSR is so insistent on Israeli
withdrawal, it should set example by withdrawing from Lithuania, Estonia and
Latvia; implies dismay that Muskie could visit Israel and UAR and still tell
Kosygin that there is disunity between him and Nixon on US mil spending
regarding Israeli security; contends that Muskie told Kosygin that there is
strong body of opinion in US opposed to US defense appropriations for Israel;
declares it is tragic that Fulbright has undermined prospects of real settlement
by tacitly encouraging USSR and Arab extremists to desist from genuine peace and
to continue mil escalation; also indirectly scores Sec Rogers's negotiating
proposals by implying that Rogers is not giving sufficient weight to Soviet
threat; Muskie charges Ford with distorting his comments and says it was
'complete untruth' that he told Kosygin there is no disunity between him and
Nixon on US policy towards Israel; apparent purpose of meetings sponsored by
Amer-Israel Pub Affairs Com is to demonstrate Cong support for Israel; com, in
policy statement distributed to participants, scores Adm for accepting UAR's
position on Israeli withdrawal from occupied territories and calls on Adm to
reconsider its opposition on territorial issues to allow Israel to negotiate
freely and establish agreed and secure boundaries; Ford's purpose in attacking
Muskie and Fulbright seen attempt to draw Jewish contributors away from liberal
Democrats, particularly those that are dovish on Vietnam; Sen McGovern, declared
Dem pres candidate, makes distinction between opposition to Vietnam war and US
support for Israel's security, s sponsored by Amer-Israel Pub Affairs Soc and
Jewish Community Council of Greater Washington (DC); expresses concern with
possibility that growing number of Amers will allow revulsion for war in
Indochina to alter US responsibility for supporting peace worldwide; says
distinction must be drawn between Middle East and Indochina; contends that US
has binding internatl commitment to Israel's survival; details his Middle East
policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              351 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

Ex-Sec Dean Rusk says he favors admission of Communist China to UN and
continuing membership of Nationalist China, Amer Soc of Internatl Law panel;
stand is reversal of his position as State Sec; ex-Asst Sec William P Bundy
recalls that Chinese Cultural Revolution in '66 and '67 quashed efforts during
Johnson Adm to improve relations with mainland China and ease its way to
eventual entry into UN; Rusk urges admitting both Gers, Vietnams and Koreas;
proposes that US henceforth grant diplomatic recognition to any member of UN

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              352 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 48 words

US B-52s reptdly hit targets in NW corner of S Vietnam just above Ashau Valley
to force N Vietnamese troops from jungle bases; S Korean forces rept killing 81
enemy troops along 200-mi stretch of S Vietnam's central coast; S Vietnamese
illus arriving at old fire base N of Ashau Valley

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              353 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 49 words

Duong Dinh Thao, spokesman in Paris for Provisional Revolutionary Govt in S
Vietnam, says killings described by Danny S Notley were broader in scope than
Notley realized and in fact concerned 2 neighboring hamlets, Truongle and
Khangiang, whose names were apparently combined by opposing side

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              354 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 27 words

45 Amers killed, wk; total for Vietnam War now is 45,019, exceeded only by tolls
in World War I and II; 518 wounded, wk; figures on S Vietnamese and enemy, wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              355 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 2

LENGTH: 74 words

US troops and civilians have left behind in S Vietnam tens of thousands, some
say hundreds of thousands, of illegitimate children; most have little money for
schooling; they are resented by many Vietnamese because they are reminders of
unpopular Amer soldiers; private agencies help a few children indirectly through
refugee or feeding programs but most struggle alone; neither S Vietnamese nor US
Govts offer aid; some cases described; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              356 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

Lrs by Sylvia R Day, James W Shue, Dr Albert Szent-Gyorgyi and Frank Masland on
thaw in Chinese-US ties; why US seeks coexistence with Communist China at the
same time as it fights a 'dishonorable' war in Indochina; scores visit by Amer
table tennis team to Communist China, noting Chinese aid to N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              357 of 357 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 30, 1971, Friday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Ret Brig Gen S L A Marshall article, responding to Burke Marshall Apr 10
article, denies Vietnam war is based on killing of civilians

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1971 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
