
                               1 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Vietnam reopens rr between Hanoi and Saigon, linking 2 halves of country after
22 yrs' separation.  Most of ry was destroyed by US bombing (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 1-77-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 1, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY JOHN M CREWDSON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 219 words

NY Times survey of FBI, which is experiencing worst internal crisis in its
history.  Traces trouble to public disclosures of illegal activity, internal
corruption and abuse of power.  Notes Cong's failure until recently to oversee
bur's activities, allowing bur to exist in nearly perfect pol vacuum during
48-yr reign of J Edgar Hoover.  Discusses efforts of Atty Gen Levi and bur Dir
Clarence M Kelley to redefine bur's mission and install adm safeguards to
prevent future abuses.  Claims ultimate success of reforms depends on person
Carter chooses to succeed Kelley, and on Carter's Atty Gen-designate Griffin
Bell.  Traces bur's improprieties to '36, when bur was 1st given power to gather
information about pol beliefs of Amer citizens.  Recalls how bur began by
bugging, tapping and burglarizing suspected Nazi collaborators, then suspected
members of Communist Party, and then domestic radicals.  Says real value of bur
reforms may not become apparent until nation again undergoes wrenching
experience like Vietnam war which would provide occasion for bur to revert to
old tactics.  Claims creation of special Sen investigating com, and new select
com to serve as permanent watchdog, will prevent bur from every again conducting
itself free from external scrutiny, guidance and criticism.  Kelley por (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 1-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY STEVE GROSSMAN

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8

LENGTH: 145 words

Steve Grossman, co-editor of Amex-Canada, magazine for US war resisters in
Canada, describes his life in Canada since '72.  Claims that he was 1st exposed
to 'immorality of Vietnam war' while serving in Peace Corps in Malaysia and,
rather than serve in Peace Corps for 3d stint, notified his draft board that he
would neither serve in war nor request deferment.  Notes he then decided to go
to Canada rather than serve prison term.  Explains that after he entered US in
'74 on speaking tour, charges against him were dropped but no reasons were
given.  Suggests that it was Govt attempt to compromise movement's speakers or
lure him out of movement.  Explains that he wants to return to US but cannot do
so until pardon is extended to all those affected by war and protests against
it.  Profiles expatriates ineligible to return to US under present laws.  Photos
(L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 2-77-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 78 words

Ed on New Year reckonings for Amer.  Notes recent messages of 2 historians, C
Vann Woodward and Arthur Schlesinger Jr, that Amers are childish and innocent,
and perceive of Amer as having sacred mission and sanctified destiny.  Discusses
whether there is something to celebrate as '77 begins.  Says '77 marks end of 13
yrs of torment, dating from assassination of Pres Kennedy and including Vietnam
War and Watergate scandal.  Claims there is reason to be optimistic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 2-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 2, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOHN G DEEDY JR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

John Deedy article on status of antiwar teachers of '60s.  Notes some radical
professors have resumed old teaching jobs while others have obtained honored new
posts in academia.  New hospitable climate for radical and liberal teachers
attributed to end of war in Vietnam.  Also notes apparent student detachment
from issues of '60's and discusses possible reasons for that detachment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 2-0-6

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 3, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM L SAFIRE

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

William Safire article proposes that Pres-elect Carter pardon Vietnam draft
evaders and Watergate lawbreakers.  Answers arguments of those who favor amnesty
for draft evaders, but not for Watergate figures.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 3-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 3, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 41 words

Mrs Betty Ford indicates in int that she opposes blanket amnesty for Vietnam War
draft evaders and deserters but has not advised Pres Ford on issue.  Pres Ford
promised widow of Sen Philip A Hart to reconsider question of blanket amnesty
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 3-77-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 6

LENGTH: 39 words

Vietnam reports state farms in North Vietnam achieved record rice yields in '76.
Reports record tea, tobacco and corn yields.  Reports state farms met all main
goals of '76 state plan and will assist farms in south during '77 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 6-77-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Vietnam News Agency says Mil Inst of Vietnamese People's Army is inaugurated in
Hanoi, Jan 3. Defense Min Gen Vo Nguyen Giap and Gen Van Tien Dung attend
ceremonies.  Coll will give training in dialectical method to army officers (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 6-77-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 6, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 135 words

Article on plight of Indochinese refugees, from Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos, many
of whom are living in Thai camps.  Conditions at Songkhla camp, where 811
Vietnamese refugees are settled, described.  Thai Govt estimates there are
77,151 Indochinese refugees in country, including 63,766 from Laos, 10,699 from
Cambodia and 2,686 from Vietnam.  While Laotians are blending relatively easier
into Thai culture, Vietnamese are finding adjustments difficult.  Thailand has
been only country in region willing to accept refugees.  Refugees are becoming
source of friction with Indochinese neighbors.  Attempts by govts, particularly
Vietnam, to halt outflow of refugees described.  Sr UN refugee officials says
orgn is concerned that permanent Palestinian situation is developing in SE Asia.
Illus.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 6-77-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 7, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 65 words

World Bank sends mission to Vietnam.  Spokesman says mission will be 1 of econ
'reconnaissance' and not to examine specific projects for which loans might be
made.  Risk that bank may alienate members of US Cong opposed to such aid
noted.Spokesman says bank is acting entirely on its own and not as possible
leader of consortium of donors to country.  US conditions for econ aid noted
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 7-77-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 8, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 124 words

US State Dept spokesman Robert L Funseth discounts notion that sending World
Bank team to Vietnam reflects progress toward normalizing relations with US.
Says any recommendations for World Bank credits to Vietnam will be made after
Carter inauguration.  Declines to speculate on Carter Adm attitude.  World Bank
officials say mission, which will leave for Vietnam later in Jan, will carry out
preliminary survey and is not expected to recommend immediate loans.  US
unsuccessfully opposed Sept '76 bid by Vietnam to take over memberships held by
former S Vietnamese Govt in World Bank, IMF and Asian Development Bank.  Carter
has endorsed policy of delaying normal relations with Vietnam until full
accounting of missing Amers is given (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-77-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 10, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

Ed urges Pres-elect Carter to extend widest blanket of pardon to Vietnam draft
evaders, dodgers, deserters and war protestors as only way to put Vietnam
problem truly behind US.  Admits that questions about fairness of extending
blanket pardon and future ability of US to muster reliable mil forces have
merit, but notes that fairness played small role in determining who would or
would not serve.  Suggests that raising of future armies will depend on whether
US has learned to embark on war only with understanding and support of most
Amers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 10

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 11, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY EMMA ROTHSCHILD

SECTION: Page 33, Column 2

LENGTH: 127 words

2d article in series The Economics of Starvation focuses on US role in
Bangladesh famine.  Notes that US wheat shipments to Bangladesh were delayed
until worst of famine was over.  States Bangladesh was priced out of US wheat
mkt in months before famine and did not qualify for food aid or credit because
Bangladesh was not of pol interest to US.  Also notes that Bangladesh had sold
jute to Cuba.  US law prohibits countries buying food as aid to trade with Cuba
and North Vietnam.  Notes that Sec Kissinger suggested that he would have
intervened had he known what was happening in Bangladesh.  Notes US lacks policy
to insure that people do know what is happening and urges creation of Food
Export Council to oversee agr exports to developing countries (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 11

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 12, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 30 words

Louisa Calder, wife of late artist, boycotts White House ceremony for posthumous
award of Medal of Freedom as gesture in support of complete amnesty for Vietnam
draft evaders (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 12-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 12, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 33 words

Alexander Calder's widow, Louisa Calder, says she will not go to White House to
accept Medal of Freedom bestowed on her late husband as gesture in support of
amnesty for Vietnam draft resisters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 12-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 12, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY PHILIP SHABECOFF

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 235 words

Pres Ford int on his Pres and on contents of State of Union Message he will
deliver Jan 12.  Says he will use message as vehicle to urge Pres-elect Carter
to reconsider before reducing defense budget.  Claims sizable reduction would be
'very serious' because of Soviet Union's constant buildup in mil strength.
Defense Sec-designate Harold Brown says reductions can be made, but not until
fiscal '79.  Pres Ford claims 'some people' are urging him to run for Pres in
'80.  Says 'heritage' of Nixon Adm was handicap in his campaign and in his
conduct of nation's affairs.  Claims Cong has encroached too much on Pres
prerogatives, particularly in foreign affairs.  Holds Pres should not be
'imperial'.  Holds 'some further compassion' might be shown to certain
categories of Vietnam War offenders, but notes most deserters and draft evaders
had their chance for clemency in his earlier program.  Says his Adm will get
'high marks' for restoring credibility and confidence in White House.  Expects
history to reach favorable judgment on his Adm.  Claims 'solid achievements' in
foreign policy.  Holds nation is in excellent position to make 'significant
progress' in Africa and Middle East and in SALT talks.  Says many of his
last-minute proposals represent things he would have done early in his next adm
if he had won election, including his proposal to grant statehood to Puerto
Rico.  Ford illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 12

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 12, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 277 words

State Sec-designate Cyrus R Vance testifies at Sen Foreign Relations Com hearing
into his nomination.  Pledges to pursue policy of 'openness' wherever possible.
His answers to various questions detailed.  Admits that 'it was a mistake to
intervene in Vietnam'.  Says he, as Deputy Defense Sec in Johnson Adm, learned
lessons from this error.  Refuses to agree, however, that Johnson Adm fabricated
Gulf of Tonkin incident that produced Cong resolution giving Johnson
wide-ranging freedom of action in Vietnam.  Promises to seek arms control and
detente with USSR.  Says US will pursue solutions of global econ problems that
overshadow pol questions.  Proposes policy to insure ability of Cong to
influence Pres-elect Carter in deciding whether to carry out specific covert
activities.  Claims such operations should be undertaken only in 'most
extraordinary circumstances' and with prior approval of com in which Atty Gen,
State Sec, Defense Sec and Natl Security Adviser should participate.  Says
appropriate Cong coms should be informed in advance to allow them to voice any
concern they might have.  Says chances are good for agreement in Middle East.
Claims Israel's defense needs must be taken care of.  Refuses to rule out mil
sales to Egypt.  Says normalization with China should be pursued, but Taiwan's
security also must be protected.  Says good relations with Turkey and Greece is
in Amer natl interest.  Claims S Korean's alleged lobbying efforts among Amer
Congressmen are objectionable, but would not cause US to withdraw its troops
from Korea.  Por of Vance and of Defense Sec-designate Harold Brown and Atty
Gen-designate Griffin Bell (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 12-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 12, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE H FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 106 words

IFM says it has made its first loan to Vietnam, apparently with US concent.
Fund says it is lending equivalent of $35-million to country under facility that
provides 3d-world countries with compensatory financing to cover export
shortfalls.  News of reconstruction loan comes wk before World Bank is to
journey to Hanoi for mo-long econ study.  Mission is to be headed by GB
economist Edward Hawkins.  US reptdly has raised no objections to bank or fund
decisions.  IMF exec bd US delegate Sam Y Cross comments.  Says loan was granted
on basis of export shortfall experienced by country during 12-mo period ending
June 30 '76 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 12-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 13, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY GLORIA EMERSON

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Gloria Emerson comments on reactions of Bardstown, Ky, residents almost 7 yrs
after 5 town men died in mil action in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 13

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD C BURKS

SECTION: Page 51, Column 2

LENGTH: 82 words

NJ Gov Brendan Byrne and Pa Gov Milton J Shapp trade barbs as they debate Army's
plan to shut down Frankford Arsenal in Philadelphia and transfer many of its
specialists and facilities to expanded Picatinny Arsenal (Dover, NJ), hearing by
Sen Mil Construction Subcom.  Gov Shapp points to cost of such move, while Gov
Byrne cites unemployment problem in Dover in aftermath of Vietnam war.  Pa wants
funding decision postponed until Feb '76 to allow Carter Adm time to study
problem (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 15-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD C BURKS

SECTION: Page 51, Column 2

LENGTH: 82 words

NJ Gov Brendan Byrne and Pa Gov Milton J Shapp trade barbs as they debate Army's
plan to shut down Frankford Arsenal in Philadelphia and transfer many of its
specialists and facilities to expanded Picatinny Arsenal (Dover, NJ), hearing by
Sen Mil Construction Subcom.  Gov Shapp points to cost of such move, while Gov
Byrne cites unemployment problem in Dover in aftermath of Vietnam war.  Pa wants
funding decision postponed until Feb '76 to allow Carter Adm time to study
problem (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 15-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JAMES FENTON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 6

LENGTH: 26 words

Gloria Emerson book, Winners and Losers.  Battles, Retreats, Gains, Losses and
Ruins From a Long War, about the Vietnam War, revd by James Fenton.  Illus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 16

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY LOUIS LINDEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 21 words

Louis Linden lr scores Ford's proposals of statehood for PRand amnesty to
Vietnam War era draft resisters and deserters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 16

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 16, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 89 words

2 former officials of Pres Ford's clemency bd, Lawrence M Baskir and William A
Strauss, propose sweeping program of amnesty and 'relief' for Vietnam servicemen
and civilians punished for nonviolent acts of protest such as draft evasion,
desertion, civil disobedience, and failure to pay taxes.  Propose seeking
reconciliation with everyone who was victim of war whether war was right or
wrong.  Proposal goes beyond general amnesty program for draft evaders that
Pres-elect Carter plans to issue during his 1st week in office (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 16-6-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 17, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY JACOB S HURWITZ

SECTION: Page 24, Column 4

LENGTH: 38 words

Jacob S Hurwitz lr rejects William Safire suggestion that Watergate offenders
should be pardoned along with Vietnam draft-resisters.  Finds Watergate
criminals guilty of treachery while occupying high offices of public trust.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 17

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 18, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 5

LENGTH: 119 words

Defense Dept discloses joint study by Pentagon and Office of Management and
Budget that finds that US aircraft indus currently retains excess capacity that
is costing Defense Dept about $400 million a yr to sustain.  Concludes that 17
cos currently in business are using only half their capacity and that about
20,000 of 225,000 persons currently employed by cos are 'excess'.  Cites
production orders for next few yrs showing total production of 300-500 aircraft
per yr, compared to high of over 2,000 a yr at peak of Vietnam war.  Estimates
that judicious curtailments, phased procurement and stimulation of aircraft
indus consolidation might permit savings of up to $240 million a yr.  Cos
examined named (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 18

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 18, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 41, Column 5

LENGTH: 119 words

Defense Dept discloses joint study by Pentagon and Office of Management and
Budget that finds that US aircraft indus currently retains excess capacity that
is costing Defense Dept about $400 million a yr to sustain.  Concludes that 17
cos currently in business are using only half their capacity and that about
20,000 of 225,000 persons currently employed by cos are 'excess'.  Cites
production orders for next few yrs showing total production of 300-500 aircraft
per yr, compared to high of over 2,000 a yr at peak of Vietnam war.  Estimates
that judicious curtailments, phased procurement and stimulation of aircraft
indus consolidation might permit savings of up to $240 million a yr.  Cos
examined named (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 18

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 19, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 43 words

Vietnamese News Agency says southern authorities are turning Con Son Island
former prison into tourist center.  Island was notorious for 'tiger cage' prison
cells during war.  Agency says relay TV station and air link with mainland has
been established (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 19-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 19, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 217 words

Outgoing State Sec Kissinger makes rare statements about himself, his background
and Amer during round of farewell lunches and dinners.  Appears to be trying for
reconciliation with groups, such as press and Amer Jews, with whom he has had
uneasy relationship.  His comments before Natl Press Club, Conf of Presidents of
Major Amer Jewish Orgns and Foreign Service Assn detailed.  Tells Natl Press
Club he will never forget 'how hard you tested me'.  Despite fact he has been
more open with press than any predecessor, his relationship with newsmen has
been controversial aspect of his career.  His seeming compulsion to talk
recalled.  At recent State Dept dinner he said that Mao Tse-tung once told W Ger
Chancellor Helmut Schmidt that no nation could be powerful if it gave up in war
after 'losing only 50,000 men,' an allusion to Vietnam.  Kissinger tells Jewish
orgn that their criticism 'hurt me more' than any other group's.  Notes that he,
as a Jew, and Amer Jewish community, have had 'very complicated relationship'.
Says US support for Israel reflected not his personal preferences but natl
interests of US.  Tells Foreign Service Assn that he harassed them because he
felt them to be 'the ablest group'.  Tells of his personal feelings about coming
to and living in Amer.  Kissinger por.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 19-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DAN H POLLITT and FRANK THOMPSON JR

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 63 words

Repr Frank Thompson Jr and Prof Daniel H Pollitt lr asserts that Pres-elect
Carter's proposed pardon for Vietnam draft evaders has precedent throughout Amer
history.  Summarizes pardons given to individuals and groups by Presidents G
Washington, J Adams, T Jefferson, J Madison, A Lincoln, A Johnson, W Wilson, W
Harding, C Coolidge, F Roosevelt, H Truman and D Eisenhower.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 20

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DAN H POLLITT and FRANK THOMPSON JR

SECTION: Page 36, Column 3

LENGTH: 63 words

Repr Frank Thompson Jr and Prof Daniel H Pollitt lr asserts that Pres-elect
Carter's proposed pardon for Vietnam draft evaders has precedent throughout Amer
history.  Summarizes pardons given to individuals and groups by Presidents G
Washington, J Adams, T Jefferson, J Madison, A Lincoln, A Johnson, W Wilson, W
Harding, C Coolidge, F Roosevelt, H Truman and D Eisenhower.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 20

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Page 35

LENGTH: 25 words

Gloria Emerson book, Winners and Losers.  Battles, Retreats, Gains, Losses and
Ruins From a Long War, about Vietnam War, revd by C Lehmann-Haupt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 20

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Sen Dem leaders block immediate approval of resolution expressing opposition to
Pres-elect Carter's plan of gen pardon for Vietnam draft evaders.  Preliminary
votes showed there might be surprising amount of opposition to Carter's plan
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 20-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DIANE HENRY

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Pres Ford announces decision not to grant blanket amnesty to Vietnam era draft
evaders and mil deserters.  Orders that records of veterans who had been wounded
and decorated, but who later deserted, be upgraded to honorable discharges.
Move follows Ford's pledge to widon of Sen Philip Hart to look into issue of
amnesty.  Pres-elect Carter works with advisers on pardon issue (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 20-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 41 words

Sen Dem leaders block immediate approval of resolution expressing opposition to
Pres-elect Carter's plan of gen pardon for Vietnam draft evaders.  Preliminary
votes showed there might be surprising amount of opposition to Carter's plan
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 20-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DIANE HENRY

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Pres Ford announces decision not to grant blanket amnesty to Vietnam era draft
evaders and mil deserters.  Orders that records of veterans who had been wounded
and decorated, but who later deserted, be upgraded to honorable discharges.
Move follows Ford's pledge to widon of Sen Philip Hart to look into issue of
amnesty.  Pres-elect Carter works with advisers on pardon issue (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 20-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 20, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JAMES BARRETT RESTON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 177 words

Henry A Kissinger int by James Reston on his 8 yrs in Govt.  Expresses pride in
his record.  Discusses major events of his yrs in Nixon and Ford Adms.  Notes
nation is not at war for 1st time in almost a generation.  Holds Amer has
survived const crisis of Watergate.  Claims relations with China, Soviet Union
and indus democracies have improved.  Notes some progress on arms control and on
relations with poor nations of Africa, Asia and Latin Amer.  Regrets leaving
West so poorly organized to deal with oil cartel.  Laments slow progress of SALT
talks and of North-South negotiations between indus and developing countries.
Regrets bitterness of debate over Vietnam, alienation of intellectuals from
Govt, tardiness of US in handling crisis in southern Africa and conflict between
exec and legis branches over control of Amer foreign policy.  Calls for 'heroic
effort' to resolve conflicts in Panama, Rhodesia and Namibia.  Claims progress
can be made in Middle East negotiations and in halting spread of arms and Law of
the Sea.  Kissinger illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 20

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 21, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 3; Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Gloria Emerson comments on new book Winners and Losers: Battles, Retreats,
Gains, Losses and Ruins from a long War, published by Random House.  Book is
about Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 21-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 21, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 3; Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Gloria Emerson comments on new book Winners and Losers: Battles, Retreats,
Gains, Losses and Ruins from a long War, published by Random House.  Book is
about Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 21-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 21, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY DAVID E ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 114 words

Carter aides say Adm will move at moderate pace in first 100 days.  Do not
expect Carter's extensive campaign promises to begin to be fulfilled for 20 mos
or more.  Have developed tentative timetable for action on major issues.
Timetable detailed.  It includes action on Carter's promised pardon of Vietnam
draft evaders, legis on Govt reorganization, including reorganizing exec branch
and establishing new dept of energy, legis for stimulating econ, including bills
to expand Govt job-creating programs and to reduce taxes, recommendations to
Cong in areas of energy and environment, and draft legis for restructuring
welfare system and developing more equitable tax system (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 21-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 21, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY PETER DAVIS

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 71 words

Article by Peter Davis, dir of documentary film on Vietnam, Hearts and Minds,
explores pol feelings of residents of Hamilton, Ohio and their attitudes toward
Carter.  Finds preferences revolving more around personal than public issues.
Finds pervasive feeling at all econ levels is that Fed bureaucracy has become
uncontrollable monster.  Comments from residents Martin Protzman, Al Bowling and
Tom Rentschler.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 21

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY SLOAN WILSON

SECTION: Page 20, Column 3

LENGTH: 83 words

Sloan Wilson lr praises Sec of State Vance for acknowledging that intervention
in Vietnam was mistake but notes that thousands of people knew that US
intervention was mistake at time it happened.  Notes that those people who tried
to tell Govt that tragic mistake was being made were branded as unpatriotic,
jailed, assaulted and driven from country they were trying to enlighten.  Claims
that those who opposed war despite personal risks should be honored in their own
time as well as by history.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 22

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT C RANSOM

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Robert C Ransom lr lauds NYT's amnesty coverage but claims that it is inaccurate
to state that blanket pardon would be unfair to families of those who died in
Vietnam.  Explains that his oldest son who died in Vietnam opposed war and
claims that his family lives with 'cruel reality' that he died for nothing.
Claims that his feelings of bitterness would be assuaged by knowledge that he
died for nation compassionate and big enough to admit its mistakes.  Claims that
broad general amnesty is step toward putting war behind us.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 22

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 116 words

Ed lauds Pres Carter's unconditional pardon of Vietnam draft evaders as
vindicating nation compassionate enough to admit its mistakes.  Claims that
grief tempered by charity for those alive because of draft evasion is better
guide to future than vindictive demands for honor based on refusal to forgive.
Claims that pardon allows us to take seriously Carter's campaign pledges.  Also
lauds Carter for refusing to be intimidated by virulent rhetoric against pardon.
Notes that Carter's pardon leaves unresolved fate of deserters and delays
actions to adjust mil's excessive use of less-than-honorable discharges, but
points out that Carter has promised speedy study of what else should be done.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 22

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT C RANSOM

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 89 words

Robert C Ransom lr lauds NYT's amnesty coverage but claims that it is inaccurate
to state that blanket pardon would be unfair to families of those who died in
Vietnam.  Explains that his oldest son who died in Vietnam opposed war and
claims that his family lives with 'cruel reality' that he died for nothing.
Claims that his feelings of bitterness would be assuaged by knowledge that he
died for nation compassionate and big enough to admit its mistakes.  Claims that
broad general amnesty is step toward putting war behind us.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 22

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 116 words

Ed lauds Pres Carter's unconditional pardon of Vietnam draft evaders as
vindicating nation compassionate enough to admit its mistakes.  Claims that
grief tempered by charity for those alive because of draft evasion is better
guide to future than vindictive demands for honor based on refusal to forgive.
Claims that pardon allows us to take seriously Carter's campaign pledges.  Also
lauds Carter for refusing to be intimidated by virulent rhetoric against pardon.
Notes that Carter's pardon leaves unresolved fate of deserters and delays
actions to adjust mil's excessive use of less-than-honorable discharges, but
points out that Carter has promised speedy study of what else should be done.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 22

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 106 words

Vietnam War resisters in Canada view Pres Carter's pardon of draft evaders with
bitterness due to exclusion of deserters.  Jack Colhoun, co-editor of
Amex-Canada magazine, criticizes Carter's decision that draft evaders who have
taken Canadian citizenship may have same status as other aliens if they return
to US.  Colhoun estimates war resisters in Canada at between 20,000 to 25,000,
of whom 6,000 to 7,500 are believed to have become Canadian citizens.  Colhoun
contends that exclusion of deserters from immediate pardon discriminates against
poor, disadvantaged and minorities who are said to constitute majority of exiles
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 106 words

Vietnam War resisters in Canada view Pres Carter's pardon of draft evaders with
bitterness due to exclusion of deserters.  Jack Colhoun, co-editor of
Amex-Canada magazine, criticizes Carter's decision that draft evaders who have
taken Canadian citizenship may have same status as other aliens if they return
to US.  Colhoun estimates war resisters in Canada at between 20,000 to 25,000,
of whom 6,000 to 7,500 are believed to have become Canadian citizens.  Colhoun
contends that exclusion of deserters from immediate pardon discriminates against
poor, disadvantaged and minorities who are said to constitute majority of exiles
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY JIMMY CARTER

SECTION: Page 10, Column 2

LENGTH: 27 words

Text of Pres Carter's Jan 21 proclamation and exec order granting pardon to
draft evaders of Vietnam war era, covering period from Aug 4 '64 to March 28 '73
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Text 22

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 222 words

Pres Carter pardons almost all draft evaders of Vietnam War era but leaves
unsettled status of deserters in his 1st major act as Pres.  Justice Dept
estimates that about 10,000 men are affected by pardon, 8,700 convicted draft
violators and about 1,800 fugitives from draft, of whom about 1,600 live in
foreign countries.  Pardon seen affecting predominantly white, middle- and
upper-class men.  Carter promises 'immediate' study of process that might
accelerate rev of 100,000 desertion cases with view toward upgrading
less-than-honorable discharges.  Pardon does not affect cases alleging acts of
force or violence deemed to be serious enough by Atty Gen to warrant continued
prosecution and cases involving employees of Selective Service System.  Press
sec Jody Powell repts that no clemency was contemplated for deserters who
received dishonorable or less-than-honorable discharges.  Pardon elicits
protests from veterans' orgns and conservative politicians and from pro-amnesty
groups who complain that decision discriminates against poor, disadvantaged and
minorities.  Repr Edward I Koch and Louise Ransom of Natl Council for Universal
and Unconditional Amnesty call for pardon of disadvantaged deserters.  Sen Barry
Goldwater, Repub natl chmn Bill Brock, Sen Jake Garn and VFW dir T Cooper Holt
condemn pardon.  Photo (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 160 words

US IRS says Park Tong Sun owes US Govt $4.5 Million in back income taxes,
interest and penalties.  Tax lien against Park's property shows IRS contention
that Park owes taxes for '72 through '75, yrs he was allegedly active in
cultivating, entertaining and bribing US Cong members.  Spokesman says
statistics on Park's income are unavailable, but he allegedly spent $500,000 to
$1 million each yr in period in Cong lobbying.  Park has told US acquaintances
that he is 2d cousin of Pres Park Chung Hee.  Such a family tie is important in
terms of trust, loyalty influence and obligation in Korea and, if true, adds new
dimension to case.  Park has told US friends that he was involved at beginning
of Korean-US negotiations that led to dispatch of Korean troops to fight in
Vietnam war and that Korean Govt asked him in '64 to suggest to US that South
Korea would be prepared to send troops to Vietnam if US increased its financial
assistance to Seoul (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 22, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT D MCFADDEN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 173 words

Pres Carter's pardon for draft resisters draws qualified praise from pro-amnesty
groups because it does not extend to deserters and veterans with
less-than-honorable discharges and sharp denunciations from veterans' orgns.
Amer Legion commander William J Rogers, Sen Robert J Dole and VFW dir Cooper
Holt condemn action.  ACLU exec dir Aryeh Neier praises pardon but notes that
99% of people who could have benefited from full amnesty remain to be dealt
with.  Sen George McGovern, Midwest Amnesty Program for Clergy and Laity
Concerned and Amer Friends Service Com welcome pardon but call for it to be
broadened.  Amer Friends Service Com claims that pardon shoud cover offenses
from '61 to draft's end in '75, rather than period from Aug '64 to March '73.
Safe Amnesty Com calls pardon 'totally unacceptable' and claims that directing
Pentagon to rev cases of deserters and veterans is like asking prosecutor to be
jury.  Sen Edward Kennedy praises pardon as impressive and compassionate step
toward healing wounds of Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 22-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JAMES BARRETT RESTON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 112 words

James Reston comments on Pres Carter's pardon of Vietnam War draft-dodgers and
finds that, like Pres Ford's pardon of Richard Nixon, draft-dodger pardon
created contention and division instead of intended compassion and national
unity.  Holds that Carter has been caught between campaign promises and
'realities' of Presidency.  Points out that some who were pardoned sacrificed
less than many who fought and later deserted.  Warns that many powerful veterans
orgns are outraged and may organize to impede Carter programs.  Concludes that
Carter has not been bold enough and that he must learn that every decision
satisfies some supporters and disappoints everybody else.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 23

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN SCHOEMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 5

LENGTH: 54 words

Stephen Schoeman sees US suffering from situational ethics.  Notes several
appointees to Carter Cabinet have admitted making judgmental errors in past,
including Cyrus Vance's admission that Vietnam was mistake, and wonders why they
should be entitled to help lead nation still suffering from policies they did
not oppose.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 23

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 89 words

Reactions of some Vietnam war draft resisters in Canada to Pres Carter's pardon
of draft evaders are surveyed.  Broad consensus emerges that deserters, as well
as draft evaders, should be pardoned.  Canadian and Amers familiar with fugitive
war resisters rept that fewer than half will return permanently to US.  Ints
show that many have developed firm roots in Canada and are unwilling to leave
for any reason, although all would like to be able to return to US for visits.
Photos of deserters Jack Colhoun and John Harvey (M) .

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 23-6-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 32 words

Photo of former Marine Sgt Gregory Carter Daigneault, Vietnam veteran, burning
honorable-discharge papers in Bangor (Me) in protest of Pres Carter's pardon of
draft evaders on Jan 21 '77 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 23-6-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 89 words

Reactions of some Vietnam war draft resisters in Canada to Pres Carter's pardon
of draft evaders are surveyed.  Broad consensus emerges that deserters, as well
as draft evaders, should be pardoned.  Canadian and Amers familiar with fugitive
war resisters rept that fewer than half will return permanently to US.  Ints
show that many have developed firm roots in Canada and are unwilling to leave
for any reason, although all would like to be able to return to US for visits.
Photos of deserters Jack Colhoun and John Harvey (M) .

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 23-6-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 32 words

Photo of former Marine Sgt Gregory Carter Daigneault, Vietnam veteran, burning
honorable-discharge papers in Bangor (Me) in protest of Pres Carter's pardon of
draft evaders on Jan 21 '77 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 23-6-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 131 words

Justice Dept says it is impossible to determine exactly how many persons are
included in Pres Carter's pardon of Vietnam era draft evaders, because no
figures are available on how many failed to register for draft.  Dept puts
number of known draft evaders at 11,300, including 8,700 convicted of draft
evasion and 2,600 with indictments pending of which 2,300 are fugitives.
Defense Dept figures for deserters for period of Apr 4 '64 to Mar 28 '73
include: 10,115 fugitive deserters, of whom 5,555 underwent review process under
Pres Ford's clemency program and 4,500 of whom are still fugitive.  83,135 mil
personnel who received less-than-honorable discharges for desertion offenses, of
whom 13,589 applied for clemency under Ford program, seeking to have discharges
upgraded (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 23

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 23, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JAMES WOOTEN

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1

LENGTH: 123 words

Pres Carter presides over 1st meeting of Natl Security Council.  Announces his
decision to lower White House thermostats to 65 degrees and denies making choice
for CIA dir in his 2d full day in office.  Those being rumored about to head CIA
include Burke Marshall, Thomas Hughes, Gerard C Smith, Paul C Warnke and James M
Gavin.  Carter and council discuss Vice Pres Mondale's goodwill mission to
Europe and Japan, which they claim is more substantive than symbolic.  Carter
press sec Jody Powell announces expected realignment of Natl Security Council,
reducing coms in council from 7 to 2. White House switchboard repts receiving
many calls concerning Carter's pardon of Vietnam draft resisters.  Says
'several' support pardon (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 23-5-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 24, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 161 words

Most of Carter Cabinet is sworn in as Pres Carter looks on in White House's East
Room.  Carter eschews usual pomp and formality of his office.  Foregoes playing
of 'Ruffles and Flourishes' and 'Hail to the Chief'.  Carter bids farewell to
Vice Pres Mondale as he departs on diplomatic mission to Western Europe and
Japan.  Attends services at First Baptist Ch with wife, daughter, 2 sons and
their wives.  Most of family formally join ch.  Labor Sec-designate F Ray
Marshall says it may be difficult to reduce unemployment from present 7.9% to
Carter goal of 6.5% by end of '77, int on ABC program Issues and Answers.
Robert Lipshutz, counsel to Pres, says adm will conduct rev of status of mil
deserters of Vietnam War period and other possible bona fide war resisters who
recd less-than-honorable discharges, int on CBS program Face the Nation.  Pres
Carter illus with Cabinet members and their spouses during swearing-in by Chief
Justice Warren E Burger (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 24-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 25, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN GILLERS

SECTION: Page 35, Column 5

LENGTH: 101 words

Article by Stephen Gillers, exec dir of Society of Amer Law Teachers, discusses
why he would not accept position in Govt, were he asked.  Claims there is more
important work to do outside Govt than in it.  Holds it is nature of inst of
govt that it does not take risks, and often stifles creative people.  Says Govt
trails behind people working on frontiers of developments in soc, pol and econ
policy.  Notes that in 3 major issues of 70's, civil rights movement, Vietnam
and Watergate, it was private citizens who perceived something needed to be
done, then organized and publicly demanded action (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 25

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 25, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT MCGEEHAN

SECTION: Page 34, Column 4

LENGTH: 34 words

Robert McGeehan lr on State Sec Cyrus Vance's statement that US involvement in
Vietnam was mistake.  Says purgatives will not be applicable until US Pres
publicly states that intervention was peccant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 25

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 25, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6

LENGTH: 21 words

Sen fails to muster enough support to hold vote on resolution opposing Pres
Carter's pardon of Vietnam draft resisters (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 25-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 25, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6

LENGTH: 21 words

Sen fails to muster enough support to hold vote on resolution opposing Pres
Carter's pardon of Vietnam draft resisters (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 25-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 25, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Wisconsin Amer Legion adjutant Robert Wilke reports Wis orgn will spearhead
effort to have Pres Carter barred from Amer Legion for pardoning Vietnam War
draft evaders (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 25-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          January 26, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 101 words

Repr Andrew Young, Pres Carter's choice as chief delegate to UN, says US still
hopes for negotiated solution in Rhodesia despite rejection of latest Brit
proposals by Rhodesia's white minority Govt, Sen Foreign Relations Com hearing
on nomination to UN post.  Says S Africa appears to have accepted Brit plan and
contends Rhodesia 'cannot survive without S Africa'.  Is endorsed unanimously
for UN post.  Calls on Cong to repeal legis under which US imports chrome from
Rhodesia.  Hopes US will be able to establish normal relations with Vietnam
before it applies again for UN membership.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 26-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DEIRDRE CARMODY

SECTION: Page 22, Column 2

LENGTH: 209 words

Order by Fed Ct Judge Charles S Haight 3d in libel suit that CBS turn over to
him producer's notes about CBS documentary--on 60 Minutes Program--about Lt Col
Anthony B Herbert has raised new questions about confidentiality of editorial
process.  Suit was brought by Herbert who resigned from army in '72 after being
relieved of his command in Vietnam following accusations that fellow officers
had covered up war crimes and atrocities there.  Suit was filed against CBS,
Mike Wallace and Barry Landau and Atlantic Monthly which published article by
Lando about making of program.  Alleges that both program and article
maliciously portrayed Herbert as liar who had committed atrocities and acts of
brutality in Vietnam and as opportunist seeking to use war crimes issue to cover
up his own alleged failures in Army.  Suit is of particular interest to press
because Herbert is considered 'public figure', which means he has to go to
greater lengths to prove he has been libeled than would more obscure person.
Herbert has asked defendants to produce number of documents, including notes and
film footage, relating to CBS show or Atlantic article.  Natl News Council
issued statement about Haight's opinion, calling issues of major press
importance (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 27-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 130 words

State Dept spokesman Frederick Z Brown confirms Carter Adm intends to work for
normalized relations with Vietnam.  Says progress depends on clearing number of
issues including information on Amers still missing.  Says no 'time frame' has
been fixed for resuming talks.  UN Amb-delegate Andrew Young had said Sec of
State Cyrus R Vance might reopen negotiations within 90 days.  Later contends he
was restating policy laid down by Carter and Vance.  US has vetoed UN
applications of N and S Vietnam and reunited Vietnam in past because issue of
missing Amers had not been resolved.  Natl League of Families of Amer Prisoners
and Missing in SE Asia members are assembling in Washington, DC, for annual
meeting and candlelight vigil outside White House scheduled for Jan 27 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 27-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 27, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 132 words

Sen Majority Leader Robert C Byrd sees 1st strain in Cong relations with Carter
Adm, deploring Carter's failure to consult with him on some matters, press
meetings.  Predicts 'serious spats' will come during 'honeymoon' with Dem Adm.
Cites Carter's failure to seek his advice on Theodore C Sorensen nomination to
CIA or on energy questions.  Sees slowing down of proposed legis as bills travel
through Cong.  Lauds Carter's 1st wk in office opposes pardon of Vietnam war
draft resisters.  Doubts Cong will enact any Carter welfare reform bills until
'78.  Sees legis to control Medicare and Medicaid costs, problems with econ pkg,
any Carter tax bill, Cong moves to increase pub works programs and rev of
Ford-vetoed bills on such issues as consumer advocacy legis and strip mining.
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 27-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 32 words

Newark, NJ, Fed Judge Lawrence A Whipple dismisses indictments against 49 NJ men
charged with draft evasion during Vietnam War in compliance with Pres Carter's
pardon of draft evaders (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 28-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY RAYOND J PONTIER

SECTION: Page 22, Column 5

LENGTH: 65 words

Rev Raymond J Pontier lr supports Pres Carter's pardon of Vietnam War draft
resisters as act of conscience rare in high places.  Notes that Carter has taken
risk in standing for principle.  Also notes that he supported his son's
resistance to war as similar decision of conscience and that decision cost him
his church since he was forced to resign shortly after son's release from
prison.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 28

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY H RICHMOND CAMPBELL

SECTION: Page 22, Column 4

LENGTH: 62 words

H Richmond Campbell lr condemns Pres Carter's pardon of Vietnam War resisters as
'disgraceful act' which establishes precedent for 'yellow-bellied' draft
resisters to decide freely whether or not they desire to come to their country's
defense.  Condemns day of pardon as 1 of 'darkest and saddest' days in US
history and pardon as contributing to divisiveness in US.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 28

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY H RICHMOND CAMPBELL

SECTION: Page 22, Column 4

LENGTH: 62 words

H Richmond Campbell lr condemns Pres Carter's pardon of Vietnam War resisters as
'disgraceful act' which establishes precedent for 'yellow-bellied' draft
resisters to decide freely whether or not they desire to come to their country's
defense.  Condemns day of pardon as 1 of 'darkest and saddest' days in US
history and pardon as contributing to divisiveness in US.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 28

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD I KOCH

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 20 words

Repr Edward I Koch lr disputes Jan 18 lrs by Natalie E Carlson and John McAuliff
on alleged repression in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 28

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY CARLYLE ADAMS

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

Carlyle Adams lr praises Pres Carter for morally facing issue of resisters to
Vietnam War.  Notes that some people refused to participate in war because they
were convinced it was wrong while others who voluntarily committed themselves to
combat service violated those pledges when they fled from service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 28

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY CARLYLE ADAMS

SECTION: Page 22, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

Carlyle Adams lr praises Pres Carter for morally facing issue of resisters to
Vietnam War.  Notes that some people refused to participate in war because they
were convinced it was wrong while others who voluntarily committed themselves to
combat service violated those pledges when they fled from service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 28

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 52 words

Amer Legion Commander William J Rogers repts that Legion is not trying to expel
Pres Carter from membership and that proposal to do so by legion's Wisc Dept is
not in accordance with Legion's constitution and principles.  Proposal stemmed
from opposition to Carter's pardon of Vietnam era draft evaders (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 28-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 124 words

Pres Carter's aides are expected to meet week of Feb 1 to formulate guidelines
for Defense Dept study of handling of Vietnam era mil deserters and veterans who
received less-than-honorable discharges.  White House source repts aides
selected are Robert J Lipshutz, White House counsel, Atty Gen Griffin Bell and
Charles Kirbo.  Press sec Jody Powell repts that study will be made with view to
possibly upgrading discharges by category, thus leaving open possibility of
granting form of class relief to whole groups of former servicemen.  Most vital
question facing study group is whether Pres Carter will relent on his earlier
insistence of case-by-case rev of deserters or whether broad 'political'
solution will be applied to problem (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 28-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 52 words

Amer Legion Commander William J Rogers repts that Legion is not trying to expel
Pres Carter from membership and that proposal to do so by legion's Wisc Dept is
not in accordance with Legion's constitution and principles.  Proposal stemmed
from opposition to Carter's pardon of Vietnam era draft evaders (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 28-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6

LENGTH: 124 words

Pres Carter's aides are expected to meet week of Feb 1 to formulate guidelines
for Defense Dept study of handling of Vietnam era mil deserters and veterans who
received less-than-honorable discharges.  White House source repts aides
selected are Robert J Lipshutz, White House counsel, Atty Gen Griffin Bell and
Charles Kirbo.  Press sec Jody Powell repts that study will be made with view to
possibly upgrading discharges by category, thus leaving open possibility of
granting form of class relief to whole groups of former servicemen.  Most vital
question facing study group is whether Pres Carter will relent on his earlier
insistence of case-by-case rev of deserters or whether broad 'political'
solution will be applied to problem (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 28-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 51 words

US Amb to UN Andrew Young suggests that Carter Adm might not have been happy
with his stand on normalizing relations with Vietnam, news conf before scheduled
speech at Univ of South, Sewanee, Tenn.  Re-emphasizes view that recognizing
Vietnamese Govt will depend on settling status of missing Amers (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 28-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 28, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY JAMES WOOTEN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 164 words

Labor Sec F Ray Marshall announces $1.3 Billion program to create 200,000 jobs
for unemployed Vietnam veterans, plan designed to complement Pres Carter's
pardon of Vietnam draft resisters.  Program focuses on 145,000 jobs provided by
Fed Govt at total cost of $1.2 billion and increased training and employment
opportunities in private indus.  Both components are part of Adm's larger econ
stimulus program, which seeks to create 750,000 jobs over next 18 months at cost
of $6 billion.  Hire, plan dealing with private indus, will operate under
existing Comprehensive Employment and Training Act and will require additional
outlay of $100 million in Fed funds over next 18 months.  Smaller section of
program will focus on 2,500 jobs for disabled veterans at cost of $20 million.
Marshall claims that Labor Dept has not done enough for unemployed veterans.
Unemployment rate among young male veterans in Dec '76 was 8.6%, compared with
7.9% total natl rate for same period (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 28-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 30, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 14 words

Ad sponsored by 19 individuals urges Carter Adm to improve relations with
Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Advertisement 30

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 30, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 17 words

VietnameseGovt says 95% of prisoners taken after Apr '75 Saigon takeover have
been released (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 30-3-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 31, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 113 words

Vice Pres Mondale arrives in Tokyo and strongly affirms Carter Adm's pol and
econ links to Japan and rest of Asia.  Says Japan represents 1 of cornerstones
of new Adm's foreign policy.  Schedules to meet later in day with Japan's Prime
Min Takeo Fukuda to discuss econ policies as well as US intentions in Asia.  US
officials traveling with Mondale say mission is meant to emphasize Carter Adm's
views that US has regained confidence after Vietnam War and Watergate scandal
and is designed to erase any doubts in Asia about US resolve and commitmentin
Pacific region.  Illus. On flight from Paris, Mondale stopped in Iceland and
conferred with Prime Min Geir Hallgrimsson (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 31-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 31, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 195 words

345 draft evaders, deserters and sympathizers adopt resolution in response to
Pres Carter's pardon of draft evaders demanding 'universal, unconditional
amnesty' for all anti-Vietnam war offenses, 2-day conf in Toronto.  Affirm that
Carter's 'partial pardon' does not relieve US Govt of its 'responsibilities' for
war and its consequences.  Participants come from 30 states, all 10 Canadian
provinces, Sweden, France and Latin Amer countries.  Reprs of civil liberties
orgns say legal action will be taken to stop plan by Veterans of Foreign Wars to
have names of pardoned draft evaders published in their communities.  Some
speakers criticize limitation of pardon to 'predominantly white, middle class'
draft evaders while ignoring 'poor, blacks and other minorities' who comprise
majority of deserters and recipients of substandard discharges given 'without
trials, hearings or counsel'.  Persistent legal questions are discussed such as
collateral charges of draft-card burning and failure to file Fed income taxes
while abroad, and foreign citizenship.  Conf is prelude to 10-day period of
demonstrations in Washington (DC) and rest of country to protest pardon (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 31-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 2, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY ALVIN SHUSTER

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 168 words

Eur officials express concern that heroin addiction is spreading despite
internatl cooperation of narcotics agents.  Trend is reflected in rising number
of deaths attributed to heroin.  Heroin-related deaths jumped from 13 in '74 to
59 in '76 in France, from 104 in '73 to 156 in 1st 6 months of '76 in W Ger and
from 1 in '73 to 30 in 1st 6 months of '76 in Italy.  Officials note that trend
emerged suddenly after withdrawal of US troops from Vietnam and that heroin
traffic originating in 'golden triangle' at border of Laos, Burma and Thailand
shifted from Turkey-Marseilles-NY route to Eur, particularly Amsterdam.  Police
in Amsterdam suggest that main business is handled by members of secret society
in city's large Chinese community, which agents have found difficult to
infiltrate.  Netherlands recently increased sentence for dealing in heroin from
4 to 12 years and plans to intensify efforts to expel non-Dutch Chinese.  In
Italy there is also increasing concern over rise in cocaine use (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 33

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 2, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 47 words

Article on Dinh Ba Thi, chief Vietnamese observer at UN.  He comments on US
travel restrictions and Vietnamese-US relations.  Says he is studying statement
by Amb Andrew Young that Carter Adm favors normalizing ties but says Vietnam
will be cautious and wait for deeds.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 33-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 33, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Anthony Lewis says suit against Govt brought by 10 anti-Vietnam protestors who
charge they were victims of illegal Govt surveillance is example of waste of
time, money and common sense so often involved in business of govt secrecy.
Sees no logic in Govt lawyers' refusal to turn over to plaintiffs certain
unclassified documents.  Recalls Pres Carter's campaign pledge to fight secrecy
in Washington, and suggests Carter designate someone in White House to move
quickly whenever urge for suppression appears.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 34

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 3, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 160 words

US Embassy in Seoul reptdly lodged strong protests with sr officials of S Korean
Govt about that Govt's efforts to bribe Amer Congressmen, but recd little
support from State Dept during Nixon and Ford Adms.  Under Sec of State Philip C
Habib is said to have taken unprecedented step of protesting directly to Pres
Park Chung Hee during yrs he, Habib, was Amb to Korea.  Amer diplomats in Seoul
were reptdly most incensed by activities of Park Tong Sun, Korean businessman
who is central figure in Fed investigation of alleged bribery of Congressmen.
Unnamed official claims it was 'common knowledge' in '74 that S Korea would give
campaign contributions of $30,000-$50,000 to any Congressman who asked.
Diplomats reptdly got little support from Washington because Nixon Adm wished to
avoid upsetting Korean Govt while Korean troops fought in Vietnam, and,
following war, because of State Sec Kissinger's wish to maintain US-Korea
security relationship (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 34-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 4, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE H FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 219 words

Fed Reserve Bd chmn Arthur F Burns tells HR Banking Com he disagrees with timing
and size of Carter's econ stimulus pkg.  Says econ is improving on its own, and
it is not clear that any stimulus is needed at all.  Sharply criticizes plan to
grant rebates of $50 per person on '76 taxes.  Urges cut in tax on corps.
Suggests Govt be employer of last resort for persons willing to work who cannot
find jobs, at pay rates below minimum wage.  Says money supply will be more than
adequate to accommodate Carter's program.  Opposes 'letting printing presses
roll'.  Lauds Carter for resisting pressures from all sides and for keeping
figures down.  HR Budget Com approves modest increases in job-creating elements
of Carter's econ pkg for current fiscal yr.  Adds $1.8-billion to help youth and
minorities, states and communities, and construction indus.  During some 4 hrs
of questioning, Burns backs repeal on '33 ban on interest payments on checking
accts in banks.  Links current inflation to 'colossal overstimulation of econ'
in '65, in part because of Vietnam War.  Backs Carter's targets on reducing
unemployment and increasing econ growth rate.  Sees housing starts continuing to
move at good pace.  Sees improvement in export-oriented businesses, though not
necessarily an improvement in trade balance (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 35-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 5, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Page 16, Column 5

LENGTH: 32 words

Former Vietnam war prisoner, retired Col Raymond Schrump, is turned away at
White House in effort to return his mil decorations in protest over Pres
Carter's pardon of draft evaders (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 36-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY VIRGINIA ADAMS and TOM FERRELL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Western Eur alarmed by rise in heroin addiction, which has grown from few
hundred users in '70 to estimated 30,000 users in '77.  Reasons offered include:
availability of Southeast Asian heroin through intensified sales by Asian heroin
dealers who lost US customers at end of Vietnam war and relaxed border controls
among EEC countries that ease entry into rest of continent (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 37

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JOHN W FINNEY

SECTION: Section 23; Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 214 words

John W Finney profiles Conn as arms-producing state, reviews products of leading
producers and employment picture.  Notes that Conn is largest arms producer on
per capita basis, with $763 a person in '75, compared to Calif, with $396 and
Texas, with $192.  Notes that drop in defense contracts at end of Vietnam war
brought recession that pushed Conn unemployment above national avg.  Cites 2
large new contracts, 1 for Sikorsky aircraft co for developing new generation of
helicopters that will mean $3 billion for state over 10 yrs, and 1 for Lycoming
Division of Avco Corp, which is scheduled to build big turbine engine to power
Army's new battle tank and provide additional $60 million per yr to Conn econ.
State Comr of Commerce Edward J Stockton predicts stable employment base in Conn
for next 10 yrs because of defense business.Notes that of total manufacturing
force in state of 400,000, 50,000 or 12.5% work on defense projects.  Finney
highlights Pratt & Whitney co, largest employer in Conn with 47,500 on payroll,
with solid contracts to build engines for F-14, F-15 and F-16 airplanes.  Also
mentions Electric Boat division of General Dynamics, which has near-monopoly in
submarines.  2 illus and map of Conn showing approximate locations of defense
contractors (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 37

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 4

LENGTH: 30 words

William J Crum, Amer businessman living in Hong Kong, dies Feb 5 '77 at age 58.
Was named in '71 Sen investigation of illegal activities at US military post
exchanges in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 37

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 6, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 35 words

French RC nun Sister Francoise Vandermeersch, at request of Vietnam Govt, is
working at rehabilitating many of nation's 300,000 prostitutes.  Says
prostitutes are main source of VD.  Her career noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 37-5-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 7, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN B YOUNG

SECTION: Page 22, Column 5

LENGTH: 47 words

Stephen B Young lr holding Carter Adm stress on morality in foreign policy has
put State Dept in hypocritical position, citing Frederick Z Brown's criticism of
human rights violations in Czech while at same time saying it is in US interest
to work for good relations with Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 38

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 8, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY MAURICE CARROLL

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 130 words

Former Pres Ford returns to Yale, where he coached football and studied law 40
yrs ago, to address students as Chubb Fellow.  Breakfasts with students and
meets with Ducky Pond, coach who hired him as asst in '35.  Reflects on his yrs
in office.  Calls it 'regrettable' that he failed to invite exiled Russian
writer Aleksandr I Solzhenitsyn to White House to visit him in '75.  On Vietnam,
says Amer's motives were right but tactics were wrong.  Hopes reaction to
Vietnam will not stir isolationist views.  Accuses Cong of dangerous
'overreaching' in foreign policy, particularly in Cyprus issue.  Says Harry S
Truman was his kind of Pres.  Expects to go on series of informal visits to
campuses throughout country.  Ford illus addressing Prof Gaddis Smith's history
class (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 39-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 10, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANDRE WILLIAMS

SECTION: Page 38, Column 4

LENGTH: 60 words

Andre Williams lr refutes H R Campbell lr (Jan 28) claiming that Pres Carter's
pardon of Vietnam-era draft resisters 'dishonors' vets.  Contends that there was
'no honor to be got' from participating in Vietnam war and that those who
recognized it early are to be complimented.  Revs family's mil service record,
noting his son served 'uselessly' in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 41

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 12, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY JAMES WOOTEN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 87 words

Natl Security Council spokesman Jerrold Schecter says Pres Carter, in meeting
with officers of Natl League of Families of Missing in SE Asia, reiterated
campaign promise to pursue direct negotiations with Vietnamese to resolve
question of missing Amers and pursue normal diplomatic relations by sending
high-level delegation to Vietnam.  State Dept suggests proposal has been
accepted by Hanoi.  White House indicates Carter has already begun to choose
delegation personnel.  League bd chmn Earl Hopper comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 43-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY GEOFFREY R TAYLOR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 2

LENGTH: 69 words

Article by law student Geoffrey R Taylor discusses Pres Carter's directive to
his Cabinet to reduce their legal staffs.  Recalls 'legalese and legal grief,'
including Vietnam and Watergate, of last 3 adms.  Says it is time for Amer to
stop hiding behind legal constructs and resurrect concepts like community and
fellowship.  Says Pres Carter's call for fewer lawyers was call for more 'good
faith'.  Drawing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 44

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY GEORGE B PICKETT JR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 67 words

George B Pickett Jr lr urges Pres Carter to partially offset 'insult' to 28
million veterans resulting from pardon of draft evaders by paying modest bonus
to those who honorably served in Vietnam War.  Notes money would stimulate econ,
instill pride in loyal Amers and raise morale of present and future mil
personnel.  Notes that recipients would be predominantly young, lower-income and
minorities.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 44

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 13, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS BUTSON and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

Pres Carter plans to send delegation, perhaps headed by Sec of State Vance, to
Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 44-4-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 14, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 110 words

Article on Univ of Wis, 6 yrs after physicist Robert Fassnacht was killed during
bombing at Army Math Research Center on campus.  Notes memory of incident still
lingers although anger has begun to ease.  Incident recalled.  Campus scene now
and in '60's described.  Former student Karleton Armstrong, who is serving
indeterminate prison sentence for bombing and other antiwar acts, has asked
local judge for reduction of sentence in view of Pres Carter's pardon of Vietnam
war draft evaders.  No campus rallies have been held in Armstrong's behalf, but
there are indications that condemnation has waned.  Illus of Armstrong with his
atty Mark Frankel (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 45-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 15, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 6

LENGTH: 27 words

Ngo Dzu dies Feb 13 '77 at age 52.  Was former South Vietnamese Gen once linked
by Cong investigations to drug traffic at Amer mil bases in South Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 46

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 16, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY MABEL M JASUT

SECTION: Page 24, Column 3

LENGTH: 24 words

Mabel M Jasut lr comments that desire for reconciliation should govern Amers'
attitude toward Pres Carter's pardon of Vietnam War resisters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 47

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 16, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 2

LENGTH: 18 words

Pres Carter reptdly will name Joseph Maxwell Cleland, triple-amputee veteran of
Vietnam war, to head VA.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 47-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 16, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

Vietnamese newspaper Quan Doi Nhan Dan accuses US of using undercover mil agents
in Thailand and Green Beret teams in Laos to sabotage SE Asian peace.  Says US
has 'immediate and long-term scheme of subversion and aggression' in area.
Articles comes after recent statement by Pres Carter that he wants to send
mission to Vietnam to learn fate of missing Amers (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 47-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 59 words

State Dept says Pres Carter wants former Sen Mike Mansfield to head mission to
Vietnam.  Says Vietnamese Govt has not yet replied to question of whether Govt
is willing to receive high-level Amer delegation.  Defense Dept reptdly believes
Vietnamese hold remains of 12 Amer airmen and information about hundreds of
others still listed as missing (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 19, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 2

LENGTH: 78 words

Book on CIA by Victor Marchetti and John D Marks, The CIA and the Cult of
Intelligence, reptdly contained names of several foreign leaders who received
CIA money, but those portions were deleted by court order after CIA declared
publication would cause 'irreparable injury' to US.  Book named as recipients
Pres Jomo Kenyatta of Kenya, Prime Min Forbes Burnham of Guyana, former
Chancellor Willy Brandt of West Ger and former Pres Nguyen Van Thieu of S
Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 19, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 124 words

Intelligence officials say CIA has made clandestine cash payments to many
foreign leaders in return for favors.  List as past recipients Pres Chiang
Kai-shek of Nationalist Govt of China, Ramon Magsaysay of Philippines, Syngman
Rhee of S Korea, Sese Seko Mobuto of Zaire, Eduardo Frei Montalvo of Chile and
Ngo Dinh Diem of S Vietnam.  Say other recipients include Luis Echeverria
Alvarez of Mex, Carlos Andrew Perez of Venezuela, Gen Phao Sriyanond of Thailand
and Holden Roberto of Angola.  Ray S Cline, former CIA Deputy Dir, refuses to
confirm earlier rept that Jordanian King Hussein has recd CIA money.  Defends
concept of paying foreign leaders as security measure.  Harrison M Symmes,
former Amb to Jordan, also defends payments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 50-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS A SILVESTRI

SECTION: Section 22; Page 20, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

Article by Pace Univ student Thomas A Silvestri on Pace Pleasantville, 1 of 3
Pace campuses.  Coll seen as microcosm of post-Vietnam small coll, with students
more concerned with classwork than with soc issues (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-5-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 20, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DOUGLAS E KNEELAND

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 114 words

Indications are becoming increasingly widespread that most of 145,000
Indochinese refugees from Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos who fled to US after
Communist takeovers are finding life in US harsh and often unrewarding.  Many
are on welfare, unemployed or underemployed.  Hang Dorsey, Catholic Charities'
SE Asian Resettlement Program dir and Dale S deHaan, dir of Sen Kennedy's subcom
on refugees comment.  Most Govt officials who have worked on resettlement of
refugees agree that Indochinese newcomers face more difficult adjustment that
earlier waves of pol immigrants.  Refugee mental problems have led to
establishment of 5 regional projects in attempt to deal with situation (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 51-4-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 21, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 176 words

Ed cites detailed study on Vietnam-era mil offenders in attempt to rid issue of
myths and misconceptions.  Study, sponsored by Center for Civil Rights at Notre
Dame Univ and supported by Ford Foundation, gains significance from fact that
its authors, Lawrence M Baskir and William A Strauss, were deeply involved in
Pres Ford's clemency program.  Study finds that under Ford program, 20,000 draft
evaders and deserters received unconditional amnesty, while only 2,500 were or
are 'earning' clemency, that program left 500,000 cases unsettled and that only
24 'desertions to avoid hazardous duty' existed although issue of cowardice
undermined amnesty program.  Study also finds that 50,000 bad discharges went to
vets who, having completed full tours in Vietnam, found it difficult to adjust
to Stateside duty, and that more than 50% of all 'absence offenders' left
because of personal problems that had little to do with attitude toward war.
Urges broadest kind of pardon, including upgrading of overwhelming number of
less-than-honorable discharges.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 52

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ARTHUR K MASON

SECTION: Page 30, Column 4

LENGTH: 71 words

Arthur K Mason lr comments on recent ed supporting revival of draft.  Claims
draft enables Pres to wage wars, undeclared or unauthorized by Cong.  Notes that
with all-volunteer Army, Pres is required to bring any proposed 'Vietnams' to
Cong, in advance, to explain what is contemplated and to request enactment of
suitable manpower measures to meet requirement.  Questions whether Cong would
have approved Vietnam in advance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 53

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 30 words

US Sen adopts resolutions calling on Pres Carter to demand full accounting of
all Amers still listed as missing in Vietnam war action.  And to establish comm
to pursue matter (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 53-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 26, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 95 words

Pres Carter to send high-level comm, headed by UAW pres Leonard Woodcock, to
Vietnam to discuss possibility of obtaining full rept on missing Amers and on
establishing normal relations.  State Dept spokesman Frederick Z Brown says US
hopes to send similar mission to Laos, where fate of 560 Amers still is unknown.
Says there have been no attempts to contact Cambodian authorities on 80 missing
Amers because prospect of cooperation is not encouraging.  Agreement was reached
following exchange of lrs between State Sec Vance and Foreign Min Nguyen Duy
Trinh (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 57-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 27, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS BUTSON and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 6

LENGTH: 18 words

Carter Adm plans to send diplomatic mission to Vietnam, headed by UAW pres
Leonard Woodcock, revd (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 58-4-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 28, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY DOUGLAS E KNEELAND

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 60 words

Article on Vietnamese refugee Nguyen Van Huong and family, resettled in Silver
Spring, Md. Focuses on difficulties Nguyen, who worked with Amers in Vietnam for
12 yrs before coming to US, is having in finding suitable job.  He currently
works as asst cook in restaurant.  Overqualification of Indochinese refugees for
available jobs is widespread.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 59-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 3, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 86 words

Senate Budget Com study finds recruitment lagging in all-volunteer force and
predicts increasingly difficult and costly maintenance of such recruitment.
Asserts Army and Marine Corps are behind in recruitment.  Univ of Pittsburgh
Prof William R King, study dir, estimates that it would cost $29 billion more to
increase mil to Vietnam war level of 3.1 Million enlisted men through volunteer
system than through draft.Recommends alternatives, including program of national
service short of return to draft (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 62-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 3; Page 22, Column 2

LENGTH: 15 words

Pub of Joseph Buttinger book Vietnam: The Unforgettable Teagedy set by Horizon
Press (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 71 words

Fed grand jury indicts 5 R J Allen and Associates officials for fraud in alleged
investment scheme that bilked former Vietnam prisoners of war out of $1.9
Million through now-defunct bond firm R J Allen and Associates, which was shut
down by SEC in '74.  Those indicted are co pres Robert J Allen, former pres
Howard W Alexander, exec vp Charles J Diaz, treasurer James W Brewer and
principal investor I (Bill) Vasillos (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

VietnameseForeign Min spokesman says country is prepared to consider and settle
question of Amers missing in Indochina war.  Urges Carter Adm to 'disasociate
itself' from past US policies in order to normalize relations.  Vietnam News
Agency publishes spokeman's remarks in connection with upcoming US delegation
visit.  Spokesman suggests US contribute finances for reconstruction.  Cites US
trade embargo (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 5, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

R Baker sees little evidence of 'rage' on Amer scene, in sharp contrast to days
of Vietnam and Watergate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 64

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HAITCH

SECTION: Page 41, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Follow-up on controversy during Vietnam war on what shape Paris peace talks
table should be notes tables that were finally agreed upon by US, S and N
Vietnam and Vietcong delegations have been dismantled and are stored in French
Foreign Min cellar (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 65-2-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RAYMOND H ANDERSON

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

NYC rally for Vladimir Bukovsky, held on Mar 5, is marked by jeers from some
pro-Socialists, Stuyvesant HS.  Bukovsky is cheered by Ukrainian and Russian
emigres.  Cheers change to jeers when speakers Michael Harrington, Dem
Socialist, and Ralph Schoenman, antiwar activist during Vietnam conflict, make
remarks approving character about socialism as an ideal.  Most prolonged protest
comes when Harrington criticizes US involvement in overthrow of what he calls
'democratic' Allende Govt in Chile.  Other speakers noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 65-2-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 396 words

Pres Carter speaks to 42 telephone callers from 26 states on Mar 5 during 2-hr
nationwide radio broadcast moderated by Walter Cronkite.  Answers questions on
variety of subjects.Supports recent Cong pay increases, but feels future
increases should not become effective until after new election.  Is 'encouraged'
by North Vietnam's response to his initiatives on normalization of relations.
Will seek discussions with Cuba on fishing boundary limits and aerial hijacking,
but will require Cuban moves to respect human rights and refrain from
interference in other countries before restoring diplomatic recognition.
Promises comprehensive tax reform program by Sept 30.  Claims US acted
forcefully in assuring safety of Amers living in Uganda.  Denies inclusion of
additional gasoline tax in his forthcoming energy proposals, but says plans may
involve price changes to encourage conservation.  Says Yankee exhibition
baseball game in Cuba is possibility.  Outlines his 2-yr, $31-billion job
'stimulation' proposal, which he says seeks substitutes for some provisions of
Humphrey-Hawkins bill.  Says members of his family pay for their own expenses
while living in White House.  Hopes to change income tax structure that benefits
rich.  Does not feel farmers are making excessive profits and promises to offer
'stable' agr policy.  Defends his pardon of Vietnam draft evaders.Denies trying
to pressure state legislators on issue of ERA.  Promises follow-up call on
question of ban of drug Laetrile.  Is concerned about some aspects of 'vertical
integration' of oil cos, but does not think concept is contrary to Amer's best
interests.  Would like to remove tax advantages enjoyed by couples living
together outside matrimony.  Stresses importance of establishing consumer
protection agency.  Concedes Amer's policy of foreign aid may not be pol
popular.  Says he has no authority to decide if British-French Concorde sst
should be permitted to land at Kennedy Airport.  Promises follow-up call on
inquiry about lifting of ban on civil service hiring.  Claims War Powers Act
does not impinge on his powers as Pres, since he would never proceed toward war
situation without consulting Cong and Amer people.  Has no objection to granting
Panama sovereignty over canal, but hopes it will remain open to everyone.  Illus
with Cronkite.  Illus of 1st caller, Joseph Willman (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 65-0-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 17, Column 2

LENGTH: 140 words

Enrollment in ROTC is rising although it is still below figures of decade ago.
ROTC enrollment fell from 177,000 in '67 to 33,000 in '73 and climbed to 42,000
in '74, 48,000 in '75 and 55,000 in '76.  ROTC program has provided 40% of
officers in active Army and 50% of all active and reserve officers.  33% above
rank of col are ROTC grads.  Program has returned to several campuses that
dropped it during Vietnam War, including Princeton, Dartmouth and MIT.  Number
of women enrolled in ROTC is also growing.  282 women were commissioned in '76,
700 are presently enrolled and figure is expected to rise to 1,100 in '78.  Maj
Gen Charles C Rogers attributes increase to end of Vietnam War, during which
ROTC was major target of antiwar passions.  Also attributes increase to econ
depression and patriotism aroused by Bicentennial (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 66

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

Carter Adm is expected to lift restrictions on travel by Amers to Cuba, Vietnam,
North Korea and Cambodia.  State Dept spokesman Frederick Z Brown does not deny
Newsweek rept that adm will remove legal obstacles.  Sec of State Cyrus Vance
indicates that Adm plans discussions with Cuba on fishing limits and
continuation of antihijacking agreement.  Dept tells Baseball Comr Bowie Kuhn it
has no objection to proposal for visit to Cuba by all-star team of Amer and Natl
League players (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 67-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 9, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 168 words

Defense Dept prepares recommendations for upgrading less-than-honorable
discharges received by Vietnam War vets in effort to create basis for policy
statement by Pres Carter.  Repts that bulk of upgrading would take place on
case-by-case basis under enlarged Defense Dept rev bds and would involve such
categories as 4,500 fugitive deserters, 5,555 deserters who applied for clemency
under Pres Ford's '74 clemency action and 83,135 servicemen discharged after
desertion.  If recommendations are accepted, vets with honorable combat records
who deserted while in uniform in US and those who received honorable discharge,
returned to service and then received less-than-honorable discharges are
expected to have their discharges automatically upgraded.  Pres Carter's
advisers White House counsel Robert J Lipshutz and Charles Kirbo have reptd that
discharge categories involving drug offenses and alcoholism are also being
considered for upgrading.  Defense Sec Harold Brown is considering proposals
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 68-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 10, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Pres Carter announces restrictions on travel to Cuba, Vietnam, North Korea and
Cambodia will be removed Mar 18.  Links move to his desire to improve US
position on human rights in line with '75 Helsinki accord on East-West
cooperation (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 69-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 11, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Page 11, Column 2

LENGTH: 143 words

Richard Halloran examines debate over amnesty for Vietnam war deserters,
sketching background, arguments for and against Pres pardon and possible options
open to Pres.  Comm of senior Pres advisers ordered to review matter include
Pres informal adviser Charles Kirbo, Pres counsel Robert J Lipshutz, Defense Sec
Harold Brown, and Atty Gen Griffin Bell.  Background discusses statistical
breakdown on draft evaders, deserters, dishonorably discharged, fugitives and
persons who participated in Pres Ford's clemency program.  Halloran summarizes
possible options: blanket pardon, blanket denial of pardon, pardon for those who
could prove moral qualms about war or who suffered mental problems as result of
fighting in Vietnam, clemency program similar to Pres Ford's with alternative
service, or case-by-case review of those given undesirable discharges (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 70-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 13, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 18 words

Pres Carter's lifting of travel restrictions on trips to Vietnam, Cuba, Cambodia
and North Korea revd (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 72-0-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 13, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 113 words

Westerners visiting Vietnam, including Mennonites, Quakers, UN and World Bank
officials, rept agr recovery is progressing despite continued rice rationing.
Vietnamese Govt's attempts to attract more outside business by new code on
foreign investments noted.  Country hopes to receive at least $100-million in
Internatl Development Assn loans for indus expansion.  Quakers say they saw
considerable concern about food prospects, especially in light of recent adverse
weather.  Mennonite soc worker Max Ediger, Amer Friends Service Com chmn Wallace
Collett and UN official Dr Victor Umbricht comment.  Country continues to
receive large-scale assistance from USSR and China (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 72-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 13, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY JAMES WOOTEN

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Pres Carter meets with Amer comm bound for Vietnam and Laos to continue search
for missing Amers.  Says comm's work could provide foundation for eventual
normalization of relations.  Comm itinerary noted.  White House spokesman says
there has been no response from Cambodia in effort to arrange similar visit.
Comm leader Leonard Woodcock takes same view as Carter that some missing will
never be found (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 72-2-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 90 words

Ed generally lauds Pres Carter's approach to amnesty for Vietnam era servicemen
but claims that call for handling of 'deserters and all' on individual case
basis by Defense Dept will undermine Carter's hope to 'get over the Vietnam War
as soon as we can'.  Claims that upgrading their discharges on individual basis
will invite new charges of unequal treatment and undercut very concept of
amnesty.  Recommends extension of blanket amnesty to everyone except those who
committed serious felonies normally punishable in civilian courts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 73

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 14, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 45 words

US Govt comm leaves for Vietnam and Laos.  Panel chmn Leonard Woodcock comments
before departure.  Panel members are former Sen Mike Mansfield, Repr G V
Montgomery, Children's Defense Fund exec dir Marian Wright Edelman and Brookings
Inst member Charles W Yost (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 73-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 16, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 65 words

PLO, along with other observer orgns and nations, such as N Korea and Vietnam,
have been invited by Sec Gen Waldheim to attend UN speech by Carter and
reception for him.  Development becomes possible after US, in face of some
objections, drops request attendance be limited to UN members.  PLO deputy
observer Hassan A Abdel Rahman welcomes move.  Israeli Amb Chaim Herzog objects
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 75-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 57 words

US mission to Vietnam leader Leonard Woodcock, in Quotation of Day in meeting
with Foreign Min Nguyen Duy Trinh, says 'We can put a difficult and bitter past
behind us.  There are many problems between our two countries, but we believe
that with patience and perseverance and creation of understanding these problems
can be cleared away'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 76-3-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 1

LENGTH: 211 words

A Lewis comment on Carter's stand against govt secrecy and difficulty he will
have changing policy.  Cites continuing case of attempts to release last 4
volumes of Pentagon papers, dealing with diplomatic moves to end Vietnam War.
Govt has withheld 200 pages saying they must be kept secret.  These volumes were
all in public record when Fed prosecutor introduced them as evidence in trial of
Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony Russo.  Congressman Les Aspin has sued under Freedom
of Information Act to get Navy estimates of future Soviet naval strength.
Justice Dept said suit was filed in wrong Fed ct in Wis.  Another suit asks for
details of CIA efforts to persuade editors not to publish stories about Glomar
Explorer operation to retrieve sunken Soviet submarine.  Lewis cites CIA refusal
to furnish information to historian Alan Fitzgibbon on disappearance of Columbia
Univ lectuer Jesus de Galindez.  Cites implications of denial of press pass for
Washington correspondent for The Nation, Robert Sherrill, because he was once
convicted of assault.  Holds Justice Dept could make great difference in Govt
attitudes if it made clear that it would defend agencies in information cases
not as matter of routine but only when there was convincing case for secrecy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 76

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 178 words

Vietnamese officials begin distributing to Amer businesses copies of new liberal
guidelines in hopes of spurring foreign investment if Pres Carter lifts trade
embargo.  Some Western businessmen are pessimistic, citing long delays in
concluding deals, including problems of lack of information, bureaucratic
inertia and what they consider overly tough demands by Vietnamese.  Bank of Amer
and Citibank hope to open branches in Vietnam.  Country's econ is still weak,
with inflation rate rising, 3-million unemployed people in south and increasing
food shortages.  Country reptdly has raised $250-million in commercially
syndicated loans since end of war.  Lawyer who has studied new guidelines notes
that although Vietnamese seem to have given priority to developing what they
hope will be major offshore oil fields, they have actually concluded very few
deals.  Only sizable deal is with French Compagnie Maritime d'Expertises for
establishing logistical base at Vung Tau.  Illus of US delegation head Leonard
Woodcock greeted by foreign min official Nguyen Minh (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 76-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JAMES WOOTEN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 194 words

Pres Carter attends 'town meeting' in Clinton, Mass.  Makes opening remarks and
answers questions of some of 700 townspeople attending meeting.  Topics touched
upon outlined.  Says Palestinian refugees must be given homeland.  Says he would
like to get courts 'out of our business,' and claims Chief Justice Burger
agrees.  Defends his pardon of Vietnam draft evaders.  White House releases Pres
plan for maritime safety standards which would reduce risk of oil spills in US
waters, provide compensation for victims and possibly ban from Amer ports
tankers with history of accidents.  Following meeting, Carter rides in motorcade
through town, accompanied by Mass Gov Michael S Dukakis and Sen Edward M
Kennedy.  Arrives at home of Edward G Thompson family, where he spends night.
Will make speech and attend reception in his honor at UN.  White House press sec
Jody Powell says reprs of PLO, North Korea and Vietnam may attend reception, but
at inv of Sec Gen Waldheim, not of White House.  Illus of Carter in Bedford,
Mass, and at town meeting in Clinton, and with his host, Mrs Edward G Thompson,
at her home.  Map showing Clinton's location in Mass (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 76-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 18, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Vietnamese Prime Min Pham Van Dong says 'new spirit' of Pres Carter could solve
problems between US and Vietnam.  White House comm head Leonard Woodcock praises
Vietnamese as 'courageous people' during meeting with Dong in Hanoi.  Vietnam
pledges to trace missing Amers and calls on US to provide reconstruction aid as
matter of 'honor' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 77-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 19, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY BRUCE W BEAN

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 133 words

Vietnam veteran Bruce W Bean lr urges amnesty or pardon for mil deserters in
Vietnam war and urges new and fairer system of compulsory national service.
Holds that injustice of previous Selective Service System is reason enough to
grant amnesty or pardon, especially in view of fact that deserters have already
suffered more than those who 'beat' system.  Proposes, as more equitable system,
universal govt service that would include women but need not be mil, be of short
duration, on 'essentially' unpaid basis, with adequate pay to volunteers in
longer mil term, or in programs like Peace Corps.  Essential feature would be
that service be designed that cannot be 'beaten'.  Urges those who question such
program to solicit views of 17- and 18-yr-olds, who would participate in such
program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 78

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 19, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2

LENGTH: 12 words

Ban on travel to Cuba, North Korea, Vietnam and Cambodia expires (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 78-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 20, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THOMAS BUTSON and BARBARA SLAVIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 10 words

Return of 12 missing US servicemen by Vietnam revd (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 79-0-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 20, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Vietnam War veteran Carl E Smith's gesture of returning his war medals and
commendations to Pres Carter to protest pardon of draft evaders falls short of
goal as package is mistaken for gift and returned with thank-you note.  Note
cites Pres Carter's policy of not accepting gifts (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 79-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 20, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT D MCFADDEN

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Remains of 12 Amer pilots killed in Vietnam war arrive aboard US Air Force
plane, Honolulu.  Are to be sent to TriService Mortuary at Travis Air Force
Base, Calif after positive identification.  Mrs Virginia Capling and Mrs Frank E
Roark comment.  Capling and daughter illus.  Plane illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 79-1-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Ed calls reprint of article by French-Canadian RC priest Andre Gelinas on
Vietnam today in New York Rev of Books as welcome surprise in light of fact that
article does not paint rosy picture of current scene.  Notes his expulsion from
Vietnam in July '76.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 80

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 21, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 17 words

Vietnam News Agency says local elections are to be held in southern section of
country in May (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 80-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 22, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 17 words

Presidential comm headed by Leonard Woodcock phones Pres Carter on return from
Vietnam and Laos (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 81-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 23, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 3

LENGTH: 63 words

White House comm on Amers missing in action returns from Indochina and says
Vietnam plans to return remains of former CIA employee Tucker Gouglemann, who
returned to Saigon just before Govt collapse in attempt to rescue friends, and
unnamed serviceman.  Former Sen Mike Mansfield says mission helped give US 'new
beginning' in SE Asia.  Chmn Leonard Woodcock comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 82-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 23, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 87 words

Bd of Veterans Appeals rules Vietnam war hero Sgt Dwight Johnson was mentally
incompetent when he was shot to death in apparent store robbery attempt in
Detroit, Mich, as result of Army exploitation and that widow is therefore
eligible for $300-monthly combat pension.  Johnson allegedly was exploited by
Army after he had been returned to US after service-related illness and was
notified he had been awarded Medal of Honor.  Disabled Amer Veterans official
James Pelligrini, in testimony before bd, recalls case (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 82-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 24, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1

LENGTH: 16 words

Comment on possibility of US renewing relations with Vietnam and other
Indochinese countries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 83

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 24, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

Article on Vietnam econ situation.  Notes Bank of Amer figures indicating
country imported $432.5-million in goods from 7 major trading partners in '76
while exporting only $116.2-million.  Says trade gap may double as country
starts new 5-yr plan for indus and agr development.  Notes country has sought
loans from World Bank, Asian Development Bank and IMF.  Notes similar situation
Laos is in, which may have led to good reception US delegation received
recently.  Notes stand Cambodian leaders are taking in not seeking any outside
help (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 83-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 24, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 155 words

Pres Carter says he will accept inv from Vietnam to begin new round of
negotiations in Paris aimed at normalizing relations.  Believes Vietnamese acted
in 'good faith' in promising to make further efforts to account for missing
Amers.  Says Prime Min Pham Van Dong suggested reinitiation of diplomatic
discussions.  Notes Vietnamese have imposed no 'preconditions'.  Says 1 of 12
bodies returned from Vietnam is remains of male Vietnamese and not that of Amer
soldier killed in action.  Calls it 'honest mistake'.  Says Vietnamese have not
combined politically sensitive issue of Amer econ aid or war reparations and
question of missing Amers.  Troublesome issues that may develop during
negotiations reptdly are possible US aid, ending trade embargo, more open access
for travel between countries and agreement by US not to continue to block UN
membership application.  Carter and mission leader Leonard Woodcock illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 83-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 25, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 124 words

Pres Carter says he will 'respond well' to question of possible Amer econ aid
for Vietnam if assistance is arranged as part of successful negotiations to open
normal diplomatic relations, news conf.  Says aid should not be viewed as
reparations.  Action seen as subtle important shift in policy, suggesting that
promises of renewed Vietnamese efforts to account for missing Amer servicemen
will be sufficient to open diplomatic and trade relations.  Carter defends
practice of discussing in unusual detail diplomatic positions and possible
bargaining points in press confs and other public forums.  Defends personal
style and openness.  Backs findings of special comm that total accounting of
missing would be unreasonable expectation (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 84-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 26, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 5

LENGTH: 25 words

Spokesman for UN High Comr for Refugees Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan says number of
refugees fleeing Vietnam by sea has increased in recent mos (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 85-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY NAYAN CHANDA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Article by Nayan Chanda on insurgencies in Thailand, Malaysia, Burma, Vietnam,
Laos, Philippines and Indonesia.  Illus.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 86-0-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 28 words

Attempts by US and Vietnam to normalize relations, including recent US mission
aimed at gathering information about Amers still listed as missing in war, revd
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 86-0-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 29, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 166 words

Defense Dept announces that Pres Carter has authorized rev and possible
upgrading of less-than-honorable discharges of 432,000 servicemen.  Sec Brown
notes that program is being implemented in spirit and compassion in which Carter
has sought to bind up divisions of Vietnam era.  Those eligible under program
for upgrading are 69,170 deserters who did not participate in Pres Ford's
clemency program and who had received undesirable discharges, 103,836 servicemen
who received undesirable discharges for causes other than desertion and 259,521
recipients of gen discharges, including Carter's son Jack who was discharged
from Navy after being apprehended for smoking marijuana, and 4,560 deserters
listed as fugitives.Those who deserted from combat zone, 1,903 men who received
dishonorable discharges and 28,759 men with bad conduct disharges are ineligible
for upgrading.  Criteria for automatic upgrading revd.  Fleet Reserve Assn
scores program as 'travesty' of Disharge Rev Bd system (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 88

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 31, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 5

LENGTH: 34 words

David R Gray lr lauds Pres Carter's comm's attempts to find information about
Amers missing in Vietnam.  Says equally important problem is attempt to bring
families of refugees resettled in Us to US.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 90

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 31, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HUGHES

SECTION: Page 24, Column 3

LENGTH: 21 words

Vietnamese Shoeshine Boys Project founder Richard Hughes lr disputes Mar 21 ed
on current conditions in Vietnam.  Drawing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 90-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 31, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 2

LENGTH: 17 words

Illus of coffin of AF Lt Col E R Capling returning from Vietnam, Travis Air
Force Base ceremony.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 90-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 2, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 103 words

Pentagon sources estimate that nearly 60,000 of 69,170 deserters from Vietnam
war era who accepted undesirable discharges in lieu of courts-martial will
qualify for 'automatic' upgrading of discharges under plan announced earlier in
week by Defense Dept. Many of 92,000 other servicemen with undesirable
discharges for reasons other than desertion and 260,000 who received general
discharges will be eligible to apply for upgraded discharges, but action will
not be automatic.  Move is seen as departing from 'case-by-case' approach Pres
Carter had promised during electoral campaign and closer to class relief (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 92

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 89 words

Charles Mohr claims that Carter has gone 'long way' toward ending Vietnam as
domestic social issue but claims that plan for Defense Dept to rev and upgrade
undesirable discharges of Vietnam vets treats middle-class draft evaders and
predominantly poor and black vets with less-than-honorable discharges
differently.  Questions whether members of 2d group will attempt to surmount
bureaucratic and procedural obstacles posed by individual case revs.  Cites
limited scope of pardon.  Revs criteria for upgrading discharges.  Photo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 93

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY R V DENENBERG and CAROLINE RAND HERRON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

Pres Carter announces that Defense Dept will rev and possibly upgrade
unfavorable mil discharges issued during Vietnam War.  Cases will be considered
individually and only if individual vet asks for rev.  Deserters from combat
zone may not have discharges upgraded and are still liable to prosecution and
other charges.  Those who meet several criteria will be upgraded routinely (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 93-0-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MICHAEL GOODWIN

SECTION: Section 21; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Article on Air Force Lt Peter Arthur Grubb, of Southampton, NY, who still is
listed as missing in action in Vietnam war.  His parents comment.  Drawing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 93-1-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY PAUL WILNER

SECTION: Section 21; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 78 words

Legis condemning Pres Carter's pardon program for Vietnam draft resisters fails
to gain enough votes for adoption by Suffolk County (NY) Legis, with 8 members
for, 6 against and 4 abstaining.  Legis was sponsored by Anthony Noto and Louis
Howard.  Suffolk County residents express sentiments ranging from outright
opposition to any leniency for draft resisters or deserters to support for
blanket pardon for all who resisted mil involvement.  Composite photo (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 93-1-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 3, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 107 words

New VA Admr Max Cleland begins vigorous reorgn of his agency, which employs
226,000 civil servants, has budget of $19-billion and seeks to meet needs of
29-million veterans.  Seeks installation of $100-million computer to keep
records and make benefit payments.  Suggests reallocation of
resources.Criticisms of adm by Vietnam veterans include charge that it has
ignored Vietnam veteran because he fought in unpopular war, that GI Bill of
Rights is inadequate for Vietnam veteran, and that VA provides insufficient
psychological counseling and rehabilitation services.  Cleland has initiated
6-week study to identify specific problems (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 93-2-

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY DEIRDRE CARMODY

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 172 words

Article on foreign correspondent, a dwindling breed.  Overseas Press Club survey
in '75 showed 429 full-time Amer correspondents and 247 foreigners working for
Amer news orgns around world.  There were 797 correspondents in '72 and 929
working abroad for Amer cos in '69.  Drop is predominantly reflection of sharp
increase in costs in recent yrs for Amers living abroad as result of changing
tax laws, unfavorable rates of exch with foreign currencies and gen inflation.
AP gen mgr Keith Fuller comments on cost.  Other news execs say that cost of
maintaining bur overseas runs between $85,000 and $115,000 a yr.  Decrease is
also seen as reflecting gen turning inward of Amer people since end of Vietnam
war.  Correspondent situation of various news orgns noted including Chicago
Daily News, Baltimore Sun, Westinghouse Boradcasting Co, Christian Science
Monitor, Washington Post, AP, UPI, ABC, NBC, CBS, and NY Times.  James Hoge
(Chicago News), Stan Opotowsky (ABC) and Prof Ralph E Kliesh comment on
situation.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 94-77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 6

LENGTH: 13 words

Vietnam war MIA Lt William Klenert buried, Long Island Natl Cemetery (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 95-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 5, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 1

LENGTH: 108 words

Ed finds congruence between Pres Carter's order to Defense Dept to upgrade
estimated 432,000 less than honorable mil discharges and his campaign promise to
close book on Vietnam war period.  Holds that order does not address question of
justice for many former servicemen who clashed with mil because of ignorance, in
contrast to 'more sophisticated and affluent contemporaries' who devised legal
ways of avoiding mil duty.  Notes adverse reaction by some organized mil reserve
orgns, and urges White House to carefully monitor review bds so as to insure
that 'martial mentality and bureaucratic delay' do not interfere with requested
compassion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 95

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 9, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 88 words

Military Personnel Records Center receives approx 3,000 calls daily from Vietnam
veterans seeking to have their discharge status changed, under program
instituted by Pres Carter.Program applies to veterans who served from Aug 4 '64
to Mar 28 '73 and allows some general, undesirable and clemency discharges to be
upgraded.  Excluded from program are bad conduct and dishonorable discharges and
battle-zone deserters.Project mgr Maj D E Meynig notes some of calls are from
honorably discharged veterans who oppose program (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 99-77

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 10, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Growing number of Columbia Univ students and faculty members oppose ex-State Sec
Kissinger's proposed apptmt to univ, citing his 'immoral' actions while
directing Amer policy in Vietnam, Cambodia and Chile.  Demand that univ pres
William J McGill halt negotiations with Kissinger (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 100-0

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 10, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

Rept prepared by Sen Humphrey's Foreign Relations Com subcom on foreign
assistance questions value of keeping Clark Air Base in Philippines unless US
intends to maintain ability to launch further Vietnam-like mil operations on SE
Asia mainland.  Urges US to reassess its natl interests in SE Asia to determine
benefits of retaining Amer mil bases in Philippines.  Current status of
negotiations with Philippines over new treaty governing bases discussed.  State
Dept officials comment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 100-1

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 12, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 67 words

Ex-Pres Ford, in lecture prepared for delivery at Univ of Ky, describes
difficulty he had in consulting with Cong in meaningful way during major crises
of his Presidency, including decision to evacuate Danang, Vietnam, air base and
evacuate Amers from Lebanon during civil war there in '76.  Urges Cong and
Carter Adm re-examine War Powers Resolution of '73, which requires such
consultation (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 102-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 13, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 71 words

Vietnam Press Agency says biggest problem facing Saigon is how to get city
dwellers back to countryside, dispatch marking coming 2d anniv of Communist
takeover.  Says 6-million more people will be moved to country.  Author Nguyen
Khac Vien says more than 10% of city's population provides no useful work for
state.  Estimates only 35% of population in south live outside cities.  Says
figure must be increased to 70% (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 103-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 15, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Wesley L Fishel, Mich State Univ pol science prof who became leading academic
advocate of Amer involvement in Vietnam, dies Apr 14 at age 57.  According to
Ramparts magazine, Fischel set up Mich State Univ aid program in Saigon and
served as cover for CIA operations from '55 to '59.  Disclosures made Fishel
target of antiwar movement and controversial figure whose career was reportedly
damaged by episode.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 10

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 15, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 33 words

Carter Adm officials say US and Vietnam will begin high-level talks in Paris in
May.  Say US will probably be represented by Asst Sec of State for E Asian and
Pacific Affairs Richard Holbrooke (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 105-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY CLAUDIA KRICH

SECTION: Page 24, Column 4

LENGTH: 31 words

Former Amer Friends Service Com S Vietnamese programs co-dir Claudia Krich
disputes Mar 21 ed based on article by Andre Gelinas.  Contends situation in
Vietnam has greatly improved.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 10

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 16, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 17 words

US and Vietnam reprs to meet, May 3, Paris, on possibility of normalizing
diplomatic relations (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 106-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 19, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 64, Column 5

LENGTH: 116 words

US Sup Ct agrees to decide whether foreign nations can sue for triple damages
when alleging they are victims of antitrust violations by Amer cos.  To rev
Circuit Ct decision that India, Iran, Philippines and S Vietnam have right to
sue cos.  Suit charges cos conspired to drive up price of antibiotic
tetracycline.  Cos named are Pfizer, Amer Cyanamid, Bristol-Myers, Squibb, Olin
and Upjohn.  Cos were sued by scores of private cos, all 50 states, Fed Govt and
9 foreign countries.  Most suits by states and private parties have been settled
with awards totaling some $100-million.  Suits filed by W Ger and Colombia are
pending.  Claims by S Korea, Spain and Kuwait have been withdrawn (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 109-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 171 words

ACLU to file lawsuit charging FBI and top officers of Honeywell Inc with illegal
conspiracy to infiltrate religious and pol groups that opposed Honeywell's
production of antipersonnel weapons in early 70's.  Suit alleges that FBI
provided information from paid informants to Honeywell in hope of heading off
possible disruptions of co's annual stockholders' meeting and preventing antiwar
groups from obtaining publicity or embarrassing Honeywell officials.  Suit is
1st to link bur with major corp in activities involving war protesters.Names as
defendants former Honeywell chmn James H Binger, current chmn Stephen F Keating,
FBI Assoc Dir Richard G Held, Atty Gen Bell and FBI Dir Kelley.  Honeywell is
nation's 67th largest indus corp and was frequent target of protesters during
Vietnam war because it mfrd fragmentation bombs.  Plaintiffs include Marvin
Davidov, organizer of project in Minn, home of Honeywell, to protest co's
production of weapons.Illus of demonstrators protesting at co's annual meeting
in '70 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 111-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 21, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 6

LENGTH: 116 words

Army starts ad campaign to spur interest in Pres Carter's program to upgrade
less-than-honorable mil discharges from Vietnam period.  Ad campaign will
include service spot announcements on nation's TV and radio stations, special
material to be sent to 8,900 newspapers and posters that will be displayed in
post offices, Vet Adm offices and other Fed bldgs.  15,000 of possible 432,500
veterans made inquiries about program during its 1st 14 days.  It has been
decided that 173,000 Vietnam-era service personnel who received undesirable
discharges may receive veterans benefits and some retroactive Army entitlements
such as back pay for leave accrued up to time of original discharges (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 111-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 23, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

Asian Development Bank members France, Austria, Finland, Norway, Sweden and
India urge that development activities in Vietnam and Indochina be resumed,
statements, annual meeting.  US delegate does not raise issue.  Unified Vietnam
is attending meeting for 1st time as full-fledged member.  Austrian delegate
Erich M Schmid discloses Vietnam recently fulfilled bank obligations by meeting
outstanding service payments.Issue seen as severe test of bank's established
policy and continuing desire to keep out politics out of financial decisions
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 113-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 24, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 51 words

Vietnamese delegate Tran Duong, attending Asian Development Bank's annual
meeting, Manila, asks for reconstruction assistance.  Bank pres Taroichi Yoshida
contends further discussions are needed.  7 of bank's 42 members urge speedy
resumption of assistance to Vietnam and other Indochinese countries (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 114-0

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 25, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY LAURENCE H SILBERMAN

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Laurence H Silberman article contrasting Carter Adm's hard line toward USSR and
apparent moves toward recognition of Cuba and Vietnam, opposing latter.  Holds
it confession of weakness to bargain with Prime Min Castro while Cuban troops
are in Angola.  Calls upcoming talks with Vietnamese in Paris thinly-disguised
retreat from reasonable US position that Vietnam must account fully for missing
Amers.  Drawing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 11

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 28, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

A Lewis article on promising foreign policy signs in 1st 100 days of Carter
Presidency.  Notes decision not to plunge into Zaire situation, 1st steps toward
recognition of Vietnam and Cuba, new leadership in Middle East, stress on human
rights and moves to curbs arms sales abroad.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 11

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 28, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 6

LENGTH: 90 words

Air Force announces plans to dispose of herbicide used in Vietnam war stored at
Gulfport, Miss, naval base since '70 ban on its use.  Herbicide, called Orange
because of identification stripes on its containers, will be shipped to area
1,000 miles west of Hawaii in Dutch-owned tanker Vulcanus, where it will be
burned in incinerators at temperatures of 2,600 degrees Fahrenheit.  Marine life
and air in area will be tested for ill effects and, if all goes well, Vulcanus
will dispose of remaining stockpile on nearby Johnson Island (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 118-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 29, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 98 words

W Ger urban guerrillas Andreas Baader, Gudrun Ensslin and Jan-Carl Raspe,
members of Baader-Meinhof gang, found guilty of bombing US Army posts in
Frankfurt and Heidelberg in '72 and bldgs in 4 other cities.  Chief Judge
Eberhard Foth rejects assertions by defense that bombings were legitimate
protests against Amer mil actions in Vietnam War.  Terrorists are also convicted
of attempted murder and joining criminal conspiracy.  Are on hunger strike.  4
Amers killed in bombings were Lt Col Paul A Bloomquist, Capt Clyde R Bonner,
Sp/4 Ronald A Woodward and Sp/5 Charles L Peck (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 119-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 29, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 199 words

NY Times/CBS News survey finds 64% of Amers approve of Pres Carter's performance
as he ends 1st 100 days in office.  Links high ratings to support of many who
voted against him, but who now believe he is more conservative than expected,
and to support of his style, rather than to substance of his policies.  Finds
only 47% approve Carter's handling of econ, and 42% approve of his conduct of
diplomacy, with 25% disapproving and 33% undecided.  Finds 50% disagree with his
granting amnesty to Vietnam-era draft evaders, 66% favor negotiating strategic
arms limitation agreement with USSR and 38% disapprove his lecturing Soviets on
human rights.  Finds 31% of public believe econ is getting worse, compared with
18% who feel econ is recovering.  Finds popularity dropped when he urged US to
confront energy crisis by using less fuel and paying more for it.  Finds that
despite overall impression of Carter's rightward movement, especially in
conservative West, his most steadfast supporters are liberals.  Finds public has
low impression of Govt and pol leaders, and that 58% want Cong to have more
control of Fed Govt than Pres.  Graphs showing responses to specific questions
in survey (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 11

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Hanoi, Vietnam rally, attended by thousands, marks 2d anniv of Communist
takeover, Apr 30.  Speakers include Communist Party Sec Gen Le Duan, Natl
Assembly Chmn Truong Chinh and Deputy Prime Min Pham Hung.  Other festivities
noted (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 121-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 39 words

Article on differences between econ and soc conditions of northern and southern
areas of Vietnam 2 yrs after war's end.  Notes northern efforts concentrate on
indus construction while in south cities continue to bustle.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 121-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 1, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 189 words

First of 3 articles in series on Indochina since Communist victories there two
yrs ago deals with Vietnam.  Notes econ and soc disruptions in S Vietnam, hard
hit by unemployment, inflation and wage cuts.  Notes sharp impact of Govt
resettlement of Saigon residents to 'new econ zones' to work on land and relieve
population pressure.  Says Northern soldiers and officials have bought or
confiscated consumers goods and shipped them to Hanoi.  Notes that N Vietnamese
Communist Party and Govt leaders have virtual monopoly on natl key policy-making
posts.  Notes 5-yr plan gives precedence to agr and light indus, aiming at food
self-sufficiency and 40% increase in exports.  Notes that Vietnam had trade
deficit of $570 million and GNP of $6.5 Billion in '76.  Notes foreign
businessmen are skeptical of Hanoi Govt's invitation to private foreign
investment because of internal dissension over question.  Says analysts believe
leaders are divided over size of N Vietnamese army because it is burden on econ.
Notes that ethnic prejudices between Northerners and Southerners remain.  Illus
of war damaged street in North Vietnam (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 12

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Families of Amers missing in action in Vietnam say they expect Pres Carter to
stand by pledge not to establish diplomatic relations until everything is done
to account for missing (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 123-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 3, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 36 words

US and Vietnam to open talks, May 3, Paris.  US delegation is to be headed by
Asst Sec of State for E Asian and Pacific Affairs Richard Holbrooke.  Vietnamese
side to be headed by Deputy Foreign Min Pham Hien (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 123-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 4, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Ed says only important Watergate question Nixon should be asked in upcoming TV
int is why he did not destroy White House tapes.  Claims more important matter
is what has happened in Indochina since end of US involvement.  Notes misery and
fear that exist in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 12

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 4, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

Former US State Sec Kissinger says US has no commitment to supply reconstruction
aid to Vietnam, US Chamber of Commerce meeting.  Says he will strongly object if
econ aid is only aspect of Paris accords to be fulfilled (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 124-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 4, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 97 words

Drastic shift in US foreign policy perspectives during 2 yrs since end of
Vietnam war discussed.  Prime developments are retrenchment in Far East,
reinstatement in govt of policy dissidents on Indochina and moves toward
bipartisanship.  In Far East, US is working on plans to withdraw ground forces
from S Korea, establish full diplomatic relations with China and revise security
commitment to Taiwan.  Dissidents reinstated have been W Anthony Lake, Paul C
Warnke and Richard Moose.  Illus of Richard Holbrooke, in Paris for Vietnam
negotiations, being greeted by Phan Hien (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 124-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 4, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 59 words

US and Vietnam open formal negotiations in Paris to re-establish relations.
Asst State Sec for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Richard Holbrooke leads US
delegation while Deputy Foreign Min Phan Hien leads Vietnamese.  US delegation
terms meeting 'frank, friendly and useful' but notes that only agreement reached
is to meet again on May 4 '77 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 124-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 5, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 26 words

Vietnam reptdly will have to await Sept 20 '77 reopening of UN Gen Assembly
before applying for membership despite US decision to drop objections (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 125-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 5, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 58 words

Vietnamese Govt campaign to educ people to fact that Amers may be returning to
country in peace described.  Newspapers and radio broadcasts have been
emphasizing themes of 'mutual benefits and peaceful coexistence'.  Broadcasts
have been emphasizing agreement that Vietnam will press search for remains of
Amers listed as killed or missing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 125-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 5, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 165 words

State Sec Cyrus R Vance repts that US and USSR have made no concessions on
strategic arms limitations during weeks of discussions with Amb Anatoly F
Dobrynin in Washington (DC), news conf.  Repts 2 countries are preparing for May
18 '77 meeting in Geneva with impasse blocking new agreement on limiting
strategic arms.  Other points made at news conf include: US will pay Vietnam no
war reparations, but will not oppose Vietnam's admission to UN, in return for
progress made so far on missing in action in Vietnam War.  Vance is preparing
suggestions for Middle East settlement, and will visit area after Israel elects
new Govt and new prime min has opportunity to visit US.  VP Mondale intends to
ask South African Prime Min John Vorster to move away from apartheid and deal
with minority problems during May 19 '77 meeting.  Vance calls normalization of
US-China relations 'difficult' because of Taiwan issue, and will discuss problem
when Vance visits People's Repub later in '77 (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 125-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 5, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 144 words

Progress is made towards normalization of US-Vietnam relations as 2-day 1st
round of negotiations ends in Paris.  2d round will follow in Paris in another 2
weeks.  US pledges that it will not veto Vietnam's admission to UN and that it
will lift trade embargo after diplomatic ties are established and embassies set
up.  Vietnam pledges to intensify hunt for Amers listed missing in action in
Vietnam War.  Both sides express satisfaction with results of 1st round.
Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min Phan Hien insists that trade embargo must end
immediately, news conf.  Modifies stand on need for reparations.  Article notes
that publicly Vietnam has called for $3.25 billion in reparations promised by
Nixon Adm, but in private request is closer to $1 billion, word reparation is
replaced by 'contributions,' and actual amount of aid is considered negotiable
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 125-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 6, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY TOM WICKER

SECTION: Page 29, Column 2

LENGTH: 64 words

T Wicker comments on pol ramification of Feb 1 '73 lr purportedly written by
then-Pres Nixon pledging $3.25-billion in reconstruction aid to Vietnam over 5
yr period.  Notes former State Sec Kissinger's role in incident.  Notes Pres
Nixon never made lr public lr nor acknowledged its existence despite fact that
Vietnamese officials continue to contend such a pledge was made (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 12

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 6, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 48 words

Dwight Alan Armstrong, accused in '70 anti-Vietnam war bombing at Wis Univ
campus in which a physicist was killed, ends his fight against extradition and
returns voluntarily to US to face murder and arson charges.  His bro Karleton is
now serving prison term for his part in crime (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 126-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 6, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 246 words

State Dept pledges that US will not offer any econ aid to Vietnam after HR votes
266 to 131 to prohibit even discussions of providing econ assistance to Vietnam.
Legis comes shortly after US and Vietnam conclude round of talks on normalizing
relations.  Vote came on amendment to State Dept authorization bill and prevents
dept from using funds for purpose of negotiating reparations or any other form
of payment to Vietnam.  Amendment was sponsored by Repr John Ashbrook, who was
angered by TV news rept that Vietnam claims US owes it more than $4.5 Billion.
Legal situation remains unchanged because previous legis bars aid to Vietnam,
but amendment is expected to make normalization talks more difficult.  Cong
sources who had been briefed by State Dept claim that Asst Sec Richard Holbrooke
told Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min Phan Hien that US was ready to exchange
ambassadors.  Main disagreement during negotiations stems from Hanoi's
insistence that US is obliged to contribute to postwar recovery on basis of 2
documents, Article 21 of Paris cease-fire agreement of '73, which pledges US
reconstruction aid, and still unpublished lr from former Pres Nixon to Prime Min
Pham Van Dong following cease-fire and reportedly pledging $3.25 billion and
$1.5 billion in reconstruction and food aid, respectively.  Repr Lester L Wolff
is attempting to get lr released.  State Dept calls HR vote 'superfluous' and
claims there are no plans to negotiate aid to Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 126-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 8, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 105 words

Sen Robert C Byrd says Pres Carter told him that he expects Cong to make changes
in energy package.  Suggests that revenues from energy taxes be used to provide
energy-related jobs for blacks, teen-agers and Vietnam veterans.  Takes strong
issue with Carter's assertion that his top priority is a balanced budget, saying
there is need for soc welfare programs and for stimulation of econ.  Says legis
providing universal voter regis will be stalled in Sen unless it contains
adequate antifraud provisions.  Has urges US trade repr Robert S Strauss to seek
to have imports of Japanese TV sets cut 50% to 1.3-million a yr (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 128-1

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 10, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 4

LENGTH: 46 words

HR Subcom on Asian and Pacific Affairs chmn Lester L Wolff says Cong may
subpoena former Pres Nixon if he fails to produce lr promising US reconstruction
aid for Vietnam.  Asst Sec of State Holbrooke says Nixon lr is among
presidential papers and not in State Dept files (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 130-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 11, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 102 words

Marine Corps limits authority of drill instructors after series of brutal
incidents.  Simultaneously stiffens requirements for recruits after embarrassing
growth of disciplinary problems and sharp drop in calibre of recruits during and
after Vietnam War.  Maj Gen A G Poillon, Paris Island commander, notes that by
fall '77, 75% of all recruits will have earned hs diploma, highest educ level in
recent years.  Reforms described, including forbidding drill instructors from
touching recruits, reduced daily training schedule and making 2 officers
responsible for supervising drill instructors.  Photos (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 131-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 12, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 37 words

Lady Bird Johnson, answering questions put by audience members during wkly Natl
Town Meeting, Kennedy Center, Washington, DC, says she and Pres L B Johnson felt
'extremely pained' over continuance of Vietnam war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 132-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 13, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 138 words

HR, 252-158, reaffirms its opposition to US trade with Cuba and Vietnam, while
approving $1.7-billion foreign aid bill that ends 'outdated restrictions'
against foreign aid to other nations trading with Cuba and Vietnam.  Also
removes some restrictions on aid to Egypt.  Adds limitations on help to
countries violating human rights.  Repr Clement J Zablocki tells HR Internatl
Relations Com members says legis 'in no way lifts any restriction against US
trade or aid to Cuba or Vietnam.  HR adopts amendment by Repr John M Ashbrook
specifically reaffirming ban.  Legis prohibits food aid to nations engaged in
consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human
rights, unless aid directly benefits needy people.  Approves amendment by Repr
James P Johnson eliminating $24-million in tobacco exports (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 133-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 14, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY WARREN WEAVER JR

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 77 words

Sen George McGovern holds that his criticism of Pres Carter represents thinking
of 'mainstream of the Democratic Party'.  Compares colleagues' silence to their
silence on Vietnam, saying they regard criticism of Pres as in bad taste.
Asserts Carter has not moved quickly or decisively enough on unemployment,
welfare reform, farm support, energy or tax reform.  Recalls that Carter made 2
attempts to be chosen as his running mate in '72 Pres campaign (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 134-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 28 words

Prof John C Donovan lr, on start of US-Vietnam talks, Paris, notes US left $2-
to $3-billion in mil equipment and installations in Vietnam when it evacuated in
'75.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 13

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MICHAEL GOODWIN

SECTION: Section 22; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Article on Helen and George Shine of Pleasantville, NY, whose oldest son
Alexander was wounded in Vietnam in '69, youngest son Jonathan was killed and 3d
son Anthony has been listed as missing in action since '72.  Their work aimed at
finding out what has happened to Jonathan described.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 135-0

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

Charles Higham article on making of film Apocalypse Now, about Vietnam war,
directed by Frank Coppola and written by John Milius.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 135-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY CHARLES HIGHAM

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 33 words

Article on filming of Francis Ford Coppola's Apocalypse Now, about Vietnam war.
Film has been in production for over 1 yr and has cost over $22-million so far.
John Milius is screenwriter (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 135-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Section 11; Page 31, Column 5

LENGTH: 16 words

Rebecca Roseto lr on Michael Goodwin's May 1 article on Amers missing in
actionin Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 13

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 57, Column 2

LENGTH: 21 words

NY-NJ-Conn HR roll-call vote on amendment prohibiting use of funds for any form
of aid or trade with Cuba or Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 135-1

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 146 words

Article on conflict surrounding opening of Tokyo's new internatl airport at
Narita notes 7 members of Japan Communist League have built shack off runway in
attempt to halt opening.  League spokesman Hideaki Harada explains that
principal reason for opposition to airport is fear that it will be used as
military base by Japan or US.  Notes his group has confirmed that 200 Japanese
planes chartered by US flew from Tokyo's Haneda Airport to Vietnam daily during
Vietnam War, carrying unspecified war cargo.  Also cites Govt's failure to
consult with local residents, Govt's apparent support of industry over
agriculture and environmental factor as reasons for opposition.  Airport adm
spokesman Takeo Komatsugawa believes police will be able to control security
problems once airport is in operation.  Previous demonstrations at airport
detailed.  Map of Tokyo area (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 135-2

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 15, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 93 words

Vietnam, Laos and Thailand agree to reactivate Mekong River Development Project,
in which Cambodia also participated until Communist takeover in '75.  Describe
accord as means of attracting foreign money and expertise.  Such aid is 1 issue
in US-Vietnam talks recently begun on normalization of relations.  US withdrawal
from all participation in projects of Mekong agency's coordinating com noted.  W
J van der Oord, exec agent of river project, comments.  Scores of projects ready
to be started in 3 nations, according of officials of project.  Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 135-2

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 57, Column 2

LENGTH: 74 words

Newsweek repts that Nixon will defend his campaign against war dissenters in 3d
TV int with David Frost, to be broadcast May 19.  Says Nixon will acknowledge
that White House 'plumbers' unit waged pol motivated campaign, but will deny
having advance knowledge of unit's break-in at office of Daniel Ellsberg's
psychiatrist.  Says Nixon will say he decided to invade Cambodia to get more
favorable terms for Amer withdrawal from Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 136-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 18, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 130 words

Recently defected Vietnamese former deputy Nguyen Cong Hoang says central thrust
of country's cultural policy is to dam northward spread of southern Vietnam's
Westernized culture, int.  Says parliamentary culture com, of which he was only
non-Communist member, concluded in Oct '76 that south Vietnamese culture was
entirely Western and would have to be eliminated.  Says com called for 're-educ'
of writers and artists.  Most prominent victim of Communist disgrace among
'progressive' artists is popular poet-songwriter Trinh Con Son.  Poet, whi was
banned by Thieu Govt, has been denounced by new Govt and has not been heard from
since being banished from Saigon to Hue.  US Embassy has received immigration
papers from Hoang and refugees Tran Van Son and Tran Van Thung (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 138-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 19, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY EDITH EVANS ASBURY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 105 words

6,800 Columbia Univ students receive degrees on May 18 at ceremony slightly
marred by presence of some pickets protesting possible apptmt of former Sec
Kissinger to faculty and others protesting award of honorary degree to Murray
Gellmann, Nobel Prize winner, for his role at Pentagon during Vietnam War.  Joan
Mondale, wife of Vice Pres, delivers address to Barnard Coll grads.  Sees
possibility of woman Pres and supports passage of ERA.  Receives school's Medal
of Distinction.  Recipients of honorary awards from Columbia listed.  Pres
William J McGill's commencement speech noted.  Illus ofof Joan Mondale and
students (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 139-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 19, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY HERBERT B LARNER

SECTION: Page 22, Column 6

LENGTH: 24 words

Herbert B Larner lr says those who criticize Nixon and his int on TV should
remember that he saved thousands of lives by ending Vietnam war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 13

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 20, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 38 words

Nixon, defending his wiretapping of Govt officials and journalists to discover
leaks of confidential information during Vietnam war, says in Quotation of the
Day, 'Call it paranoia, but paranoia for peace isn't that bad. '.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 140-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 20, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 214 words

Letter written by former Pres Richard Nixon to Nassau County (NY) Repr Lester L
Wolff, declassified May 19 and released after Nixon gave his consent, reveals
Nixon told Prime Min Pham Van Dong that US would furnish North Vietnam with up
to $4.75 billion in postwar reconstruction aid.  Pledge, made on Feb 1, '73, was
reptdly made 'without any political conditions'.  Repr Wolff, who holds Congress
and Amer people were 'consistently misled' about negotiations, criticizes former
Secs of State Henry Kissinger and William P Rogers, noting both denied existence
of secret agreements with Vietnam during '73 Congressional testimony.  Threatens
to subpoena Nixon, Kissinger and Rogers to testify before House subcommittee on
Asian and Pacific affairs to explain action but committee member Repr L H
Fountain holds he is not certain Rogers or Kissinger 'deliberately' misled
committee.  Wolff notes that Nixon's letter to Dong issued by State Dept had 2
addendums, one pledging $1-$1.5 Billion in aid other than $3.25 billion alluded
to in body of original letter and one which noted pledge would be instituted
with 'constitutional provisions'.  Holds there is no way of knowing whether
addendums were 'part of the original letter or were delivered later or were
never sent at all' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 140-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 20, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

Former Pres Richard Nixon, in 3d TV int with David Frost, says he was obliged to
act forcefully against dissident Amers in order to extricate country from
Vietnam war.  Says he sought to combine mil pressure with diplomacy through
Moscow to prod N Vietnam toward peace negotiations (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 140-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 20, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY JAMES M NAUGHTON

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 178 words

Former Pres Richard Nixon holds, in 3rd TV interview with David Frost, that he
was obliged to act forcefully against dissident Americans to end Vietnam War.
Contends antiwar movement served to prolong war, and charges Dems who became
doves after leaving prior Dem Administrations with being 'hypocritical' and
'sanctimonious'.  Admits that he may have been paranoiac in stance on Vietnam,
but claims 'paranoia for peace isn't that bad'.  Also holds it was not illegal
for President to use IRS and other agencies to punish opponents, but that such
tactics were 'wrong'.  Maintains his actions, including wiretaps and burglary,
were necessary to his secret Southeast Asian diplomacy.  Notes he wanted to
convince Hanoi that he would not yield to protesters, but admits he often felt
'besieged' inside White House.  Also claims that while surprise US invasion of
Cambodia in '70 resulted in mass opposition to his tactics, it was one of 'most
effective operations of the war'.  Maintains his personal actions have to be
understood 'in the context of the times' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 140-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

70-yr-old Dr George Wald, Nobel Prize winner and outspoken critic of Vietnam
War, retires from Harvard Univ.  His por (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 142-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 22, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

Vietnamese Foreign Min makes public Feb 1 '73 lr from former US Pres Richard M
Nixon to Prime Min Pham Van Dong which projected $3.25-billion in postwar
reconstruction aid along with other documents of exchanges between US and
Vietnam since '73 Paris agreements (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 142-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 6

LENGTH: 23 words

Norwalk, Conn, holds annual memorial ceremony to honor local mil men lost at sea
in World War I and II and wars in Korea and Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 143-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM L SAFIRE

SECTION: Page 27, Column 5

LENGTH: 61 words

William Safire article supports Kissinger's apptmt to Columbia Univ
professorship, contending acad freedom is at issue.  Holds denial of apptmt
because of Kissinger's role in Vietnam and Cambodia would signal that higher
educ in US cannot tolerate unpopular view of recent history, while his apptmt
would open a few closed minds about its current 'rewriting' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 14

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 23, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 48 words

A Lewis comment on official policy toward Vietnam during US Presidents Nixon and
Carter.  Recalls recent US-Vietnamese talks in Paris aimed at re-establishing
diplomatic relations.  Notes Nixon's secret promise of $3.25-billion in aid to N
Vietnam for use in reconstruction efforts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 143-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section 3; Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 15 words

Philip Caputo book A Rumor of War, about Vietnam War, revd by Christopher
Lehmann-Haupt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 14

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 26, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 11 words

Vietnam Govt establishes diplomatic relations with Spain (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 146-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 29, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY THEODORE SOLOTAROFF

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9

LENGTH: 15 words

Philip Caputo book A Rumor of War, about Vietnam, revd by Theodore Solotaroff.
Drawing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Review 14

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 1, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY H BRUCE FRANKLIN

SECTION: Page 20, Column 6

LENGTH: 28 words

Prof H Bruce Franklin lr claims it makes no sense to appt Kissinger to endowed
chair in pol science at Columbia in view of his 'nonsensical' theories about
Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 15

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 2, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 18 words

US and Vietnam to resume negotiations on establishing diplomatic and trade
relations, June 2, Paris (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 153-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 3, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 34 words

US and Vietnam reopen talks on normalizing relations, US Embassy, Paris.  Chief
US negotiator Richard Holbrooke and Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Min Phan Hien
decline to give details on talks.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 154-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 4, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 142 words

Second series of talks between US and Vietnam results in delivery of new list of
20 Americans killed in Vietnam War, but monetary agreements could not be
reached.  US officials note there will be no public disclosure of men named on
list until families are notified and Central Identification Lab confirms their
identities.  Note that some of men on first list supplied by Vietnamese were
incorrectly identified.  Both nations agree to hold another round of talks in
'near future' to resolve aid question, but no definite date is set.  Vietnam
Deputy Foreign Min Phan Hien demands fulfillment of secret $4.25-$5 billion
reconstruction aid pledge made by former Pres Nixon, while US chief negotiator
Richard Holbrooke maintains Congressional and public opinion in US prevents
possibility of foreign aid to Vietnam.  Details of initial talks cited (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 155-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 5, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY TOM WICKER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 5

LENGTH: 38 words

Tom Wicker sees slowly improving relationship Carter Adm is developing with Cuba
and US as well as with Vietnam as symbolically satisfying and politically
sensible.  Recalls some recent history and incidents between nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 15

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY L A D DELLEN, ADOLPHE FURTH and DON LUCE

SECTION: Page 28, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

Prof L A D Dellen, Clergy and Laity Concerned co-dir Don Luce and Adolphe Furth
lrs on controversy over whether US should provide reconstruction aid to Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 15

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              June 6, 1977, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6

LENGTH: 45 words

Hanoi radio repts that large areas of Vietnam are suffering from drought and
that farmers are carrying out irrigation projects to save rice crops in Hai Hung
Province, central Vietnam and Mekong River delta.  Rept did not say whether
crops had already been damaged (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 157-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 7, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 130 words

Justice Dept is reptdly expanding its investigation into allegedly illegal
Korean lobbying scheme, as result of former Korean CIA dir Kim Hyung Wook's
contention that US CIA was aware of scheme.  Former State Dept Office of Korean
Affairs head Donald Ranard has confirmed Kim's statement, and there is
increasing evidence that top Nixon and Ford Adm officials in FBI, State Dept,
Defense Dept, Justice Dept, Agr Dept and IRS knew of alleged bribery.
Investigation sources believe little was done to dissuade Korean Govt from
continuing scheme because CIA was anxious to protect its sources, Nixon Adm was
concerned about Korean relations and their effect on Vietnam War, and because
KCIA information was scattered throughout several offices.  Details of Kim's
charges cited (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 158-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 8, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6

LENGTH: 81 words

Vet Admin official Max Cleland repts that treatment of alcoholism will become
priority because proportion of alcoholics and problem drinkers among VA patients
increased from 1 in 5 to 1 in 4 between '70 and '73.  In same period, percentage
of Vietnam vets with drinking problems rose from 13% to 25%.  Notes VA will seek
funds to increase number of treatment units at VA hospital from current 71
units.  Notes vets constitute 3 million of estimated 10 million alcoholics in US
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Statistics 15

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 8, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 264 words

Japan refuses to allow 37 Vietnamese refugees who sailed from port of Vung Tau 1
month ago to come ashore even temporarily unless Liberian or Swiss Govt will
accept responsibility for removing refugees from Japan if no other country
offers them permanent refuge.  Liberian-flag, Swiss-operated freighter Los Andes
arrived in Japan June 1 with refugees whose strength was waning after attempting
to bail out their small boat.  High Foreign Min official explains that it is
Govt policy not to accept refugees.  There are 431 Vietnamese in Japan, nation
of 113 million.  Japan provides no services for refugees and officials claim 'we
have enough problems looking after ourselves for housing'.  Most refugees are
cared for by religious orgns, principally RC Caritas group, and supported by UN
High Comr for Refugees, which must guarantee cost of their stay, their eventual
transport to another country and their absention from pol activities, which is
interpreted to mean they must not speak about condititons from which they fled.
Foreign Min did not know if Japan feared complicating developing rel with Hanoi.
Eur banker claims that market of 50 million Vietnamese is strong magnet to
business and banking and doubts that many countries would risk offending Hanoi
for sake of humanitarian considerations.  Shunji Kobayashi, chief of general
immigration, emphasizes Japan lacks tradition of receiving foreigners, statement
seen as disregarding Koreans and Taiwanese brought to Japan after countries were
conquered by Imperial Japan.  Profile of refugees fleeing Vietnam.  Map (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 15

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 10, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 2

LENGTH: 9 words

Vietnam nationalizes Michelin's Saigon factory (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 161-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              252 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 10, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 73 words

Recent flurry of Chinese diplomatic activity, including several foreign visits,
seen marking return to active foreign role after many mos of concentration on
domestic pol and econ problems.  Leadership stresses loyalty to Mao Tse-tung's
precepts, continued hostility to USSR.  Visits to Peking by Pres Gaafar
al-Nimeiry (Sudan) and Min Vo Nguyen Giap (Vietnam) described.  Illus of Mex
ex-Pres Luis Echeverria Alvarez in Peking (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 161-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              253 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 10, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Article on plight of Vietnamese refugees in Japan, who feel they are being
ignored by rest of world, particularly US.  Refugee Nguyen Cong Hoan, who fled
Vietnam and left wife and child behind, contends even refugees who have been in
Japan for longer time are becoming indifferent to newer refugees' pleas for help
from world community (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 161-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              254 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 10, 1977, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 57 words

Article on plight of Vietnamese refugees in Japan, who feel they are being
ignored by rest of world, particularly US.  Refugee Nguyen Cong Hoan, who fled
Vietnam and left wife and child behind, contends even refugees who have been in
Japan for longer time are becoming indifferent to newer refugees' pleas for help
from world community (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 161-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              255 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ALFONSO A NARVAEZ

SECTION: Page 49, Column 6

LENGTH: 41 words

Regional VA admr James R Purdy announces advance payments to approximately
20,000 Vietnam-era veterans attending schools in NJ will be discontinued.  Notes
some veterans recd checks after signing enrollment ctfs but never attended
classes (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 162-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              256 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 11, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 3

LENGTH: 75 words

Photo essay on recent NYC demonstrations shows demonstration by members of NY
Food Vendors Assn, Central Pk, objecting to exclusive vendor's contract awarded
by Pks Dept to John Zervas, illus of Buddhists demonstrating outside UN
protesting lack of religious freedom in Vietnam, proponents of equal rights for
homosexuals outside City Hall and pickets at Aeroflot, USSR natl airline office,
demanding release of Jewish dissident Anatoly Shcharansky.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 162-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              257 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 12, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 64 words

Pres Carter declares inclination 'to aggressively challenge in a peaceful way'
USSR for influence in world's critical areas, naming Vietnam, Iraq, Somalia,
Algeria, China and Cuba.  Makes remark in talk before Magazine Publishers Assn
in context of opening statement dealing with his human rights stance.  Discusses
his efforts to form tighter ties with Western democracies (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 163-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              258 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 13, 1977, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 52 words

Article on plight of group of 34 Vietnamese refugees in Singapore who are
confined to fishing boats.  Boat owners rescued refugees, who had fled Vietnam
by boat.  As result, Govt has banned fishermen from taking to boats to sea.
Prime Min Lee Kuan Yew concedes that refugees are not welcome in Singapore (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 164-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              259 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 14, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY JOAN KRON

SECTION: Page 30, Column 2

LENGTH: 60 words

Article on difficulties families of men still listed as missing in action in
Vietnam war face.  Notes many emotional problems are lifted when final official
word comes that someone missing is dead.  Maerose Evans, wife of Navy Comdr
James Joseph Evans, who had been listed as missing since Apr '65 and whose
remains were buried recently, comments.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 165-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              260 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 15, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE H FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 116 words

US Sen, 59-30, approves appropriations bill for internatl lending assns which
directs US reprs to use 'voice and vote' to advance human rights.  Defeats,
50-43, stronger HR version requiring US reprs to oppose loans for nations which
violate human rights.  Authorizes $4-billion for World Bank, $990-million for
Asian Bank and Fund, $50-million for African Development Fund, all for 3-4 yrs.
Approves Sen Dole amendment barring Amer approval of loans to Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia.  Declines to curb Uganda loans but issues resolution condemning Idi
Amin Dada regime.  Sen Jesse A Helms, other members criticize high salaries and
privileges of orgn officials.  Sen Clifford Case rebuttal (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 166-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              261 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 15, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 5

LENGTH: 40 words

Air Force transfers herbicide, Agent Orange, used in Vietnam war, from Seabee
base in Gulfport, Miss, to Johnson Island in Pacific Ocean, on incinerator ship
Vulcanus.  850,000 gals of chem, linked to birth defects, will be burned (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 166-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              262 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 5

LENGTH: 115 words

HR votes, by vote of 273 to 136, to deny Veterans Adm benefits to Vietnam combat
vets whose mil discharges are upgraded.  Action, seen as effort to nullify Pres
Carter's program of reviewing and upgrading less than honorable discharges given
to Vietnam vets, was tacked on as amendment to $70.2 Billion appropriations bill
for HUD and several independent agencies, including VA.  HR also overturns by
voice vote HUD regulations granting housing aid to homosexuals living together
if they meet low income criteria.  Earlier in wk, on June 13, HR had banned
funds in Justice Dept bill from use to implement Pres Carter's program of
pardons for Vietnam-era draft evaders and deserters (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 167-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              263 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1977, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 5

LENGTH: 261 words

Sen passes 2 major foreign aid bills, voting 59-32 for bill authorizing $1.6
Billion for foreign econ assistance, and 66-18 for bill authorizing $3.2 Billion
in mil assistance.  Cuts $20 million from security assistance provision of $100
million for southern African countries Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland, Zaire and
Zambia, in compromise with Sen James B Allen's proposal to cut $65 million.
Cuts $10 million from funds for UN Univ in Tokyo.  Accepts Allen's amendment to
bar mil and security aid funds for Angola, Mozambique, Tanzania and Zambia
unless Pres Carter should declare such aid in natl interest.  Rejects Sen Orrin
G Hatch's effort to eliminate $10 million in econ aid to Jamaica because of its
friendly relations with Cuba.  Adopts amendment of Sens Hubert Humphrey and
Clifford Case for $10 million to help develop solar energy and other energy
sources in developing countries.  Adopts Sen John Glenn's amendment to ban funds
for Vietnam, Laos, or Cambodia and urge Pres Carter to obtain complete
accounting for Americans still listed as missing in Indochina.  Mil aid bill
would cut off all funds for Ethiopia now and would do same for Argentina in 1 yr
if that country did not halt alleged human rights violations.  Econ bill would
allocate $500 million for AID food and nutrition programs, $160 million for
population planning, $109 million for health programs, and $252 million for
voluntary US contributions to internatl orgns.  Both bills will go into Sen-HR
conf coms where differences between them and HR versions will be worked out (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 167-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              264 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 16, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 146 words

Former US Pres Richard M Nixon, speaking by phone and informally to rump meeting
of HR Subcom on Asia and Pacific Affairs, argues against paying 'blackmail for
bodies' to Vietnamese.  Answers questions from 5 com members about secret
negotiations that led to Jan 26 '73 Vietnam cease-fire agreement and lr from
Nixon to Hanoi on Feb 1 promising $4.75-billion in aid.  Nixon, responding to
subcom chmn Repr Lester L Wolff's May 14 lr, cited constitutional separation of
powers and refusal of other Presidents to testify as justification for rejecting
request to appear in person.  Phone call was compromise.  Wolff says former
Nixon natl security adviser Henry A Kissinger and former State Sec William P
Rogers have agreed to testify in open session.  Nixon holds that because Hanoi
violated original cease-fire accords, there was no longer any commitment to
provide aid (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 167-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              265 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 18, 1977, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Page 17, Column 3

LENGTH: 101 words

George Christian, former press sec to deceased Pres Lyndon B Johnson, asserts
that former President's decision not to seek re-election was strongly protested
by wife Lady Bird Johnson.  Notes Lady Bird Johnson feared that President's
action would have 'wrong impact' on Vietnam war.  Suggests deceased Pres had
'horrible brawl' with family on day he taped message concerning intentions.
Points out 1 of Mrs Johnson's concerns was that Johnson's sons-in-law Patrick J
Nugent and Charles S Robb were in uniform at time, and she feared Pres Johnson's
withdrawal would appear as 'abandonment' of them (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 169-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              266 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 19, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD C BURKS

SECTION: Section 21; Page 10, Column 5

LENGTH: 43 words

Article on provisions of bill sponsored by Repr Lester L Wolff and 85 others
aimed at eliminiating some of worst inequities of GI educ bill for Vietnam war
veterans.  Differences between benefits provided for World War II veterans
noted.  Wolff por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 170-1

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              267 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 21, 1977, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 2

LENGTH: 45 words

Ed assails HR actions that bar funds for Pres Carter's program of pardons for
Vietnam deserters and draft evaders and would deny veterans' benefits to combat
veteran whose discharge is upgraded.  Suggests HR is not giving certain veterans
chance to 'repair lives'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 17

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              268 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 22, 1977, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 56 words

Former Army platoon sergeant Joseph Evangelista protest to Pres Carter over
Carter's pardon of Vietnam-era draft evaders fails.  Evangelista sent his 3
medals, including 2 Bronze Stars, to Carter as protest but they were returned
unopened with letter bearing Carter's reproduced signature explaining that he
did not accept gifts (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 173-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              269 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 22, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID A ANDELMAN

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 219 words

Conf, sponsored by Jakarta-based Center for Strategic and Internatl Studies,
brings together govt, academic and business leaders of US and 5 non-Communist SE
Asian nations (Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore, Maylaysia and Philippines).  Min
Muhammad Ghazali bin Shafie decries US 'noninvolvement' in SE Asia.  Govt and
mil leaders of other SE Asian nations express similar view.  Reprs of US State
Dept and Natl Security Council dispute assertion, but apparently fail to impress
Asians.  Virtually unanimous concern is expressed regarding effect of improved
US-Vietnamese-Chinese relations, effect of human rights issue on US regional
commitments, and opinion that USSR and China would fill any power vacuum.
Robert Scalapino (Univ of Calif) and Guy J Pauker (Rand Corp) comment.
Scalapino says charges that Vietnam and Laos are supporting Thai Communists
'almost certinly have some substance'.  Pauker believes broadly reduced interest
in area by all major powers, Communist and non-Communist, could allow SE Asian
non-Communist nations to concentrate on internal problems.  Conf is scheduled to
meet again, Aug, in Kuala Lampur.  Prime mins of Japan, Australia and NZ reptdly
invited.  Malaysia and Indonesia reach private agreement that provides for mil
cooperation along common jungle border in Borneo (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 173-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              270 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 22, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 119 words

Carter Adm appears to be out of step with Cong on several important foreign
policy issues.  Adm was saved from humiliation on major foreign policy bills
before Sen only through efforts of Sen Hubert Humphrey and Sen Robert C Byrd,
majority leader.  Among issues where important differences exist are those
involving Korea, Vietnam, Cuba and Southern Africa.  Confrontation is also
likely over new Panama Canal treaty.  Part of Adm's troubles are linked to
breakdown of effective leadership in Sen Foreign Relations Com.  Com chmn Sen
John J Sparkman, 77, and Sen Clifford P Case, 73, are no longer seen as
effective as they once were.  White House-Capitol gap is also explained in part
by inexperience of new Adm.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 17

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              271 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 23, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY FRANCIS X CLINES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 31 words

Int with Vietnamese refugee Le Thanh Hoang Dan and family, living in Flushing,
Queens, whose eldest daughter My Hanh Le was raped and murdered by Vietnam
veteran on Apr 15.  Por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 174-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              272 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 24, 1977, Friday

BYLINE: BY ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 159 words

HR approves $6.7 Billion foreign aid bill, 208-174, cutting 5% from proposed $7
billion, in amendment offered by Repr Clarence E Miller.  Adds Cuba, Angola and
Mozambique to Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and Uganda on list of nations excluded
from receiving US aid, directly or indirectly.  Pres Carter expresses concern
that exclusions would damage relations with internatl orgns like World Bank, UN
Development Fund and African Development Bank.  State Dept spokesman Hodding
Carter 3d warns that restricting indirect aid in form of loans would set example
for others govts to follow and lead to 'politicization' of internatl monetary
institutions.  HR also votes, 225-180, against cutting mil aid to Nicaragua, and
59-24, against cutting mil aid to S Korea.  Votes to ban direct mil aid to
Argentina, with majority citing human rights violations.  Issues in debate on S
Korea noted, including argument that mil aid is needed if US withdraws troops
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 175-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              273 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 25, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 86 words

Ed criticizes HR for voting to prohibit internatl institutions from using US
money for aid to Cuba, Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Angola, Mozambique and Uganda.
Suggests action undermines Pres Carter's efforts to re-establish 'decent
relationships' with Indochina and Cuba and clouds future of internatl aid
agencies.  Maintains Pres has not carefully explained decisions to grant or
withhold aid from countries while pressing cause of human rights everywhere, and
has not set forth objectives in Indochina or Cuba.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 17

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              274 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 25, 1977, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 122 words

Sen defeats amendment sponsored by Sen Mark O Hatfield to strike provision
denying Carter Adm funds to carry out pardon of Vietnam draft resisters by
44-to-38 vote.  Provision had been approved by HR as part of $7.7 Billion
funding bill for several Govt depts.  Justice Dept spokesman says that nearly
all indictments and investigations of draft resisters have been dropped and that
legis bars Govt from processing re-entry applications of those who had taken
citizenship in another country.  Also notes that Pres Carter could appeal
provision in cts rather than veto entire bill.  Sen Hatfield claims legis denies
Pres Carter power to exercise his constitutional authority.  Sens Ernest F
Hollings and Robert Dole comment (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 176-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              275 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1977, Sunday

BYLINE: BY CLYDE H FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

Article on econ aid to Vietnam by US, USSR and People's Repub of China.  Notes
recently approved US Sen motion, introduced by Sen Robert Dole, that would
require US Govt to oppose aid to Vietnam by World Bank and other multinatl
lending insts.  Principal obstacle to improved relations with Vietnam is
widespread belief among Amers that Vietnam is withholding information about
Amers missing in Vietnam (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 177-1

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              276 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 2

LENGTH: 15 words

NY-NJ-Conn roll-call on amendment baring use of funds for reparations to Vietnam
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 177-2

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              277 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 26, 1977, Sunday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 2

LENGTH: 23 words

NY-NJ-Conn HR roll-call on vote on amendment prohibiting use of any funds for
indirect aid to Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and Uganda (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 177-2

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              278 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             June 28, 1977, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 116 words

Vo Van Kiet, sr Communist official for Saigon, discloses that all business and
agr in what once was S Vietnam are to be fully collectivized by '79.  Asserts
that forming peasants into collective farms and mutual aid teams is necessary to
increase productivity and improve irrigation facilities.  Also discloses that
since end of war 700,000 people have left Saigon to settle in countryside, with
another 700,000 to be resettled over next 2 yrs.  Observes this will bring
Saigon's population down to 2.5-million.  Holds unemployment will have been
'basically solved' by '79.  Repts there are presently 500,000 able-bodied people
in Saigon without jobs, creating 'urgent problem' for Govt (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 179-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              279 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 29, 1977, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY CYRUS L SULZBERGER

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

C L Sulzberger comments on formal demise of SEATO on June 30.  Says orgn, which
was formed Sept 8, '54, never worked as alliance.  Revs role of John Foster
Dulles in its formation.  Says SEATO was simply device to commit US to defend
Indochina, particularly Vietnam, against Communist advance (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 18

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              280 of 280 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            June 30, 1977, Thursday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 112 words

State Sec Cyrus R Vance declares that Carter Adm is committed to seeking full
diplomatic relations with China and that friendly relations with China are
central to US foreign policy, speech before Asia Society in NYC.  On overall
Asian policy, stresses that despite Vietnam war and troop pullouts planned for S
Korea, US is committed to maintaining major pol, econ and mil presence in area.
Repeats Ford Adm policy of moving toward improved relations with N Korea if N
Korean allies Russia and China reciprocate with S Korea.  Endorses Ford Adm plan
for peace conf on Korea, involving both Koreas, China and US.  Stresses
importance of observance of human rights (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 181-7

              Copyright 1977 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
