
                               1 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 1, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

R Baker humorous article on confusing language used in Pentagon; comments on
Defense Sec Laird's explanation of air raids over N Vietnam last wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 1, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 55, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

Lr signed with name of Weatherman leader B Dohrn, who is on FBI's 'most wanted'
list, threatens attacks on Fed and other installations in retaliation for US
'commando raid and bombing of N Vietnam'; lr recd by AP

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 1, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 118 words

Chief N Vietnamese delegate to Paris talks Xuan Thuy says N Vietnam never
expressed opposition or acceptance of internatl comm to supervise elections in S
Vietnam held under coalition govt, remarks on Pub Broadcasting Service program,
which will be televised in US, in which coalition govt is debated; says N
Vietnam is opposed to maintenance by US of present S Vietnamese govt and demand
that it organize such elections; Xuan Thuy and Nguyen Thi Binh make tape
recordings before regular debate; Xuan Thuy and Nguyen Thi Binh say coalition
govt could contain reprs of present S Vietnamese govt except for Nguyen Van
Thieu, Nguyen Cao Ky and Tran Thien Kheim; K T Young and Prof R A Falk
participate in debate

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 1, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 142 words

Vietcong says it will cease fighting for 3 days both at Xmas and New Yr and for
4 days at Tet (lunar new yr); says it refuses to prolong truce into permament
cease-fire because US does not announce planned timetable for withdrawal and
because present S Vietnamese Govt will not step down; calls on all guerrillas to
observe truce; says any allied activity will be regarded as violations; allied
commands announce increase in battlefield activity throughout S Vietnam; 5
guerrillas killed in battle 100 mi SE of Saigon, 5 killed 30 mi NE of city;
details on other action; outbreak of fighting reptd in central highlands; S
Vietnamese troops kill 54 enemy in several clashes; 7 S Vietnamese killed, 22
wounded; map; enemy forces reptdly are digging in just outside Pnompenh's outer
defense perimeter, further disrupt Cambodian defensive network N of city

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 1, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 155 words

High Nixon Adm officials privately acknowledge US establishes and reinforces new
rationale for US air raids against N Vietnam; Pentagon officials contend that in
incidents occurring yesterday and Sept 5, Amer pilots were exercising 'inherent
right of self-defense'; Laird says pilot has right to use electronic missile on
missile site that has him locked in on radar, news conf; officials acknowledge
this is different from claiming right to protect reconnaissance missions; high
officials concede Laird deliberately warns N Vietnam that there will be new
policy on striking N Vietnamese missile sites along Laotian border; Defense Dept
asserts it needs policy because of buildup of enemy missile sites along
Laotian-N Vietnamese border; Laird defends himself against Fulbright charges
that he misrepresented extent of bombing; suggests Sen com failed to question
him (Laird) closely enough; says 11 Shrikes were fired during raids

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 79 words

US intelligence analysts rept establishment of major Chinese-supplied guerrilla
base at Dong Luang in eastern Thailand; believe existence of base indicates that
Communists may be preparing to expand hostilities in Indochina; rept growing
concern in US over intelligence repts that Thai guerrillas have recently been
reinforced with trained cadres returning from China with Chinese-made rifles; sr
US officials say Nixon Adm is prepared to accelerate air strikes in North; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 24 words

Lr says Nixon Adm publicity and pub attitudes caused by it on rescue mission and
raids serve possible end of intensification of war in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 8; (RTR)

LENGTH: 11 words

4 killed in crash of US Army craft, Central Highlands, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 136 words

Bruce scores Communist attitude toward Amer POWs, news conf; stresses rescue
mission; says it reflects grave concern for fate of missing and captured men;
says Amer people are united and determined on POW question; says US intends to
get prisoners out of N Vietnam by 'one means or another'; scores Communist
refusal to discuss prisoner problem until US agrees to Communist preconditions;
estimates there are slightly fewer than 5,000 allied POWs, including 1,500
Amers; lists 13 articles of '49 Geneva Conv on POWs that have been violated by
other side; says S Vietnam, which has primary responsibility for prisoners taken
in S Vietnam, has lived up to all these positions; says he does not think rescue
mission will have any kind of effect; Laird says he will not rule out any action
to free POWs, news conf; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 69 words

Cambodian troops open drive 20 mi N of Pnompenh, push Communist forces from
positions they seized 2 days earlier; Cambodian soldiers reptdly recruited and
trained in S Vietnam lead drive, meet some resistance before pushing into Prek
Khdam, ferry crossing on Tonle Sap River; renewed fighting in other areas reptd;
12 persons arrested following blast at US Embassy; mil police guards increased
on all embassies; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 184 words

About a dozen former US servicemen, appearing in Washington at start of informal
inquiry into US policy, say they witnessed torture or murder of S Vietnamese
civilians; charge 'crimes against the S Vietnamese people' are commonplace,
deliberate and matter of policy; session is culmination of series of hearings
that have been held around US during last yr under sponsorship of antiwar
figures, including Spock, Fonda, Dellinger and ex-Sen Gruening, none of whom are
present; Defense Dept has no specific comment about inquiry; spokesman says Army
regulations require all irregularities to be reptd; many of veterans present say
they never heard of requirement; others say superior officers were present when
incidents they describe occurred; about 100 veterans are reptd to have signed
statements that they personally witnessed atrocities; staff of hearings,
described as Natl Veterans Inquiry Into US War Policy, is composed primarily of
Vietnam veterans who became involved in protest movement during or after their
service overseas; N Hale, J Beitzal, M J Uhl and C D Locke give accounts of
atrocities

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 8

LENGTH: 38 words

S Vietnamese Govt makes no official comment on enemy's declaration of holiday
truces; S Vietnamese sources say Saigon will probably declare 1-day truces; Amer
mil officials say US forces will follow S Vietnamese lead on matter

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 54 words

Enemy rocket wrecks med station at Chulai hq of Americal Div during rocket
barrage on base camp; B-52s hit U Minh Forest, Vietcong stronghold 165 mi SW of
Saigon; US command announces Navy river patrol squadron will be deactivated
soon; boats will be turned over to S Vietnamese; 845 more US troops are slated
for withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 45 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky appeals to Amers to continue to support his
Govt, s, San Francisco; heckler interrupts s; police, using clubs and tear gas,
fight with demonstrators who break off from crowd of 2,700 antiwar protesters
outside Nguyen Cao Ky's hotel

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 2, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 196 words

UN Assembly Com, 60-16, with 34 abstentions, approves resolution sponsored by US
and 11 other nations calling for regular inspection of prison camps and humane
treatment of all POWs; resolution, aimed at protecting US POWs in N Vietnam,
does not specifically mention Vietnam; opposed by USSR, Hungary, Algeria and
some others, who term it pretext for diverting attention from Amer actions in
Vietnam; final Assembly approval regarded as certain; other resolutions
approved, all raised under broad heading of 'Respect for Human Rights in Armed
Conflict,' include Brit proposal that looks toward supplementing Geneva Convs to
take acct of internal conflicts such as Biafra war; Amb Yost says decision
demonstrates 'treatment of prisoners weighs on the conscience of the world';
reiterates concern for Amers missing in SE Asia; speaks of 'positive evidence of
the inhumanities to which they have been subjected'; likely impact of resolution
viewed questionable because of N Vietnamese stand against inspection by IRC;
resolution asks Thant to continue his efforts on behalf of prisoners; Nixon's
pressing of issue in Oct s noted; other details on resolution; text of
resolution

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 2

LENGTH: 27 words

Ed saying Sen Fulbright's charges that Sec Laird misrepresented facts in his
statements on POW rescue mission and air raids against N Vietnam seem beyond
challenge

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 2

LENGTH: 59 words

Ed hails UN resolution calling for more humane treatment of POWs; notes Yost
statements; scores countries that voted against resolution; says N Vietnam
persists in flouting every obligation it undertook in ratifying Geneva Conv;
says UN action at least emphasizes most of civilized world recognizes N Vietnam
fails to hon its humanitarian obligations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

Lr, noting Wicker's Nov 29 column, backs Nixon policy and urges Nixon be
supported in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 65, Column 3

LENGTH: 39 words

Army psychologist Capt M D Stanton tells Sen investigating panel that more than
half enlisted men in survey of drug abuse in S Vietnam acknowledged having used
marijuana at least once and that 1 in 6 was 'habituated user'; statistics

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 22 words

Capt R Hubbard, USAF dr who became conscientious objector, ct-martialed for
missing flight to Vietnam and dismissed from service

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5; (UPI)

LENGTH: 19 words

USAF transport plane carrying 32 Amers and 12 Vietnamese is missing and presumed
down in central part of Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 38 words

Gen Manor says N Vietnamese prison camp Sontay has been vacant for up to 3 mos,
news conf; says he would not say that intelligence on camp was not good; says
those involved in mission were unable to tell when POWs were moved

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 65 words

Enemy has reptdly stepped up rocket barrages against towns and mil bases
throughout S Vietnam; shells 22 targets; nearly 100 attacks have been reptd in
last 4 days; ground fighting remains at relatively low level; S Vietnamese
troops push ahead with new operation to clear U Minh Forest in extreme southern
end of country; US Air Force fighter-bomber crashes, 2 crewmen aboard rescued;
map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 29 words

S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky says he is not disturbed by demonstrations
against him and indicates he would like to have met some of protesters, news
conf, Los Angeles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 158 words

A Boyce, who once told Army investigators that Lt Calley ordered slaughter of
Vietnamese civilians, invokes 5th Amendment and refuses to answer all questions
relating to alleged massacre; invokes amendment 8 times despite stern warnings
by Col Kennedy that most of questions are not incriminating and have to be
answered; Kennedy clears courtroom and conducts closed hearing to discuss
whether contempt action may be taken against Boyce; at end of hearing, says
nothing is resolved and that arguments in closed hearing will resume tomorrow;
Capt Daniel wanted to get into trial record statement made by Boyce that was
read into Mitchell trial record; Maples is cross-examined by Latimer; says
Calley never 'ordered' him to use his machine gun on civilians; Latimer attempts
to ridicule Maples's contention that Meadlo was 'weeping'; former Sp/4 C W Hall
confirms Meadlo's action; says he heard shots but did not see anyone get shot;
Maples illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 56 words

2 women inmates of S Vietnamese prison near Bienhoa charge riot police beat and
tear-gassed more than 100 women prisoners and threw lye or acid on group; are in
Saigon hosp; say they were among 416 women pol prisoners at prison; say
officials threatened to ship some of women to another prison when women
protested living conditions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 47 words

Veterans continue efforts at hearings to document charges of widespread
atrocities in Vietnam by US soldiers; former intelligence agent testifies he saw
civilians pushed from helicopters in air; former med officer shows slides of
prisoner allegedly 'being given the water torture'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 3, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 202 words

Sir R Thompson, in rept to Nixon submitted at unpublicized meeting Oct 13, says
US and allied intelligence and police efforts have failed to destroy Communist
subversive apparatus in S Vietnam; rept appears to be in marked contrast with
relatively optimistic views on security situation Thompson offered Nixon last
Dec; Thompson's findings are outlined to NY Times by Adm officials familiar with
rept, which was based on 5-wk secret mission Thompson undertook at Nixon's
request during Sept and Oct; officials say rept has been kept secret because it
seems to question validity of pacification and Vietnamization programs; say rept
emphasizes success in other aspects of pacification cannot solve basic pol
problem of S Vietnam after withdrawal of bulk of Amer forces so long as Vietcong
apparatus remains virtually intact; some US officials share Thompson's views and
also argue that S Vietnamese pol and security situation is so fragile as to pose
critical threat to Saigon Govt even in presence of 'residual' Amer combat
forces; Thompson has reptdly said US cannot leave Vietnam 'right away'; repts
Operation Phoenix and intelligence sources say operation is infiltrated by
Vietcong agents; Thompson illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 30 words

Prof W R Jacobs lr says US air raids and rescue mission endanger US POWs; says
safe return of prisoners must be arranged in Vietnam peace settlement; holds
Nixon Adm escalates war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 15 words

Lr rebuts Sec Laird's contention that mission to release POWs from Vietnam was
success

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

Pres Nixon asks Cong for increase of $225,745,754 in fiscal '71 yr budget for
judicial and legis branches; J A McKesson 3d apptd Amb to Gabon; Col J C Donovan
apptmt to Calif Debris Comm confirmed; Aviation Advisory Com estab to make
recommendations for long-rage needs of aviation; Nixon appts 9 members, C Snow
chmn; HR Com approves bill to authorize and provide funds for PHS personnel to
be sent to areas short of med manpower; House Armed Services Com passes
resolution recommending that US not negotiate with N Vietnam until progress is
made on POW issue

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

93d session Paris Peace talks; Amb Bruce discusses POW problem; other side
demands in turn that US agree to leave Vietnam by next June 30 and says this is
only way to settle questions, including that of POWs; Bruce proposes all
prisoner facilities in N and S Vietnam be opened to check by internatl orgn such
as IRC; N Vietnamese spokesman says Bruce remains silent to demand

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 42 words

US command repts US battle deaths declined by 1/2 last wk to 32; repts other
figures; 44,088 Amers have been killed in war, 292,345 have been wounded; search
continuing for C-123 and Provider transports missing with 123 aboard in central
S Vietnam; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 63 words

White House press sec confirms Sir Robt Thompson made recent trip to S Vietnam
and submitted his findings to Pres Nixon in secret rept; says he cannot discuss
contents of rept; says over-all thrust of NY Times article gives incorrect
impression that US programs are not doing well; correction of article on
Thompson rept; Operation Phoenix was not a code name for Mylai Massacre

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 159 words

Warsaw Pact meeting, E Berlin, participants issue statement indicating Chmn
Ulbricht has been forced to make concessions on issue of Western rights in W
Berlin; express hope agreement can be reached; assure E Ger that its rights will
be upheld; Soviet leader Brezhnev seen forcing Ulbricht to compromise to speed
ratification of W Ger-USSR treaty; leaders call for W Ger treaty negotiations
with Czech; Polish leader Gomulka sees understanding between Czech and W Ger
possible, s, Zabrze, Poland; participants issue statement giving qualified
backing to E Ger demand that W Ger grant full diplomatic recognition; Polish
Communist party leader Gomulka urges E Ger to improve relations with W Ger;
statement seen putting more pressure on Ulbricht to ease his relatively
inflexible approach; score 'colonial' efforts to topple Pres Toure of Guinea;
score US mil activities in Indochina; issue declaration calling for resumption
of Amb Jarring mideast mission

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 56 words

Article on changes in US air war, which have been brought about by decline in
ground activity in S Vietnam and other developments; statistics show air war, in
terms of sorties, has declined over last 2 yrs, but targets are wider; figures
made available this wk suggest 75% of US air war effort is devoted to raids
outside of S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 173 words

Meadlo is temporarily taken into custody after citing 5th Amendment and refusing
to testify at Calley trial; Col Kennedy, recalling 'nauseous detail' with which
Meadlo described massacre of Vietnamese civilians on TV, threatens Meadlo with
jail if he remains silent; refers matter to US Atty with recommendation that
Meadlo be prosecuted for contempt; Meadlo remains under subpoena as witness and
must remain in Ft Benning area; Army spokesman says that Meadlo is no longer in
custody; Meadlo's refusal to testify said to be further blow to Govt's case
against Lt Calley; Meadlo's earlier statement to Army investigators accusing
Calley of ordering and then helping to carry out killing of civilians recalled;
Meadlo invokes self-incriminating privilege even though Kennedy shows him writ
of immunity signed by Talbott; Kennedy tries to assure Meadlo that writ is
absolute safeguard against possibility that Meadlo could be prosecuted by any
Amer ct for what he might say in his testimony; Meadlo's lawyer J A Kesler calls
writ worthless

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 82 words

Spokesman for veterans R B Johnson Jr says they tried to show in hearings that
'war crimes' by Amer forces in S Vietnam were not 'aberrant isolated acts',
inquiry session; says they are 'logical consequences' of US policy; says
veterans feel mil is using Calley as scapegoat and that ct-martial must be
stopped; says only private citizens can be trusted to investigate policies
without making scapegoats of other veterans; several veterans testify;
statements by S Hassett and G Graham noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 4, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 94 words

Pres Nixon awards 4 Young Amer Medals for heroism or pub service, White House
ceremony; is startled as 1 recipient, D J Sweet, urges he get US out of Vietnam
to prove sincerity in giving medals; Nixon replied: 'We're doing the best we
can'; abruptly leaves room; illus; girl, from Madison, Wis, hon for organizing
hs students march to feed hungry children and for work in race relations; M S
Lazovick, hon for fund-raising and volunteer work; J N Caruso Jr and T Dvorscek
also receive awards; parents accept for J N Caruso, who drowned while saving
child; was 12

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 19 words

Sen Resor dismisses charges filed by Sgt Torres that Gen C Abrams condoned
mistreatment of prisoners in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 4

LENGTH: 22 words

Lr on possibility that Nguyen Cao Ky will be candidate for presidency in S
Vietnam; lr on Nguyen Cao Ky statement that he is dove

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 8 words

Hutto trial set in connection with Mylai massacre

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 2

LENGTH: 38 words

Ruckelshaus sworn in as EPA dir; Pres Nixon takes part in ceremonies; US Sen
approves by voice vote bill to lend warships to S Vietnam and Turkey; US Sen
approves by voice vote bill to continue lending subs to Greece and Pakistan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 53 words

Pres Nixon presents Young Amers Medals to 4 young people; recipient D J Sweet
startles him when she tells him to get US out of Vietnam war as he presents
medal to her; gets congratulations from friends; does not regret speaking out;
will keep and wear medal, noting Nixon urged her to continue her service work;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 41 words

S Vietnamese pres Nguyen Van Thieu's press office issues statement, said to be
designed to correct erroneous repts in some Saigon newspapers, saying Nguyen Van
Thieu will not permit Communist candidates to run for office in presidential
elections

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 2

LENGTH: 58 words

S Vietnamese Sup Ct elects as its pres Tran Van Linh, who is regarded as
friendly to Pres Nguyen Van Thieu; decision is significant because of role pres
of ct will have in next yr's presidential elections; some confrontations between
Nguyen Van Thieu and ct, including Tran Ngoc Chau case, recalled; Tran Van Linh
says case, in eyes of ct, is closed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 30 words

US mil sources disclose there will be acceleration in withdrawal of US troops
that will reduce Vietnam troop strength to 337,000 men by Dec 31, 7,000 fewer
than originally planned

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 74 words

Conti describes alleged Vietnamese civilian massacre and says he saw Lt Calley
pour automatic rifle fire into ditch full of people and 'blow the head off'
woman who tried to rise from pile of corpses; says Meadlo also fired at
civilians but started crying and said he could not shoot any more; says he
(Conti) did not kill civilians Calley told him to kill; says Sgt Mitchell also
fired into ditch; defense lawyer R Kay attacks Conti's character

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 5, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

S Vietnamese forces push deeper into forest; rept 59 Vietcong killed in 1st 3
days of drive; other details; S Vietnamese troops kill 35 Vietcong in 3 small
engagements elsewhere; B-52s raid; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 19 words

Vietcong terrorists reptdly seize and kill 2 S Vietnamese Army officers and 3
other soldiers 5 mi NE of Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 74 words

US command repts rescue of 2 USAF sgts, said to be only survivors among 32 Amers
and 12 S Vietnamese aboard transport plane that crashed recently near Camranh
Bay with 44 aboard; other plane is still missing; US command, Saigon, repts S
Vietnamese troops are in action in Parrot's Beak sec; Cambodia protests to S
Vietnamese Amb that S Vietnamese civilians live inside Cambodia; US planes begin
3d mo of saturation bombings of Ho Chi Minh Trail

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 4; (AFP)

LENGTH: 50 words

N Vietnamese army newspaper ed, replying to US Defense Sec Laird warning on
bombing of N Vietnamese targets, says US reconnaissance planes will be downed,
AA installations will be set up anywhere and troops will be massed in any
sector; dismisses warning as designed to set up 'pretext' for US attacks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 1

LENGTH: 161 words

Sen Kennedy, releasing text of Gen Accounting Office rept, prepared for US Sen
Refugees and Escapees subcom, that is highly critical of refugee programs and
that questions veracity of official S Vietnamese statistics on refugees, charges
many refugees are returning to areas controlled by Vietcong because of failures
in Saigon Govt's programs of assistance to war victims; rept is signed by
Controller Gen Staats and was prepared by Kennedy subcom; investigators describe
as 'misleading' claims made in late '69 by Nixon Adm that there had been
'dramatic' reduction in number of refugees; rept says S Vietnam did not rept new
refugees; charges there were 572,000 persons in need of aid; notes over 600,000
refugees are dependent on jobs generated by US forces; notes US troop
withdrawals will inevitably create unemployment; Kennedy says findings in rept
reflect 'warped sense of reality and progress' which pervaeds US activities in
Indochina; other details on rept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1

LENGTH: 100 words

Comments on S Vietnam Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky visit to US; Nguyen Cao Ky is
relaxing in Hawaii at end of visit; visit said to have proved, contrary to
expectations, quiet, low-key and uneventful; reception for Nguyen Cao Ky, with
exception of small demonstrations, said to have been surprisingly restrained;
many observers in Washington hold Nguyen Cao Ky's postponement of visit and his
conduct during visit have gone long way toward modifying his reputation in US;
visit received little pub attention in S Vietnam, except from Nguyen Cao Ky's
habitual partisans; eds in 2 Saigon newspapers noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 33 words

BLS repts lower percentage of Vietnam war veterans have gone to school than that
of veterans of World War II and Korean War; repts only 26% of Vietnam veterans
have recd training, June '66-June '70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 43 words

Comment on pessimistic US outlook on Paris peace talks; statements by US Amb
Bruce and Sec Rogers, and diplomatic activity over past several mos noted;
expectation by many in Washington that Pres Nixon will use expanded air attacks
in Vietnam; Bruce illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 2

LENGTH: 24 words

Comment on Lt Calley trial on charges of killing Vietnamese civilians; testimony
by Maples and Conti, and Meadlo's refusal to testify, noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 46 words

Lr says events of last 6 mos in Vietnam and Cambodia suggest US Govt continues
traditional policy of saying 1 thing but doing something else on matter of
peace; says war is primary issue and stands in way of everything else that has
to be done in US; notes POW rescue mission

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 6, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 21 words

Article on beginning of new Vietnam leave policy; 200 soldiers take 1st flight
to US; comments of some soldiers noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 44, Column 3

LENGTH: 15 words

Lr takes issue with Schoenbrun Nov 27 article on raids and POW rescue mission in
Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 45, Column 4

LENGTH: 102 words

French correspondent J Decornoy article on Nov 21 bombing raids against N
Vietnam; Decornoy has just returned from Hanoi; says raids were met placidly;
says circumstances in N Vietnam bring into question what favorable results US
was seeking in raids; says Pham Van Dong indicated to him pol evolution in
cities of S Vietnam is most essential problem, not raids or what Nixon meant in
his Oct 7 s; says Pham Van Dong holds pol evolution shows it is impossible to
set up pro-Amer govt even in zones that are not under NLF control; says it is
thought in Hanoi that US is further than ever from pol victory in Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 88, Column 1

LENGTH: 17 words

F Williams Child Care Center dedicated, Bushwick sec, Bklyn, named for soldier
killed in Vietnam in '68

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 33, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 31 words

S Vietnam Govt uses plane to drop thousands of leaflets on downtown Saigon to
notify pub that Govt tax agents will make house-to-house calls to help taxpayers
fill out forms for new tax

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 2; (RTR)

LENGTH: 56 words

Cambodian Govt mil spokesman repts mil dist hqs, Peam Chikang, under attack;
other battles noted; B-52s strike at enemy units pressing major offensive on
northern front; no major fighting reptd in S Vietnam; S Vietnamese troops push
deeper into forest; kill 12 enemy; US air strikes kill 30 enemy on western edge
of U Minh Forest; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 52 words

Sen Jackson recommends US propose Vietnam truce from Xmas to late Jan to help
reach permanent cease-fire, TV int; proposal wins prompt support from Nixon Adm;
State Dept spokesman says Sec Rogers telephoned Jackson to congratulate him on
proposal, telling him it is one Adm has been considering for some time

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            December 7, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 37, Column 3

LENGTH: 18 words

Sp/4 W Wurst, 1 of 1st soldiers to take advantage of new Vietnam leave policy,
illus with wife at his NJ home

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 8 words

Lr on POW mission; urges Vietnam war be ended now

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

Articles by B Ondrasik and C Weiss, aides of 2 US family groups concerned with
POWs, comment on rescue mission; Ondrasik says it raises morale of POWs and
their families; discusses plight of POWs; Weiss says Nixon Adm distorts facts of
POW issue and creates deliberate distractions from it; defends N Vietnam's
actions concerning POWs; says there is no foundation to charge of deaths in
captivity

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 75, Column 5

LENGTH: 15 words

First Natl City Bank applies to Fed Reserve Bd for permission to open branch in
Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

State Dept spokesman says discussions are under way between US and S Vietnam on
possibility of proposing extended holiday truce; says any such truce would
depend on agreement by Communists; expects US and S Vietnam to announce truce
proposals shortly; Sen Jackson proposes extension; receives telephone call from
Rogers, who tells him State Dept has idea under consideration but proposal has
been rejected in past by Communists; Natl Com for a Pol Settlement in Vietnam
makes similar proposal, statement signed by C Kerr, C R Vance and others

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

US command repts finding of wreckage of other transport plane that crashed in
central highlands more than wk ago; no survivors reptd among 6 US servicemen and
73 S Vietnamese aboard

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 66 words

Nguyen Cao Ky returns to S Vietnam; repts he received assurances from Pres
Nixon, Sec of State Rogers and other US officials that US will refrain from
action in S Vietnamese presidential elections next yr, news conf; says he has
not yet decided whether to challenge Pres Nguyen Van Thieu; is greeted by US Amb
Bunker; says war issue is less emotional in US than it was before; makes other
comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 8, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 224 words

T Turner, member of Calley's platoon during alleged massacre, says killings of
Vietnamese civilians in ditch went on for hr, with group after group of women,
children and old men being shoved into ditch and then shot by Calley; testimony
appears to stun defense; Calley's lawyers move for mistrial, contending
allegations go beyond specifications charged by Govt; Turner further alleges
Calley shot down woman who came running towards him pleading for mercy; Kennedy
orders all reference to incident of woman stricken from record because it is not
included in 4 counts of Govt's bill of particulars against Calley; delays ruling
on mistrial; says he will instruct jury tomorrow on how it should regard
Turner's account of killings; notes defense had access to Turner's prior
testimony at Mitchell trial; Turner says Meadlo and Mitchell helped Calley with
killings; details on his testimony; Sledge testifies he saw Calley shoot
Buddhist priest and then toss child into ditch into which he shot; says he saw
Calley and Mitchell shoot into ditch filled with 20 to 30 civilians; other
details on his testimony; Maj C D Lane testifies none of wounds observed on
photographed corpses were inconsistent with small-arms fire; is called as
witness by Govt to anticipate defense argument that civilians were slain by arty
fire or helicopter strafing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 9, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 107, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 16 words

S Vietnamese mil ct sentences to prison 2 Frenchmen who raised Vietcong flag
atop statue in July

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 9, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 21 words

Mountain Bell Telephone Co says it will urge its 2.1-million users in 8-state
area to ask Hanoi for humane treatment of POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 9, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 132 words

S Vietnamese demonstrators stone US soldiers and engage in other riot actions
against them in protest against fatal shooting of Vietnamese youth by US soldier
in Quinhon; some Amers and S Vietnamese students injured; demonstrators ransack
bar frequented by Amers; Binhdinh Prov chief imposes 24-hr curfew on city; US
mil authorities order Amers to make themselves as inconspicuous as possible; US
officials say youth was hit accidentally by warning shot fired as some other
youths were trying to steal C-rations from Amer truck; say youth was not
involved in attempted robbery; large crowd of Vietnamese demands soldier be
turned over to S Vietnamese authorities for trial; US advisers say family of
dead youth will be compensated, but soldier will remain in US hands pending
investigation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 9, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 62 words

Govt rests case against Calley after rigorous cross-examination by Daniel fails
to shake testimony of Dursi and Turner, who say they saw Calley fire into ditch
filled with Vietnamese civilians; Dursi says he refused Calley's order to fire
on civilians; recounts actions of Calley and Meadlo, who he says was crying;
details on Turner's testimony; other details on session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 9, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

S Vietnamese troops continue drive in forest; rept killing 144 Vietcong in 1st 8
days of operation; 8 S Vietnamese have been killed, 71 wounded; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 9, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 83 words

Ford Foundation announces grants for programs to spur Latin Amer and Far East
food out; announces $46,000 grant to Argentina agr econ program; grants $300,000
to Cornell Univ for support of studies on Indochina nations; announces $149,000
grant to Ceara Univ to increase sorghum production in Brazil; awards $110,000
grant to Columbia Univ for its Southern Asia Inst program of research in
Pakistan; announces $257,000 grant to Internatl Rice Research Inst for rice
research program in Indonesiaput

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 10, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 2

LENGTH: 72 words

Ed, saying extended Vietnam cease-fire could make contribution to peace, holds
only way cease-fire from Dec 24 to Jan 30 could be brought about is for US to
announce its forces will not fire unless fired upon; says Saigon Govt is
unenthusiastic about proposal, but will probably go along if Nixon makes clear
he intends to go ahead with cease-fire; suggests dramatic gesture, such as POW
release, to accompany unilateral cease-fire

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 10, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 73, Column 2

LENGTH: 64 words

Article on French-owned BGI Co (Brasseries et Glacieres de L'Indonchine), S
Vietnam's only beer mfr; co produces 2 kinds of beer; employs more than 4,000
workers; bottles 40-billion gallons a yr; is nation's largest foreign investor
and biggest taxpayer; gen mgr Despierres says profits declined, '64-69, because
of 700% rise in taxes; demand for beer far exceeds production; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 10, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 155 words

Latimer and Raby outline Calley's defense aftter Kennedy tells them they will
have to do so before he can accept as relevant evidence from depositions taken
from 3 Vietnamese and former door gunner on Amer helicopter; say they will try
to prove killing of Vietnamese noncombatants was result of 'legal and
justifiable' acts of war; say Calley acted under superior orders to destroy
village; say his platoon expected formidable resistance; say hamlet had been
declared free-fire zone; cite law of reprisal under which natives of hamlet
might be held accountable for prior atrocities committed by Vietcong; say Calley
and his men were under terrific battle stress; Kennedy denies defense motions to
dismiss 2 separate counts alleging Calley killed man wearing robes of Buddhist
priest and small child; deposition from gunner D E Hill says helicopters
received considerable enemy fire from Mylai area before operation; Calley illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 10, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 48 words

Laird presents Silver Star medals to 96 Army and USAF commandos who took part in
unsuccessful raid to free Us prisoners of war in N Vietnam, ceremony, Ft Bragg;
ceremonies disclose mission was greater in size and scope than previously
indicated; Laird, Mrs Vinson and 4 servicemen illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 10, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 93 words

Svayrieng Prov mil gov Col Koh Chhuon says over 400 S Vietnamese peasant
families have taken over abandoned farmhouses and ricelands as far as 7 mi
inside Cambodia; says Saigon Govt has ignored his protests; Cambodian Govt sends
protest note to Saigon Amb Tran Van Phuoc; charges S Vietnamese soldiers helped
their countrymen move into houses abandoned by Cambodian war refugees; Cambodian
press urges US to intervene to prevent Svayrieng from becoming another S
Vietnamese prov; century-old Cambodia-S Vietnam competition for Mekong Delta
ricelands revd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 10, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 123 words

US HR Appropriations Com maneuvers around parliamentary rules that normally
prevent it from appropriating funds for foreign aid until authorized in separate
legis to provide funds requested by Nixon Adm for Middle East including
$500-million for Israel, $30-million for Jordan, $5-million for Lebanon,
$225-million for Cambodia, $3-million for Indonesia, and $150-million for S
Korea; Sen Fulbright says he doubts if he can get votes in Sen to block funds
until authorization bill is passed; criticizes maneuver; bill provides
$20-million in additional aid for S Vietnam; Repr Findley amendment specifying
that Cambodian funds shall be used only for purposes Nixon determines to be
essential to US withdrawals from Vietnam is defeated

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 10, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 153 words

S Vietnamese Govt decides on 1-day truces for Xmas and New Yr despite
Washington's officially expressed interest in extended holiday cease-fire; Govt
decided in principle on brief truces even before State Dept said US considers
extension in hopes it would lead to permanent end to fighting; Amer officials
say they received no formal instructions from Washington even to broach to
Saigon subject of longer truce; S Vietnamese and Amer officials seek to dispel
widespread impression US diplomats try to have S Vietnamese officials change
past policy and agree to longer truce; State Dept officials say 24-hr Xmas truce
is 'probable' unless Nixon makes some broader proposal for extended truce at his
news conf tomorrow; confirm US and S Vietnamese Govts have been consulting on
details of truce since last wk; concede proposal for open-ended and mutually
observed truce would almost certainly be rejected by Vietcong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 10, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 74 words

Enemy force blasts S Vietnamese command post in Fishhook area, killing 30 S
Vietnamese, wounding 41, and destroying several trucks; S Vietnamese communique
says enemy is repulsed and 48 enemy soldiers are killed; dist center of Puok
retaken by Cambodian troops; S Vietnamese troops kill 23 enemy in clash near
Danang; other action reptd; 1 US helicopter is downed 96 mi NE of Saigon, 1
crashes while supporting S Vietnamese troops in forest

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 145 words

Latimer, in opening statement for defense, says Lt Calley had orders to 'kill
every living thing' in Mylai, and alleged 'massacre' of Vietnamese civilians
that followed was observed by superior officers who did nothing about it; cites
'superior orders' as 1 of several reasons why noncombatants were killed; says
there were other explanations, including poor training of platoon, rage of men,
and their expectation of fierce resistance; charges Capt Medina told men that at
long last they were going to fight enemy bn and 'get even for the loss and
ruination of buddies'; says Medina ordered every living thing killed; says there
was no plan for handling of noncombatants; says men were frightened and
confused; says whole episode was observed by higher comdrs on ground or in air,
including Col Barker and Maj Gen Koster; says he intends to put Calley on
witness stand

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 62 words

S Vietnamese army dr Maj Pham Van Luong, carrying 4 hand grenades and copy of S
Vietnamese Const, succeeds, after waiting for 9 hrs, in reaching Nguyen Van
Thieu to complain about corruption in 1-hr meeting; is member of small group,
determined to end corruption and named for Capt Ha Thuc Nhon, who led suicidal
rebellion last summer; talks briefly with Nguyen Cao Ky

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 6; (UPI)

LENGTH: 17 words

N Vietnam denounces any proposal for extended cease-fire as 'new treacherous
trick by the Nixon Adm'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 55 words

N Vietnamese Govt and Communist party issue extraordinary appeal to N Vietnamese
people and army for redoubled efforts to win war; N Vietnamese high command
calls for armed forces to heighten their preparedness and determination 'to
fight victoriously'; appeals seem to reflect conern about prospects of further
US bombing raids

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 74 words

94th Paris session; US and S Vietnam proposes immediate exch of POWs with N
Vietnam and Vietcong; N Vietnamese and Vietcong counter with offer of immediate
cease-fire if US withdraws its forces by next June 30; each side views the
other's suggestions as unacceptable; Bruce suggests 2 sides meet daily to
discuss POW issue; other statements by Bruce and those made by Mrs Nguyen Thi
Binh in making cease-fire proposal noted; details on session

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 402 words

Nixon declares that if N Vietnamese forces 'increase the level of fighting' in S
Vietnam as US forces are withdrawn, he will retaliate by ordering bombing of mil
targets in N Vietnam; says he will continue to order bombing of N Vietnamese
missile and mil complexes if US reconnaissance planes are fired upon; seems to
broaden his interpretation of '68 understanding; says he considers any extended,
unilateral cease-fire over holiday season to be dangerous, but US is prepared to
enter 'limited' cease-fire with other side; says he has not abandoned hope in
peace talks, but N Vietnam's rejection of POW exch offer will 'pinpoint' Hanoi
as 'internatl outlaw'; reinforces Rogers statements that Cambodian aid program
is essential to Vietnamization; details on Nixon statements in nationally
televised press conf; Nixon says he can foresee no circumstances under which US
could use ground troops in Cambodia; holds US aid to Cambodia is essential 'to
save Amer lives and permit us to bring Amers home'; statement seen reinforcing
Rogers testimony before Sen Foreign Relations Com earlier in day; testified for
over 3 hrs in behalf of Adm's request for supplemental aid; Nixon says US will
continue to try to open 'channels of communication' with Peking though there are
no plans to change policy of opposing Chinese Communist seat in UN; sees
continuing difficulties in US-USSR ties but sees also some areas for
negotiation; says he generally approves of actions Hoover has taken but refuses
to go into specific actions; says Congress was not consulted on Vietnam POW
rescue mission because of security, says all information on mission has been
released; says he believes US security is not threatened by USSR mil activity in
Cuba and Carabbean; holds it is time for labor and mgt to 'quit betting' on
inflation and to start help fighting it by restraining wage-price demands; says
some progress is being made in trade talks with Japan but that he is not
satisfied, again warns Cong legis should be ltd to textiles; says Pres Comm on
Campus Unrest rept is 'certainly not pablum,' says he has written to Comm chmn
Scranton detailing his views on findings and that lr will be released soon;
pledging to work in harmony with Cong, says that he will use Fed leverage to
promote racial integration in suburbs only to extent that law requires; OEO Dir
Rumsfeld apptd Counselor to Pres; F Carlucci dir of OEO; text; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 11, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Pacification program head W E Colby has been summoned to conf with Defense Sec
Laird amid controversy in Nixon Adm over effectiveness of effort to suppress
Vietcong's underground orgn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 129 words

Ex-CWO S Baker, testifying for Calley's defense, says he saw bodies of dead
Vietnamese strewn along southern edge of Mylai before any US troops reached
scene; suggests they had been killed either by arty or by helicopter gunships he
had seen strafing the village; Baker testimony contradicts testimony of members
of Calley's platoon who said they were standing right beside Calley when
civilians were killed and had heard him order Meadlo to shoot a nonresisting
group; defense witness Capt G C White says his men suffered heavy casualties in
early operations near the hamlet and that the civilians were to blame; charges
civilians with shooting US soldiers in the back and other treacherous actions;
under cross-examination, says he knew of no order to exterminate them

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 31 words

US command repts no US combat deaths in Vietnam in 48 hrs ending Dec 11;
communique, however, repts 1 Amer killed, another wounded in action 325 mi NE of
Saigon; 13 of enemy reptd killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 34 words

S Vietnam seizes issues of 11 Saigon dailies because of false repts that Pres
Nguyen Van Thieu had said that US and S Vietnam were considering month-long
cease-fire during Xmas, New Yr and Tet holidays

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 110 words

Enemy pressures on hwy linking capital to Cambodia's only oil refinery at
Kompong Som force Govt to ration gasoline for 1st time; flow of tanker trucks
from oil refinery reptdly interrupted by North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops'
occupation of stretches of Route 4 for last 3 wks; gasoline rationing marks
another success in Communists' strategy of isolating Pnompenh; oil refinery pres
Ouk predicts paralyzing econ and possible defeat for armed forces unless Route 4
is reopened and gasoline trucks start rolling before end of mo; Cambodian Army
repr says mil fuel and gasoline is not affected but Shell Oil repts civilian
reserve is down to 134,500 gals

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

US Army charges PFC Yzaguirre with negligent homicide in shooting of Vietnamese
boy; he is confined to stockade while probe continues to determine if he be
ct-martialed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

Hanoi reprs at Vietnam peace talks charge Pres Nixon's remarks at news conf are
'extremely bellicose and threatening'; charge Us maintains 'osbtinate attitude'
to talks; charges 'heightened perfidy'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 214 words

Laird suggests that absence of progress at peace talks could justify renewed
bombing of N Vietnam, Sen Foreign Relations Com; warns that '68 understanding
that led to bombing halt could be discarded if Hanoi refused to recognize US
right to conduct reconaissance flights over N Vietnamese territory; Laird
comments lead war critics to believe that Adm broadens interpretation of '68
understanding to justify renewed bombing; Symington charges Adm has decided to
escalate war; Fulbright charges recent US actions constitute a 'reversal of
policy' and 'a resumption of the warfare conducted by the preceding Adm'; says
Nixon Adm seeks war settlement 'through application of superior force on N
Vietnam'; hearing illus; US stiffening attitude seen as warning to Hanoi not to
take mil advantage of US troops withdrawals; also seen related to what Adm terms
high rate of troop infiltration from North; US intelligence sees build-up of N
Vietnamese forces continuing through current dry season with most troops moving
into Cambodia; Sec Laird testifies before Sen Foreign Relations Com in hehalf of
$1-billion supplemental aid bill; Sen Appropriations Com approves additional
funds but makes granting of funds conditional upon passage of authorization
legis now before Foreign Relations Com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 80 words

High Adm officials link expanding US threats to resume bombing of North Vietnam
with growing conviction that Hanoi got better of understanding it struck with
Pres Johnson in '68; Pres Nixon has not yet renounced understanding but his and
Sec Laird's warnings of more bombing suggest effort to redefine understanding so
as to impose new conditions; some officials see Adm concluding that increased US
air power is needed for diminishing US ground strength due to troops withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 12, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3; (RTR)

LENGTH: 84 words

US officials in Washington say new information on 203 Amers captured or missing
has been received from Hanoi through Swedish Premier Palme, who got information
from Hanoi; only about 1/4th of men about whom Palme inquired are listed as
being in N Vietnamese hands; deaths of 4 men in N Vietnam confirmed; information
is longest list of POWs or suspected POWs yet received through govt channels;
Sweden and US are sending notices to families of servicement who asked Palme to
check on servicemen's fate

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 93 words

Article on Nixon current problems suggests econ continues to be his most
annoying one; recalls his s to NAM on plans for expansion; Nixon seen pleased
over agreement of rr workers to return to work, comment on Nov 11 Nixon press
conf; comments on Nixon's optimism about an early unemployment decline;
Rumsfeld, as White House aide, seen well aware of grievances of poor against
Nixon Adm; article revs lr to Campus Unrest chmn Scranton; comments on Nixon's
statement on housing; comments on Nixon and Laird warnings on renewed bombing of
North Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Ed says most critical question raised by Adm threat to resume bombing of north
Vietnam if Hanoi increases level of fighting in South is whether decision has
been made to reverse policy and re-escalate war; says Fulbright and Symington
make this interpretation; need for pol settlement of war with internatl
guarantees and supervision stressed; says US Adm pays lip service to this
concept but fails to implement it

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 84 words

Americal Div in Vietnam announces it will set up 'hot line' for rapid
communication between lower ranking blacks and high command on racial issues and
differences; announcement follows demonstration by about 40 black soldiers who
marched over 1 mile to commanding general's office to complain of being
reassigned to the field after their transfer to the div when their units in
other inf divs were withdrawn; div spokesman says soldiers were being reassigned
in accordance with standad div procedures

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 94 words

US Gen Acctg Office repts to Sen Refugee Subcom that figures on civilian
casualties, 245,700 since '67, reflect only admission to S Vietnamese Health
Ministry and US mil hosps, not those helped elsewhere and those dead of wounds
before they could be treated; Sen subcom estimates, based on field studies by
its personnel and official data, put total of civilian casualties since '65 at
over a million, including at least 300,000 dead; subcom chmn Sen E M Kennedy,
who released data, says they make 'mockery' of US Govt's claims about conditions
among civilians

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 28 words

N Vietnamese Communist party and army press organs denounce Pres Nixon's warning
of retaliatory bombing attacks, call it preparation of US opinion for a stepped
up war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

Vietcong ambushes US jeep, 80 mi E of Saigon, and US convoy on same hwy 125 mi
further north; 2 killed in jeep, 7 wounded in convoy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 84 words

Cambodian Govt forces reptdly fight off heavy enemy assaults in hand-to-hand
combat at Prey Totung, 38 mi NE of Pnompenh; 4 Cambodians reptd killed, 50
wounded; 7 N Vietnamese and Vietcong rgts are reptdly in battle sector, last
major stronghold on Cambodian northern front; enemy fire sinks 4 Govt ships in
convoy on Mekong River bringing supplies and reinforcements to Kompong Cham;
kill 11 Cambodians, wound 76; threat to northern front and attack on convoy
marks sudden upsurge in enemy activity; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 32 words

Members of Co B, 1st Bn, 61st Mechanized Inf, operating near Vietnam
demilitarized zone, int on their fears of mines used by enemy and bitterness
they feel as draftees in a long war; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 322 words

Nixon, in lr to Comm on Campus Unrest chmn Scranton, gives cool response to comm
rept recommendation that pub increase understanding of youth culture and warning
that nation is on brink of chaos if it is driven to 'war upon its youth';
himself calls for enlarged youth understanding of parents generation, citing its
achievements in overcoming war and depression; holds 'traditional culture of
Amer life' has many adherents within younger generation; says, in response to
youth complaints, that his Adm has 'diminished' US involvement in Vietnam war
and has made new advances against discrimination; contests rept's recommendation
that he lead nation in reconciliation of division between estab soc and new
youth culture; says it is President's decision to do what he believes is right
in natl interest; says there are widely divergent views within our soc as to
what US problems are and that no minority, i.e. coll students, who make up 4% of
population, has veto power over President's decision to do what he believes is
right; notes moral leadership is not limited to Pres, but is responsibility of
thousands of other pub figures; holds responsibility for unrest rests with acad
community; does not respond to comm's charges of divisive official rhetoric but
praises natl leaders who have denounced violence; says he places Agnew high
among such leaders; endorses rept's history of student unrest, its criticism of
violence and call for responsiveness by univs; notes he has referred several of
its specific recommendations to Cabinet officers; does not comment on comm's
probe of Jackson State Coll and Kent State Univ killings but says law
enforcement officers should use only minimum force necessary in dealing with
disorders when they arise; Scranton and comm members are unwilling to comment
immediately on lr but may make statements after reading it; excerpts from Nixon
lr; illus of Nixon recg rept from Scranton, Sept

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 13, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 38 words

US Defense Dept announces Jan '71 draft call will be 17,000, highest monthly
call since Apr '70; officials deny any link to war in Vietnam; say calls
fluctuate each yr, lower calls coming in autumn, higher ones in beginning of yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 14, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 21 words

Xuan Thuy, at Paris talks, alluding to Pres Nixon warning, says N Vietnam is
prepared for possible resumption of bombing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 14, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 180 words

H E Salisbury appraisal of former Soviet Premier Khrushchev's memoirs; Salisbury
finds careful examination of excerpts demonstrates almost certainly that
material, in 1 form or another, originally emanated from Khrushchev; holds
excerpts discuss major subjects only in half-truths and frequently in outright
distortions; finds recollections flawed by apparent mixture of bad memory and
desire to distort record, either to enhance Khrushchev's image or to pay off
obscure scores; cites examples, including accts of de-Stalinization s and
Doctors' Plot; notes his omission of pertinent factors in '58 USSR-Chinese
rupture over Formosa Strait crisis; USSR ex-Premier Khrushchev called
'tendentious' in contending that just before '54 Geneva conf Communist China
Premier Chou En-lai was about to end support for N Vietnam in its conflict with
France because the situation was 'hopeless'; notes memoirs contain almost no
references to Brezhnev, Kosygin and Podgorny; holds memoirs are still of
considerable value to historians, providing insights into atmosphere surrounding
Soviet Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 14, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Cardinal Cooke leaves NYC to visit servicemen and families in Pacific area; to
spend 6 days in Vietnam; gets message from Pres Nixon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 14, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 45 words

N Vietnam News Agency says chem warfare by US had killed hundreds in South and
threatens to turn vast areas into wasteland; say area sprayed had increased from
about 1,400 acres in '61 to about 1.5-million acreas in '70 and that nearly
1.3-million persons were affected

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 14, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 157 words

US repts Air Force B-57 carrying secret intelligence equipment hit by ground
fire and downed over Ho Chi Minh Trail; 2-man crew rescued; craft's secret
detection equipment believed to have been destroyed and has not fallen into N
Vietnamese hands; it is 75th US aircraft reptd lost over Laos since US began
announcing losses on Mar 10; 400 are believed to have been lost since '64; US
F-100 downed apparently while flying support mission for Cambodian forces under
heavy attack in Kompong Cham Prov; is 51st US warplane reptd lost since Apr 29;
pilot rescued; Cambodian Govt repts new enemy attacks on Prey Totung have been
repulsed with help of air strikes; US Command repts no battlefield deaths for
day; 5 Amer wounded on central coastal plain; S Vietnamese repts 31 enemy killed
in 4 ground clashes; 2 enemy stockpiles seized, 1 S of Danang, 2d N of Saigon;
Vietcong downs 2 US helicopters, Phuoclong; 1 crewman killed, 2 wounded; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 14, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 27 words

Article revs incident of shooting a 12 yr old Vietnamese student; describes
Quinhon scene and attitudes of Quinhon residents and US soldiers toward each
other

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 14, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 209 words

Excerpts from former Soviet Premier Khrushchev's purported memoirs end with plea
to present Soviet leaders to open Soviet frontiers and give people 'chance to
find out for themselves what world is like' and with condemnation of present
Stalinist restrictions on literature and arts; acct revs '62 Cuban missile
crisis, contending that Khrushchev's only purpose was to deter Us invasion of
Cuba; notes reactions of Soviet leaders to division of Vietnam at 17th parallel;
says USSR leaders 'gasped with surprise and pleasure' when France, at '54 Geneva
conf, offered to divide Vietnam at 17th parallel; says this was the 'absolute
maximum we would have claimed ourselves'; and describes Khrushchev's reaction to
'55 Big Four Conf, Geneva, and to discussions with Mao Tse-tung; separate rept
by Dr A McG Harvey, pub in Life, quotes Khrushchev as saying that he lost
control of Soviet leadership after U-2 incident in '62 and that Soviet
militarists helped bring about his downfall; score Stalinist restrictions on
arts; memoirs call controls basis for stereotyped, boring and useless arts;
illus of Khrushchev and Mao in Peking in '54 discussing problems of war and
peace; quote Khrushchev as saying he was never exactly sure he understood what
Mao meant

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 15, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 57, Column 4

LENGTH: 29 words

Group of scientists in Paris representing 14 countries urge US to end war and
withdraw all troops from Indochina; accuse US of testing chem weapons in
Vietnam; Pentagon silent

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 15, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 74 words

New US provisional air cavalry brigade with over 200 helicopters reptdly formed
to patrol 10,000 sq mi around Saigon, S Vietnam; troop strength drops to
343,700, lowest level in 4 yrs; breakdown; current phase of Nixon's withdrawal
program completed 3 wks ahead of schedule; US will withdraw 60,000 by May '71;
7,000 will be withdrawn by end of '70; Communist command reptdly deactivated 4
rgts and 15 bns in region around Saigon since July

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 15, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 102 words

5 defense witnesses say that when they attacked Mylai they were under th US
Capte 'impression' derived from briefing with Medina that he wanted 'every
living thing' killed; 1 witness says Medina told them they would encounter no
women and children, that pamphlets had been dropped warning civilians to flee;
all 5 witnesses say they were frightened by Medina's briefing; say he warned
them Mylai was held by crack enemy unit; say they were indoctrinated by Army to
look with suspicion on every Vietnamese, even children; none of 5 say they saw
Calley kill anyone all day; all deny having shot a woman or a child

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 15, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

US tells IRC that US Govt has 'residual' responsibility for S Vietnamese
civilian prisoners whom it turns over S Vietnamese Govt; has obligation for
their welfare if Saigon does not observe Geneva Conv and it if mistreats
prisoners

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 15, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 49 words

Sir Robt Thompson says he is optimistic on Vietnamization policy success, int,
Eng; says he reptd this conclusion to Pres Nixon in Oct; on Dec 2 US officials
reptdly said Thompson rept to Nixon concluded that US and allied efforts failed
to destroy Communist subversive apparatus in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 15, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 27 words

US Defense Dept spokesman reaffirms that Gen Abrams can vary Vietnam withdrawal
rate or even stop it in next 2 mos if there is an enemy buildup before Lunar New
Yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 16, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

Sentence of Pvt M Schwarz, convicted of murder in death of 12 Vietnamese
civilians, has been commuted from life to dishon discharge and yr at hard labor

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 16, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 16 words

Lr socres Pres Nixon's interpretation of '68 understanding that led to bombing
halt in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 16, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 3

LENGTH: 22 words

Lt Col J H Funston lr holds riflemen, who constitute 7% of US troops in Vietnam,
should receive extra pay for hazardous duty; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 16, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 41 words

Amer sources in Saigon rept provisional US Air Cavalry brigade with 200
helicopters, designed to operate in Saigon area and 11 surrounding provs, was
disbanded after little more than wk of operations because it proved inflexible
in performance

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 16, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 38 words

S Vietnam reptdly sends 3,000 airborne troops to Kompong Cham, Cambodia, in
response to Premier Lon Nol's appeal for help; force is advance guard of much
larger force; Cambodia repts enemy routed at village of Prey Totung; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 16, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 129 words

Defense Sec Laird announces he will visit S Vietnam early next mo to conf with
Abrams on prospect for troop reductions, news conf; Pentagon official explains
purpose of trip will be to determine whether US withdrawals can safely be
stepped up by some 'thousands' over 1st half of '71; sources say Laird wants to
discuss matter with Abrams before making recommendation to Nixon; Laird says
there has been no basic change of policy regarding bombing of N Vietnam; says
Pentagon consulted with CIA on continuing basis from last May on plans for
Sontay raid and agency did not suggest there were no Amers at camp; voices
strong support for Griffin proposal on POW release; says Moorer will accompany
him on visit to S Vietnam; says he will visit Paris and talk to Amer delegation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 16, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 171 words

Calley trial; former squad leader C A West describes shooting of wounded
Vietnamese children; acknowledges he helped 'put them out of their misery'; says
Medina exhorted soldiers to 'leave nothing walking, crawling or growing' in
hamlet night before assault; tells how his squad gunned down 'about 10
individuals' who came running toward them during attack; concedes victims were
unarmed civilians, including small girls; says 1 of his men tore blouse off
girl; M A Bernhardt says Medina warned him not to disclose to his Congressman or
anyone else facts of alleged massacre; calls Medina briefing 'inflammatory;
other details on his testimony; Latimer attempts to depict co as unit addicted
to marijuana; West names soldiers who used marijuana, including Conti; says that
after smoking marijuana, he (West) thought moving trees were enemy soldiers;
none of witnesses who testify during session say they saw Calley do anything
atrocious; W C Lloyd, other witnesses stress Medina briefing; S LaMartina
testifies; West illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 17, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 1

LENGTH: 121 words

Wicker, noting statements by Defense Sec Laird and Pres Nixon concerning '68
understanding on bombing halt in Vietnam, says Adm has stated new policy,
despite its denials; says Adm obviously prepares pub position for time when it
may decide to resume bombing; queries why Adm follows new tactic, since N
Vietnam has not seriously violated understanding, except perhaps in matter of
reconnaissance planes; says Nixon approaches exposure to inherent weakness of
his Vietnamization policy: possibility that Amer troop strength may be reduced
enough to invite devastating enemy attack that could be prevented or defeated
only by air power; holds renewed bombing would result from Nixon policy, if
Vietnamization comes to bombing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 17, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Amb Bunker and Gen Abrams reptdly have recommended complete halt in program of
crop-destroying herbicides long used to deny food to enemy in Vietnam; details
on program

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 17, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

USSR scores Pres Nixon for his announcement last wk that bombing of N Vietnam
might be resumed if US troops are threatened by enemy buildup; scores recent
bombings

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 17, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 191 words

Former soldier T J Kinch testifies Medina, after assault on hamlet, received
radio query, apparently from his superiors; says Medina told soldiers: 'The
party's over--that's enough shooting for today'; is called by defense to
establish that killings were accepted as lawful acts of war by some members of
Medina's co before unit assaulted hamlet; says he overheard Medina rept body
count of 310 at end of assault; tells of torture of Vietnamese prisoner seized
at hamlet; says Capt E Katouc cut finger from hand of prisoner, who was shot a
few mins later; says, before jury is called in, that less than 3 wks before
alleged massacre he got orders from a lt to 'kill men, women and children' in
village that was considered to be in pacified zone; his testimony that he shot
defenseless youth on orders from officer of another co is withdrawn by Latimer
and Raby on advice from Kennedy; Latimer and Raby say Kinch's testimony
illustrates defense theme that Calley was obeying legal order; Sgt I Cowan,
Calley's platoon sgt, denies massacre took place; concedes he did not see Calley
for more than hr during platoon's presence in hamlet; Kinch illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 17, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 138 words

Sen approves Nixon Adm request for $225-million in new mil and econ aid to
Cambodia for balance of fiscal '70; Fulbright enters into Cong Record a heavily
censored rept by Sen investigators J G Lowenstein and R W Moose saying US
provides 'close air support' for Cambodian armed forces and carries out wide
variety of other combat missions under 'camouflage' of acting to prevent
movement of Communist troops into S Vietnam; rept challenges Nixon's contention
that his request for supplemental aid was essential to continued withdrawal of
Amer troops from S Vietnam; says, as 'a practical matter' the handing over of
major combat responsibility to S Vietnamese forces is now tied to survival of
Lon Nol Govt for next 2 yrs; full version of rept had been presented at closed
meeting of Sen Foreign Relations Com; deletions noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 17, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 7; (RTR)

LENGTH: 37 words

Cambodian Govt supply convoys pour into Skoun; S Vietnamese-Cambodian column
heads west along Route 7 to link up with S Vietnamese paratroop brigade; Saigon
repts there are now 12,000 S Vietnamese troops in Cambodia; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 17, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 73 words

US mil housing sec in Saigon is attacked by grenades and bombs; mil police
respond to what turns out to be 4 false alarms from other Amer installations; 2
Amers and 1 S Vietnamese killed in Saigon blasts, which are attributed to
Vietcong terrorists; enemy shells Bienhoa air base; details on action; guerrilla
radio broadcasts call for offensive to mark various annivs; anniv of Natl
Resistance Day and 10th anniv of formation of NLF; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 17, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 346 words

Sen Ervin charges Army intelligence agents spied on Sen-elect Stevenson, ex-Gov
Kerner and about 800 other civilians in Ill alone, statement; Stevenson says he
believed himself observed by photographers with telephoto lenses during recent
campaign but linked pol opposition; says his information was supplied by ex-Army
agent who was assigned to pol surveillance in Ill; says Army investigated men
during their election campaigns and while they were in office; disputes earlier
assertions by mil that investigations of civilians were ltd to those who
demonstrated penchant for violence or other illegal conduct; says 'it was
enough' that they opposed or did not actively support Govt's policy in Vietnam
or that they disagreed with Adm's domestic policies, or that they were in
contact or sympathetic to people with such views; Army repr says Army policy
bars collection of data of type reptdly gathered in Ill; White House press sec
Ziegler says it is 'inconceivable' that such surveillance would take place; says
White House does not condone it; Ervin says 113th Mil Intelligence Group's Ill
target list also included Repr Mikva and host of state and local officials, pol
contributors, newspaper reporters, attys and ch figures; Stevenson says he felt
he was being observed during his election campaign; Mikva tells HR that if reptd
practice is widespread, US has reached 'frightening state against civilian
control over mil'; Repr Mahon says he will make inquiries at Pentagon; Ervin
does not identify his informant, but Washington Evening Star says he is J M
O'Brien; newspaper says he identified self as domestic spy for Army; in lr to
Ervin, O'Brien says 113th's intelligence gathering switched from strictly mil
information gathering in early '68, and after June '69, his 'entire effort was
directed against individuals and orgns' not linked with any mil activities; says
information was placed in classified mil files, with copy being sent to various
other Fed agencies and to command center at Ft Holabird, Md; Chicago Daily News
also identifies ex-agent as O'Brien

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 10 words

Lr says both sides lose as result of bombing in N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 170 words

Rump session of White House Conf on Children attended by about 1,000 adopts
resolutions opposing Vietnam war and supersonic airplane and demanding food aid
programs for all needy Amers; session organizers upstaged by self-styled reprs
of Negroes, women, Spanish-Amers and youths, who debate chairmanship for 2 hrs;
A H Tyler finally takes chair; Negro dissident leader Dr C Hurst lauds conf as
most successful ever and praises Hess for allowing session and for promising
that minority-group reprs will be able to meet with Nixon or Sec Richardson;
SCLC pres Rev Abernathy s to meeting; session described; minimum income
resolution also adopted; conf urges there be no cuts in Head Start program;
adopts resolution urging federally guaranteed subsistence income by geographic
area for every family; adopt resolution calling for $6,500 guaranteed annual
minimum income, community control of day-care facilities, day-care funding
between $6- to $10-billion by '80 and separation of day-care programs from
welfare programs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 31 words

State Dept spokesman says US sees nothing new in Xuan Thuy's comments about
withdrawals from Vietnam; says US remains prepared to negotiate withdrawal
timetable as part of settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 5

LENGTH: 32 words

State Dept rebuffs USSR denunciation of US bombing policy; urges USSR to
persuade N Vietnam to stop shooting at reconnaissance planes; says USSR
statement should have been directed at N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 72 words

95th session of Paris peace talks; Bruce rejects Communist demand for unilateral
withdrawal; tells Xuan Thuy US is prepared to negotiate complete timetable for
complete withdrawal as part of over-all settlement; US spokesman, who estimates
N Vietnam has 175,000 to 200,000 troops in S Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia, says US
has to have some idea of what Hanoi intends to do about these troops if US were
to agree to withdraw its forces

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 14 words

S Vietnam announces Govt forces will observe 24-hr cease-fires at Xmas and New
Yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 67 words

US command repts 29 Amers killed in battle last wk, 377 wounded; S Vietnamese
and enemy casualties for last wk listed; 41,144 Amers, 111,002 S Vietnamese and
687,648 enemy have been killed in war; Dr Ngo Van Hieu killed by gunmen in S
Vietnam; US command increases police patrols in Saigon as part of precautionary
alert to counter what is described as pre-Xmas wave of terrorism; some incidents
noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 18, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 38 words

N Vietnamese soldier, who was captured and has been released, describes N
Vietnamese inf co's ordeal in traveling down trail; says trip took 90 days and
no soldier reached S Vietnam without suffering from malaria and exhaustion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 19, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 26, Column 3

LENGTH: 20 words

Reply to Dec 8 lr takes issue with suggestion to end Vietnam war to free US
Pows; scores N Vietnamese policy on US POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 19, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

Vietcong mil command calls on its forces to emulate 'great and glorious
successes' of '68 Tet offensive

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 19, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 18 words

Tuyhoa, S Vietnam, orphans get 600 lbs of clothing donated by students at Molloy
Coll, Rockville Centre, NY

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 19, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 72 words

2 enemy rockets strike Saigon on 24th anniv of war; 6 S Vietnamese killed, 8
wounded; attack said to cap wk of bombing incidents in city; S Vietnamese troops
find Vietcong underground prison in Mekong Delta; release 44 captives after
battle with guards; S Vietnamese Govt announces it has asked Internatl Control
Comm to help seek release of allied POWs; scattered battlefield action reptd; US
loses 3 helicopters; 2 US planes downed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 29 words

Comment on US bombing policy in Vietnam; recent statements by Nixon and Laird
noted; comment on US air raids in Laos and Cambodia; decline in US air raids
over S Vietnam noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

Ed says Vietnamese Communists have, in peace talks, made '1st cautious response'
to Nixon proposals offered in Oct; says response warrants more vigorous US
probing; holds way to initiate private talks may now exist for 1st time

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

Hijacker Glatkowski returns to US; is held without bail in Los Angeles County
Jail; sources say he was returned by airplane from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 80 words

US Phantom fighter-bomber downed over Plaine des Jarres while supporting Laotian
ground forces; 2 crewmen recovered in good condition; 20 hurt in crash of USMC
CH-46 near Danang, S Vietnam; US helicopter crashes near Danang; 2 others downed
30 and 155 mi NE of Saigon; US troops kill 10 enemy S of buffer zone; S
Vietnamese forces kill 26 enemy in U Minh Forest, kill 39 others in 2
engagements; other action reptd; US has lost 7,397 aircraft in decade of
fighting in Indochina

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 51 words

Pentagon says 25 of 1st 198 US servicemen to enjoy 14-day leave in US have
failed to return to Vietnam as scheduled; says some of men reptd they were
unable to catch return plane at various collection points because of
transportation problems; says men are not necessarily considered absent without
leave

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 20, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 169 words

NY Times survey of over 30 insts finds calm pervades campuses after yrs of
turmoil; links calm to Govt's winding down of Vietnam war and reform of draft,
which deflated 2 major natl issues; finds many insts are tightening security and
have developed hard-line policy against disorders; notes more progressive
schools have removed other issues by yielding to students' demands for greater
freedom and revised curriculum and grading systems; says students are weary and
afraid of violent confrontation and are skeptical of radicals who offer no
acceptable solutions; finds they are disillusioned with pol activism and feel
changes must be slow; finds many students claim calm does not mean they are
unconcerned, but notes many are now concentrating on developing soc and pol
reforms on personal level; views of some students and educators noted; some
campuses described; black students are clinging to separatist path in campus
life; notes many have little sympathy for causes and concerns of white students;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 40 words

Fed judge rules Pfc J L Kestler, who was killed in Vietnam, will be buried in
Arlington Natl Cemetery after memorial services in Ontario, Calif, and Dallas,
Tex, home towns of his divorced parents, each of whom claimed right to bury him

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 59, Column 6

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnamese Govt approves law giving offshore exploration rights to foreign oil
cos; will get 12.5% of all deposits and profit of 45% to 55% of processed oil

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 10 words

USSR and Communist China express support of NLF on anniv

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 31 words

USAF sends 4 mil transports to Vietnam to take 350 Amer soldiers home for Xmas
after S Vietnamese Govt refuses to clear Boeing 747 commercial jet for landing
at Tansonnhut Air Base

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 68 words

Allied commands rept 99 enemy killed in weekend actions; enemy troops, observing
10th anniv of NLF, bombard 4 allied positions, down 4 Amer planes and ambush US
convoy; 5 Amers killed, 6 wounded in actions; 19 injured in helicopter crash; US
command repts additional casualties in enemy mortar attack on US troops near
Danang, but does not disclose figures because they could aid enemy; details on
action

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 21, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 47, Column 6

LENGTH: 39 words

Fed judge rules Pfc J L Kestler, who was killed in Vietnam, will be buried in
Arlington Natl Cemetery after memorial services in Ontario, Calif, and Dallas,
Tex, home towns of his divorced parents, each of whom claims right to bury him

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 22, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 20 words

US command announces US troop strength in Vietnam dropped by 4,500 men last wk
to 339,200, lowest level since Oct, '66

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 22, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 44 words

US circulates to all UN members detailed denial of N Vietnamese charges that US
follows gen policy of massacring civilians; denial is contained in note
addressed to Thant; N Vietnamese charges were contained in documents circulated
by Hungarian mission 2 mos ago

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 22, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 57 words

Cambodian Govt troops, supported by bombers, push SW along Route 4 in attempt to
open hwy to nation's only deepwater port, Kompong Som; gasoline and other
supplies are running critically low; S Vietnamese forces rept hwy linking
Kompong Cham and Pnompenh is again under control of Govt forces; S Vietnam
casualties for past wk detailed; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 14 words

US Embassy expresses regret over recent accidental shooting of Vietnamese
student

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

People vs Presidential War, The: compiled and ed by John M Wells with Maria
Wilhelm revd; an acct of the Mass challenge to const of Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 84 words

Defense Dept repts enrollment in Army, USAF and USN ROTC programs at 502 schools
dropped during current acad yr to 109,598, lowest level since '47; hopes to
reverse trend by doubling number of scholarships to about 30,000 a yr and
doubling to $100 a mo the allowance paid to srs and jrs; officials link decline
to widespread opposition to Vietnam war, hostility toward mil, growing number of
colls that have made program non-compulsory and students 'wait-and-see' attitude
based on declining draft calls

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Article on cooks who work in officers' mess for 1st Brigade, 5th Inf Div, at
Quangtri, S Vietnam; their complaints discussed; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 122 words

Sen Goodell warns resumption of bombing of N Vietnam could bring direct mil
confrontation with USSR or China, farewell s to Sen; says 'scenario' has now
been set by Adm for resumption of extended air war over N Vietnam; says this
would 're-escalate' war, ignoring 'tragic lessons' of '60s; is lauded by
Fulbright and Cranston for his remarks; says, in news conf before s, US is in
'worse shape' now in regard to war than it was yr ago; says Nixon Adm has
'cosmetized' war with reduction in Amer casualties, appeals, in s, for antiwar
unity; scores recent POW rescue mission; says he intends to have role in
bringing antiwar sentiment to forefront again; says he weighs several job offers
from NYC law firms; intends to remain Repub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 70 words

Natl Student Assn delegation, returning to US from Hanoi, repts it negotiated
'declarations of peace' with student orgns in N and S Vietnam, news conf; says
declarations will be submitted to Amer student bodies for ratification and used
as theme for campaign of demonstrations and nonviolent resistence next spring;
was dissuaded from visiting scenes of war damage or mil preparations; had long
talk with Pham Van Dong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 6

LENGTH: 33 words

S Vietnamese Govt announces it has decided to release at least 30 disabled or
incurably ill N Vietnamese POWs to mark Tet (lunar new yr); Min Tran Van Lam
says offer is made for humanitarian reasons

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 5

LENGTH: 63 words

Abp H Lemaitre, Apostolic Delegate to Vietnam and Cambodia, makes Xmas visit to
N Vietnamese POWs at S Vietnamese camp at Bienhoa; 133 of 4,400 POWs at camp are
Roman Caths; Lemaitre hands out gifts, including photos of Pope; S Vietnamese
Govt permits journalists to visit camp; Saigon official estimates there are
36,000 enemy POWs, most of them Vietcong, in S Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 7 words

2 Amers killed in clash in Mekong Delta

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 26 words

N Vietnamese Defense Min Vo Nguyen Giap says unarmed reconnaissance planes
flying over N Vietnam will be downed; says US has no right to make such flights

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 9 words

Cardinal Cooke visits US servicemen near DMZ in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 93 words

Pope Paul deplores recent Italian divorce legis, predicts it will cause 'moral
harm', s to Coll of Cardinals; renews appeal for peace in Indochina; announces
that Mother Teresa, of India, is 1st winner of Pope John XXIII Peace Prize;
deplores 'corrosive criticism' of traditions and insts by Amer and other Western
intellectuals in ch, s to Coll of Cardinals; saddened by defections of priests
and dissent by layment, particularly young people; Cardinal Suenens has audience
with Pope; Pope exchs traditional Christmas wishes with Coll of Cardinals; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 32 words

Bob Hope begins 7th consecutive Xmas tour for US soldiers in S Vietnam;
introduces some marijuana jokes in his show; makes some pol remarks; is given
lengthy standing ovation by soldiers; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 184 words

Sen, 41-20, and HR pass foreign aid authorization bill providing $255-million
for Cambodian Govt but barring Pres from sending in ground combat troops or mil
advisers; Sens, in prior debate, question whether provision in defense
appropriation bill which says Pres may take steps he considers necessary for
withdrawal of US troops or to obtain release of POWs will be deleted; Sen Aiken
charges there had been understanding that provision would be removed if Sen
would pass foreign aid authorization; Repr Mahon, HR Appropriations Com chmn,
denies it, int; HR approves $1.85-billion supplemental measure containing
$1-billion in foreign aid funds; Sen approval seen; Cong completes action on
bill giving supplemental aid to S Vietnam; Cong approval of foreign aid bill
removes 1 obstacle to adjournment; US Cong approves bill authorizing $13-million
in aid to Indonesia; $30-million in mil aid for Jordan; $150-million in aid for
S Korea; $5-million in mil aid for Lebanon; appropriation to carry out program,
including $500-million in mil credits to Israel, has been held up pending
authorization legis

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 23, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 159 words

N Vietnam releases names of 339 Amer POWs in list it describes as final and
definitive; list is delivered by N Vietnamese diplomats in Paris to reprs of
Sens Kennedy and Fulbright (J E Nolan and J G Lowenstein); 20 of those on list
have reptdly died, 9 have been released; US officials say names on list are same
as those previously compiled from information received from peace orgns and
Swedish Govt; Laird says there are no new names on list; says US will continue
its effort to have other side abide by Geneva conv; list does not account for 10
airmen Defense Dept carries as POWs; State Dept spokesman declines to describe
release of list as significant step forward or read into it any change in N
Vietnam's attitude on POW issue; Kennedy and Fulbright wrote to Ton Duc Thang
several mos ago asking for list; received telegrams last Sunday inviting them or
their reprs to Paris to receive reply; comment; other statements by Adm
officials noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 24, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 5

LENGTH: 8 words

Correction on Dec 8 article by Ondrasik and Weiss

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 24, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 3

LENGTH: 19 words

Man and Science Inst pres E R Clinchy lr urges US to vow home rule in Vietnam as
best solution to US involvement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 24, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 60 words

9lth session of Vietnam Peace talks; Xuan Thuy calls on Nixon Adm to agree to
withdraw US forces by next June 30 or suggest another date; offers to help US
meet deadline; appears to modify priorities of peace proposals; US spokesman
voices doubt remarks represent any change; N Vietnamese spokesman indicates
enemy still calls for replacement of Saigon regime

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 24, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 16 words

S Vietnamese Natl Assembly selects Oct 3 for '71 presidential election; measure
now goes to Sen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 24, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

S Vietnamese hq repts Communist forces launch 2 attacks in 1st hrs of cease-fire

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 24, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Details on Sec of State Rogers statements scoring N Vietnam on POW list; Rogers
declines to endorse Mansfield proposal that US agree to withdraw its troops by
specific date in exch for release of all Amer POWs; list of names of 20 Amer
POWs who died in captivity

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 24, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 7

LENGTH: 57 words

N Vietnam issues statement defending its treatment of Amer POWs, which it calls
humane, and says their plight is result of atrocities committed by US mil men
and failure of US to withdraw; calls Amer POWs 'war criminals' who are not
covered by Geneva conv; notes list, which it says it does not have duty to
provide; other details on statement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 24, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 225 words

Sec of State Rogers acknowledges Nixon goes beyond '68 understanding that led to
bombing halt in threatening to resume bombing if enemy steps up level of
fighting in S Vietnam, but says this is because situation has been changed by
Amer troop withdrawals, news conf; contends Nixon warning does not constitute
shift in Adm policy; explains Nixon does not threaten to renew 'regular
bombings' but tries to maintain US 'options'; takes issue with press
interpretation of remarks by Laird; says Adm does not suggest lack of progress
in talks could be another justification for renewing bombing; Johnson Adm
official, who declines to be quoted by name, says Nixon Adm unilaterally changes
terms of '68 understanding; Clifford expands on earlier allegation that Nixon
warning constitutes radical departure from understanding, TV int; details on
statements by Rogers; Rogers scores N Vietnam for releasing POW list without any
new names on it; says N Vietnam acts to divert attention from its refusal to
open camps to internatl inspection; Rogers says Nixon Adm is revg its policy
toward admitting Communist China to UN now that majority of members have voted
in its favor, but reasserts opposition to expulsion of Nationalists; Rogers
cites 'rough spots' in US-USSR relations, but says Nixon Adm intends to continue
to negotiate realistically; Rogers illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 25, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 69 words

Members of Amer Friends Service Com attempt to deliver to Pres Nixon rept
condemning US policy in Vietnam; about 117 members of orgn begin Xmas vigil
outside White House to dramatize rept and their opposition to US policy; com
exec sec B P Clark and 5 bd members meet with Natl Security Council staff member
after asking to see Nixon; staff member says rept and his synopsis of meeting
will be sent to Nixon; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 25, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

N Vietnamese delegation, replying to Rogers news conf, says it is willing to
hold private talks with US to break talks deadlock, but does not indicate it
would modify its stand

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 25, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 2

LENGTH: 15 words

Article on Xmas scene in Saigon; liking of S Vietnamese children for toy guns
noted; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 25, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 96 words

82d Airborne Div, which is earmarked for dispatch in matter of hrs for brushfire
wars or other emergencies anywhere in world, has been seriously weakened, along
with many other Army units, by transfer of personnel to make up shortages of
combat troops in Vietnam; cutback was made last summer in 82d Div and other US
divs in US, W Ger and S Korea to make up 40,000-man shortage in combat troops in
S Vietnam; during Jordanian crisis in Sept, div would have been able to deploy
only 2 of its 3 brigades; efforts to bring div to full strength discussed; div
shoulder patch illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 25, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 76 words

Allied Christmas truce begins; S Vietnamese spokesman says enemy has violated
its truce; US command repts 23 Amer were killed in action last wk, lowest toll
for a wk in more than 5 yrs; S Vietnamese and enemy casualties for last wk
reptd; US command repts 44,167 Amers have been killed in war, repts 689,093
enemy have been killed; Nguyen Van Thieu releases Xmas message to allied troops
saying hopes and perspectives now are better than they were last yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 26, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 2

LENGTH: 193 words

Major study by Asian Development Bank of Southeast Asian econ in '70s says
nations must increase value of exports by processing products of their lands;
notes wages must be kept low for exports to be competitive; supports foreign
investments if they are directed toward primary exports rather than domestic
mfg; shows little support for Asian common mkt for present and recommends
individual countries remove trade barriers to ltd number of goods produced more
efficiently by other countries in exch for its own special products; 1-yr study
finds rising demand for natural resources of region can spur rapid rate of econ
development in coming decade; says main task of nations is to link their natural
wealth with world demand by improving admn and fiscal systems and by introducing
private foreign capital into primary production; Bank pres Watanabe comments;
study holds 'green revolution,' expected to spur econ development in many Asian
nations, cannot succeed without population control; recommends development of
small farms to discourage migration from rural to urban areas; rept urges
strengthening of Saigon's econ adm and revision of US aid policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 26, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 32 words

Hanoi radio says 3-man Amer delegation, which arrived in Hanoi with Xmas
presents and lrs for Amer POWs, has been given by N Vietnamese com 319 lrs and
330 Xmas cards for families of Amer POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 26, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 52 words

N Vietnamese troops attack Cambodian positions along Hwy 4; Cambodian command
repts S Vietnamese and Cambodian forces are trying to keep Hwy 7 open to
eliminate Vietcong threat to river traffic; scattered actions detailed; illus of
S Vietnamese soldiers preparing to attack enemy positions along Kompong Cham

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 26, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 27 words

Allied forces resume routine of war after Xmas cease-fire ends; spokesmen rept
55 clashes took place during cease-fire; 1 Amer and 17 S Vietnamese were killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 218 words

Article by S Nakagama on recent changes in applications of econ theory cites
Monetarism (advocated by Prof M Friedman) replacement of Keynesian 'new
economics'; latter stressed manipulation of Fed spending and taxation as prime
regulator of econ activity; article notes that Keynesian influence in '61 led to
recommendation that Cong grant Pres 'ltd conditional power' to raise or lower
income taxes; comments that if Pres Johnson had had that power in '66 or '67
there would have been more money to escalate Vietnam War; says Mills, by holding
up 10% tax surcharge in early '68 played bigger role in causing de-escalation of
war than all peace demonstrators and Cong doves put together; says delay led to
gold-dollar crisis in Eur, which shook Adm at time when proposed 206,000 troop
increase would have required additional $10-billion in taxes on top of proposed
surcharge; holds failure of 10% tax rise, when enacted, to work in expanding
money supply led to swing to Monetarism; por; notes ideas advocated by Prof
Friedman and Chicago school as inspiration for much of Nixon Adm's soc programs;
notes Friedman's concept of negative income tax is root of Nixon Adm's family
assistance plan; suggests Nixon Adm's opposition to wage-price controls reflects
influence of Friedman and other free-mkt economists

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 17 words

Comment on recent developments bearing on US policy, including bombing of N
Vietnam, and POW issue

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 26 words

US troop withdrawals from Vietnam under Nixon doctrine and reaction of Asian
nations discussed; map indicates location and strength of US troops in area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 4

LENGTH: 16 words

Amer Friends Service Com ad calls for end to war in Indochina; urges support for
peace effort

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 2

LENGTH: 23 words

Ed, noting statements by Rogers on list, holds N Vietnam fails to comply with
internatl law on POWs; scores N Vietnam's treatment of POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 7; Page 4, Column 0

LENGTH: 15 words

Prof R A Falk rev of Telford Taylor book, Nuremberg and Vietnam. An American
Tragedy; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 7; Page 5, Column 0

LENGTH: 26 words

Mark Lane book, Conversations with Americans, compilation of ints with Amer
soliders in Vietnam who witnessed or participated in atrocities, revd; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

7 servicemen from Olathe, Kan, arrive home from Vietnam for Xmas; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 98 words

White House officials, at yr-end briefing on Nixon policies, say success of SALT
depends largely on a 'pol' decision by Soviet leaders to seek agreement; say
real question is whether USSR wants accord; later say that evidence USSR slows
ICBM development and dismantles some IRBMs could be part of new attitude but
does not represent conclusive proof; US officials, reptg enemy infiltration rate
into S Vietnam is highest it has been in 2 yrs, warn enemy may be preparing for
offensive; enemy soldiers and material reptdly have been moving into Cambodia;
final destination is uncertain

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 101 words

HR Armed Services Subcom on Exchs and Commissaries charges that $10.8-million
worth of goods destined for mil exchs in Vietnam were lost in transit between
Dec 26, '65 and Jan 1, '67; repts it found instances of abuses in exch
operations in S Vietnam and accuses Defense Dept of 'gross lack of attention' to
exch system; recommends formation of watchdog subcom in HR to provide policy
supervision and guidance; says it also found concessions operating in Vietnam
without valid contracts and contractors failing to rept sales or income; scores
Defense Dept; urges Army exchs to abolish scholarship programs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 42 words

White House announces program for 'orderly, yet rapid phase-out' of herbicide
operations; says policies governing domestic use of herbicides will be followed
in Vietnam; White House press sec says it is expected herbicide program will end
next spring

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 50 words

Enemy ends 72-hr Xmas truce with mortar attack on allied naval base in Mekong
Delta, causing light casualties; S Vietnamese troops kill 17 enemy in U Minh
Forest; 4 S Vietnamese soldiers killed, 5 wounded in N Vietnamese troops attack
on their night bivouac at Krek; 14 N Vietnamese reptdly killed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Vietcong ends 72-hr Xmas cease-fire; US command repts 4 Amers were wounded in
clashes during allied truce; 6 S Vietnamese were killed, 37 were wounded during
same period; 17 enemy were killed; allies blame enemy for 78 attacks during
cease-fire; do not accuse enemy of violations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 119 words

Adm Moorer, chmn of Joint C/S, says 1 'possible course of action' for S Vietnam,
if N Vietnamese attempt large-scale spring offensive in Cambodia or southern S
Vietnam, would be to stage ground thrust across Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos to cut
off enemy supply lines, int, Washington; makes clear he does not advocate so
bold and potentially controversial expansion of fighting but believes it would
be militarily effective; notes N Vietnam has increased defensive assignments
throughout southern Laos, apparently in awareness of possibility; doubts any
enemy attempt to take over Cambodia by force would be successful; credits US-S
Vietnamese attacks on enemy sanctuaries in Cambodia with halting their offensive

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 31 words

Hanoi radio broadcasts what is says are excerpts from Xmas night observance at
Amer POW camp in N Vietnam; Hanoi radiophoto said to show captured Amer airmen
celebrating Xmas illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 46 words

Repr Montgomery says N Vietnamese officials told him in meeting in Laos that
Amer POWs are allowed to participate in sports and have been given special
privileges this Xmas season, news conf; says he sees some significance in his
meeting with N Vietnamese officials in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 27, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 88 words

US officials in Vietnam expect crucial yr as decade of Amer involvement ends;
hold mil situation has improved but there are as many problems in all areas now
as there were in previous yrs; see little hope for pol settlement because of
deadlocked peace talks; hold some problems have been eased; details; US
officials in Vietnam see potential trouble in coming S Vietnam campaign;
official US attitude said to favor Nguyen Van Thieu over Duong Van Minh; US
officials in Vietnam hold econ outlook in S Vietnam has improved somewhat

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 28, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 53, Column 2

LENGTH: 102 words

N Vietnamese offensive against rds leading into Pnompenh causes severe shortages
of gas, sugar and beer in city; reserves are low; Govt plans to bring in
supplies from Kompong Som around southern coast of S Vietnam and up Mekong
Delta, an expensive, long and dangerous trip; gas rationing imposed; Govt econ
aide doubts severe food shortage will develop; says major problem is that no
staples are available for export; convoy taking gasoline up river to resupply
Kompong Cham hit by rockets and 4 of 15 boats sink; gasoline rationing
continues; Shell Oil repts civilian reserves are down to 134,000 gals; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 28, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 3

LENGTH: 18 words

Prof M Ptashne describes his visit to Hanoi, N Vietnam, where he gave lecture on
molecular biology; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 28, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 167 words

HEW ex-Asst Sec Farmer, who was 1 of highest ranking Negroes in Adm, says he is
'not entirely convinced' that Nixon has been persuaded to write off black vote
by forces within Adm and Repub party, TV int; Repr Conyers and Rev J Jackson see
coalition of economically deprived, including jobless whites and young as well
as minority groups, emerging to deny Nixon re-election, TV int; Jackson sees
'young, multiracial' attack against Cong seniority system that sanctions heavy
spending on Vietnam war to neglect of domestic needs; Conyers says aim when 92nd
Cong convenes will be to break grip of entrenched Southern Dem members on com
chmnships; Farmer says he was on the verge of resigning when Nixon nominated
Haynsworth and Carswell to Ct without his advice; says he resigned from HEW Dept
in belief he could do more outside Govt to prevent violent rqcial confrontation;
says he is 'terribly disappointed' that Nixon commitment to black capatalism is
'still rhetoric' because of lack of funds, por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 28, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 2

LENGTH: 27 words

N Vietnam's Premier Pham Van Dong says list of captives is 'full and complete';
scores Nixon Adm; article details statements by Pham Van Dong to Maclear; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 28, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 25 words

2 Amers killed, 4 wounded after armored personnel carrier hits mine near buffer
zone; S Vietnamese troops kill 19 enemy in forest; other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 28, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 163 words

N Vietnam allows ints with 2 Amer POWs at small prison camp on outskirts of
Hanoi; Canadian Broadcasting Corp correspondent M Maclear describes his meeting
with 7 Amers, 2 of whom are permitted to answer 4 sets of prescribed questions;
prisoners indicate conditions of captivity are satisfactory; speak calmly but
with obvious feeling about war; appear alert, physically fit, well clothed and
not apparently underweight; Maclear meets with Pham Van Dong, who claims
prisoners are treated well; Comdrs R J Schweitzer and W E Wilber are POWs who
are permitted to talk; details on their statements; Maclear describes camp; CBS
and NBC telecast film showing part of ints; wives of Schweitzer and Wilber
comment; US official says camp where ints took place is 'Hanoi Hilton',
showplace camp that journalists have previously visited; says Schweitzer and
Wilber have been int before and are part of group that has been int many times;
says content of ints is repetitive; POWs illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 29, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 4; (AFP)

LENGTH: 15 words

Vietcong press agency says more than a million Saigon troops have deserted over
last 10 yrs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 29, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 5

LENGTH: 77 words

Defense Sec Laird calls ints with POWs carefully 'staged and edited' and
'censored production' that leaves many questions unanswered, news conf; scores N
Vietnam for allowing only handful of POWs to be seen by Western correspondents;
White House press sec says Nixon feels TV film is in 'total disregard of the
terms and intentions of the Geneva conv' covering POWs; Laird deplores lack of
detail in ints; says IRC has right to int any enemy POW in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 29, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 207 words

Defense Sec Laird makes yr-end rev and forecast; Laird says slowdown in
construction of Soviet SS-9 missiles could not be taken as signal on basis of
which US would decide to postpone increasing its development work on an advanced
bomber and an advanced missile submarine, says formal agreement to limit or
reduce strategic weapons is necessary precondition to Amer forbearance in this
field, news conf; says mil probes of civilians in connection with concern about
urban riots could be better performed by Justice Dept than by Army intelligence
agents; concedes that in natl security cases, mil agents engaged in wiretapping
'under terms prescribed' by Cong and Atty Gen; forecasts lower draft calls in
'71, the extent of the drop to depend largely on whether Cong votes increased
pay and other benefits; Defense Dept sources rept planners are thinking in terms
of 80,000-120,000 men; '70 calls totaled 163,500; says there is good deal of
'harbor hopping' in Cuba by Soviet vessels but minimizes concenr about USSR
possible base bldg; will be 'surprised' if vessels serviced nuclear submarine in
light of USSR consistent denial; US uncertain on whether N Vietnamese troops,
recently increased in numbers, will remain or be sent elsewhere; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 29, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 68 words

48 Amer civilian volunteers in Vietnam charge, in lrs to Nixon and Thant, that
US actions in war violate Geneva Conv and other internatl treaties; charge US
violations have in many cases been matters of policy made and espoused at
highest levels of US Govt; give examples to substantiate claims that US violates
accords; details on charges; spokesmen for Nixon and Thant say lrs have not yet
been received

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 29, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 9 words

Enemy shells 8 targets; other action reptd in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 30, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 4

LENGTH: 40 words

Feud between motorcycle gang and hippies in Atlanta leaves 1 person dead and 17
persons charged with murder; among those arrested is Specialist 4 R W T'Souvas,
1 of 13 US soldiers charged in alleged massacre of Vietnam civilians at Mylai

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 30, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 23 words

N Vietnam likens physical effects on humans of defoliants US used in S Vietnam
to effects on bombing victims at Hiroshima and Nagasaki

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 30, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 40 words

S Vietnam spokesman rept its troops have beaten back an enemy ground attack just
inside Cambodia, killed 74 attackers; US Navy jet downed during bombing run over
Ho Chi Minh Trail, Air Amer transport struck by ground fire near Longcheng

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 30, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 74 words

Cambodian Govt's need to import gas and oil through S Vietnam by way of Mekong
River places new strain on S Vietnam-Cambodian relations; Cambodian officials
charge S Vietnamese with blackmail because of delays in river shipments;
SVietnamese officials say Cambodians failed to notify Govt S Vietnamese their
plan to get supplies; says delays are result of complicated bureaucratic
procedures and need to provide naval protection for fuel convoys

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 30, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 199 words

Defoliation study undertaken for AAAS shows catastrophic effect on some parts of
S Vietnam (W Sullivan rept); finds at least 1/5 of 1.2-million acres of mangrove
forest have been 'utterly destroyed' and some unknown factor has prevented any
vegetation from returning to those areas; search for evidence of birth defects
from spraying of chems has been inconclusive; study, headed by Dr M S Meselson,
is described by its participants at AAAS meeting; Meselson says mil policy of
only spraying food crops in sparsely populated areas is not being adhered to;
estimates 600,000 people have been cut off from their normal food supply;
investigators say mil authorities cooperated with them, but refused to disclose
where and when spraying had occurred and whether there was more than 1
application; welcome White House announcement that herbicide spraying will be
phased out; urge this most be done promptly and killing of food crops be halted
immediately; say studies should be undertaken to find ways to restore devastated
areas; AAAS study parallels Army study on birth defects; Army investigators
indicate their study does not directly test effect of herbicides on birth
defects; illus; graph

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 31, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 60 words

S Vietnamese mil spokesman repts Vietcong guerrillas kill 19 members of hamlet
defense force about 90 mins after beginning of enemy's 3-day New Yr's truce;
allied forces are scheduled to halt offensive operations for 24-hr period; says
S Vietnam withdraws 2,500-man force from central Cambodia; about 10,000 S
Vietnamese troops are reptd to remain in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 31, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 79 words

97th session; Paris talks end 2d full yr with both sides agreed that no progress
has been made; each side blames other for intransigence; Communist spokesmen say
there have been no recent contacts with Amer delegation outside of regular
sessions; US declines comment on secret talks; Bruce says prospects for real
negotiation are still frustrated by enemy stance; summarizes Amer proposals; N
Vietnam says Nixon continues and extends war; Bruce and Nguyen Thi Binh illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 31, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 176 words

Repr Wolff charges S Vietnamese Govt jeopardizes program under which Amer
soldiers are permitted 2-wk leaves in US by threatening to cancel landing rights
of charter aircraft cos that have been flying men home; returns from visit to
Vietnam; says Saigon Govt 'blackmails' charter cos into leasing 727 jetliner to
Air Vietnam and turning over some $1-million worth of ground equipment to
Saigon's Tonsonnhut airport; says he raised matter with Bunker, who was
unwilling to interfere for fear of insulting Vietnamese; Trans Internatl
Airlines spokesman confirms Govt has so far refused to extend co's landing
rights in Saigon beyond Jan 4; Wolff says Trans Internatl and Pan Amer World
Airways seek permission to begin flying charters under program; comments on
program; Natl Air Carrier's Assn has sought State Dept aid in obtaining landing
rights for cos and others planning charter service; State Dept spokesman says US
is asking embassy in Saigon to see what can be done about situation, but no
representations have been made to S Vietnamese Govt so far

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 237 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          December 31, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

USN ends 4-yr role in inland waterway combat; ceremony marks turning over to S
Vietnamese navy of 125 US vessels, bringing total to 650; Rear Adms J H King and
Tran Van Chon sign official transfer documents; about 17,000 Amers will remain
with S Vietnamese navy in shore positions and as advisers aboard S Vietnamese
vessels

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
