
                               1 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 16 words

Soviet Union signs trade agreement with N Vietnam that will increase exch of
goods by 30% this yr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

USMC discloses names of 5 marines charged with murder of 16 Vietnamese women and
children at Sonthrang village Feb 19; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 127 words

Chicago 7 defendants released from jail by Appeals Ct in total of $155,000 bond;
hold press conf; are released after appeal atty posts $15,500, required 10% of
total bond; conditions of bond noted; ct decision is handed down by special
5-judge panel; panel sets $25,000 each for 5 defendants convicted of crossing
state lines with intent to incite riot; sets $15,000 each for defendants who are
serving time for contempt of ct; sets $15,000 for Kunstler and Weinglass; rules
Govt failed to show that appellants are dangerous within meaning of Bail Reform
Act; also holds that, without prejudging substance of appeals, they are 'not
frivolous'; bonds will stand until Appeals Ct rules on 2 sets of appeals facing
it; defendants' after release from jail; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 42 words

Amer industrialist C S Eaton holds news conf upon returning from Paris, where he
conferred with Xuan Thuy and Le Duc Tho; says he is confident N Vietnam will
soon release list of US POWs and will allow captives to write to their families,
news conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1

LENGTH: 210 words

Bond Orgn conf; natl campaign chmn Rothberg repts record initial sale of
$76,580,000; NYC Mayor Lindsay scores Adm attempt to be 'benevolent neutral';
describes as misleading, wrong and dangerous equating Israeli situation with
that in Vietnam; holds only way to preserve peace is to insure that Israel is
immune from attack, s, Israel Bond Orgn conf; cites USSR arms sales to UAR and
'dismaying sale of French jets to Libya' in holding US neutralitiy would
eliminate Israel's 'lone ally' among big powers; rejects view that Israel's
security depends on Amer's support of Vietnam war; he and Allon stress that only
direct talks can lead to permanent peace; Allon says Israel does not object to
participation of 3d party in paving way for direct talks; charges Arabs seek to
create impression that Israel is some sort of pariah; says that provisional
arrangements between Israel and Arab nations have only assured 'permanent and
prolonged war'; scores UN and major powers for 'constantly submitting' to Arabs;
holds Israel should be given chance to solve problem in own way; Israeli Deputy
Premier Allon says Nasser's war of attrition has boomeranged, with Israeli
countermeasures having disrupted Arab plans and preparations for early gen war
against Israel

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 28 words

Cambodia releases 5 US Navy men who were captured Feb 5 when their gunboat
sailed up Mekong River into Cambodian territory, apparently by mistake; 5
identified; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

Article on Norodom Sihanouk's role as Chief of State, his diplomacy as absolute
ruler; he reptdly believes that N Vietnam's intentions towards Cambodia are
aggressive but that if and when Communism comes to Cambodia it will be through
Communist China; seen professing absolute neutralism while accepting view that
nation is doomed to Communism; scores US as an imperialist power primarily to
keep China and N Vietnam at arm's length and pays bitter price of cutting
Cambodia off from US aid; his recent statements condemning Vietnamese noted; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 59 words

Enemy downs 3 US helicopters; 7 Amers killed, 6 wounded in scattered action; 10
S Vietnamese civilians killed, 15 wounded after bus hits mine near Danang; 11
other civilians wounded by terrorist grenades thrown at truck in same area; 3
civilians killed, 19 wounded by accidental shelling by USMC arty of village 22
mi SW of Danang; enemy shells 16 targets

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 9 words

Comment on Tran Ngoc Chau case and his arrest; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 0

LENGTH: 9 words

Chicago Defense Fund ad in form of lr by Davis to child

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 43 words

Ed says Saigon Govt takes 'tardy 1st step' toward reversing action against Tran
Ngoc Chau with decision to order new trial, but says it remains doubtful whether
Tran Ngoc Chau should ever have been brought to trial in 1st place; says charges
should be dropped

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 1, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

Lr scoring Judge Hoffman's courtroom procedure contrasts Brit method of having
disruptive attys disciplined by their peers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 21 words

B-52s again diverted from air action over S Vietnam to attack N Vietnamese
supply depots along Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 84 words

US State Dept task force headed by D L Osborn begins work on confidential
project to determine new approach for econ aid to SE Asia after Vietnam war
ends; project envisages major role for Japan in providing econ and tech aid;
Japanese Foreign Min has started study comparable to that of State Dept's;
project reptdly differs markedly from aid program proposed by Pres Johnson in
'65; seeks primarily to identify US interests and objectives and determine what
developing nations can do for themselves

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 28 words

Mil tribunal chmn Lt Col Trien Khac Huynh rejects defense lawyer Vu Va Huyen
request to call Amb Bunker to testify for defense of Tran Ngoc Chau, beginning
of 2d trial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

New Mobilization Com to End the War in Vietnam outlines plans to deluge local
bds with extraneous material as part of efforts to harass bds during wk of
protests

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 75 words

2 S Vietnamese deputies begin 48-hr hunger strike in lobby of Natl Assembly bldg
to protest trial of Tran Ngoc Chau and what they term are other violations of
Const by Nguyen Van Thieu; mil ct recesses for day to allow Tran Ngoc Chau's new
lawyer to study case; Tran Ngoc Chau's 3 lawyers resigned yesterday in protest
after judges swept aside all defense challenges to constitutionality of trial;
Tran Ngoc Chau says he does not have much hope in ct

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 3, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

B-52s raid in Mekong Delta about 8 mi from Cambodia; 2 more US helicopters
downed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 55 words

M Frankel, in analysis of Laos situation, holds US anxiety stems not from fear
that Laos may become another Vietnam but that N Vietnam is now in position to
make Laos an important battleground in struggle for Vietnam; says US feels
itself vulnerable to pol and psychological pressures that N Vietnam can generate
by way of Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 179 words

Brig Gen W L Clement and Col J L Wheeler Jr, testifying before Sen com,
repeatedly decline to estimate how soon S Vietnamese forces can take over combat
responsibilities from Amer troops; Clement agrees to discuss plans for Amer
redeployments when he returns tomorrow to complete testimony in closed com
session; questions and statements by Gore and Fulbright noted; Fulbright
declares on Sen floor that high Nixon Adm officials hold Laotian situation is
even more important than Vietnam; Defense Sec Laird denies repts that next
withdrawal of US troops will cover 70,000 men; Sen McGovern charges there is a
US mil build-up, demands secret Sen session to debate situation; backed by
Fulbright; Sen Aiken disagrees with his colleagues' concern over Laos turning
into another Vietnam; Laird categorically denies US builds up its forces, Sen
and HR com hearings; says present US activities are not Defense Dept activities;
denies any significant change in numbers of Amers in Laos; Souvanna Phouma confs
with top command on plans to move reinforcements into threatened areas

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 32 words

Former US repr in Paris peace talks C R Vance says Nixon's Vietnamization
program makes settlement of war too dependent on what enemy does, s, NYC;
proposes 3-step schedule for effecting peace

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 4, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 37 words

Allied forces have killed 186 enemy during last 24 hrs in fighting ranging from
Mekong Delta to central coast; S Vietnamese hq repts 323 enemy killed during
3-wk sweep in Mekong Delta, 31 S Vietnamese killed, 401 wounded

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Sen Ribicoff charges Amer civilian pilots are illegally flying about $400,000
wkly out of Siagon to black mkt changers in Bangkok, Thailand, Sen subcom
hearing; also says funds totaling about $45,000 from fund financed primarily by
US to stabilize Laotian currency have been deposited in 'Prysumeen account' in
Mfrs Hanover Trust Co, NYC; account was identified in '69 as conduit for black
mkt funds out of Vietnam; Asst Sec Rossides testifies on Adm efforts to control
illicit money operations in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 3

LENGTH: 31 words

T Wicker sees Nixon Adm involved in 'same old game of lethal leapfrog' that
carried US into war in Vietnam; discusses dilemma facing Pres Nixon from an
over-extended foreign policy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 16 words

Time bomb found in barracks at Oakland (Calif) Army Base, major port of
embarkation for Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 13 words

S Vietnam mil ct convicts Tran Ngoc Chau for 2d time, but reduces sentence

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 25 words

Article on French presence in Saigon; French community has shrunk from 40,000 in
'49 to 13,000 now; French culture said to remain important; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 37 words

US planes attack enemy gun positions in Cambodia after town of Hatien is
shelled; S Vietnamese forces kill 41 enemy near town; Amer troops repulse 3 N
Vietnamese attacks 80 mi W of Saigon and 2 mi from Cambodian border; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 5, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 115 words

Sec Rogers reptdly assures Sen Foreign Relations Com that no Amer ground forces
will be sent to Laos and that US will not become involved in major war; reptdly
concedes that Amer air activity has been increased; Adm sources say Nixon
recognizes he will lose much pub support gained from his plans to withdraw US
troops from S Vietnam if Laotian situation becomes critical; Cong sources
indicate that some criticism of Adm over Laos has been politically motivated;
continuing Amer and Laotian air attacks have forced Pathet Lao and N Vietnamese
troops to leave Plaine des Jarres; troops reptdly have regrouped in hills around
plain; Souvanna Phouma minimizes seriousness of offensive in area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 38, Column 4

LENGTH: 14 words

G H Flanz lr on March 1 ed; quotes S Vietnamese Const concerning basis for
arrest

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 43, Column 6

LENGTH: 32 words

Chicago 7 defendant Dellinger says defendants tried to present 'rational
explanation' of their case, TV int, NYC; denies defendants unduly disrupted
trial; holds trial was badly reptd in press

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 58 words

US Paris peace talks reprs fail in attempt to get details on Amer POWs from
Communists; outside of session, Vietcong delegation makes available to wife of
captured pilot (Maj R C Schrump) in S Vietnam lr addressed 'To whom it may
concern' and praising captors; wife doubts lr reflects Schrump's true thinking;
illus; Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh appears;

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 37 words

113 Amers reptd killed last wk, 1st time battle deaths have risen past 100 this
yr; 465 wounded, lowest figure in about 2 yrs; S Vietnamese and enemy figures
listed; S Vietnamese troops kill 46 enemy 50 mi NE of Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 44 words

Comment on Tran Ngoc Chau case; says conviction is culmination of what Saigon
observers agree has been 'most naked display of pres power' since Nguyen Van
Thieu took office; discusses questions raised by case; says episode has been
painful for US from beginning

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 26 words

Tran Ngoc Chau sentenced to 10 yrs at hard labor; says he will serve his
country, S Vietnam, after peace has been restored; details on trial and case;
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 100 words

Sen Muskie charges Pres Nixon policy cannot bring peace, s, Natl Press Club,
Washington; accuses Adm of intimidating news media that are critical of war's
conduct; calls for 'new natl debate' on war; urges basic policy changes ranging
from new approach to Paris talks to fresh look at Saigon regime; charges
Vietnamization is unworkable; in reply to questions after s, says, because his
name is involved in speculation concerning '72 Pres race, he feels pressure to
speak out; aide notes his attack on Nixon policy ends his reluctance to discuss
foreign affairs publicly; details on s; Muskie por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 6, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 103 words

Rev and appraisal of situation finds N Vietnamese, with about 3 mos of dry
weather ahead, holding same ground now that they occupied in '69 at end of their
annual dry-season offensive; Communist forces are pausing to build up logistic
support before exploiting recent capture of plain; major concern seen over how
far N Vietnam wants to push into Laos and what its immediate objectives will be;
N Vietnam believed to have about 25,000 troops in northern Laos, like number in
southern panhandle region; continued calm in Vientiane and Luang Prabang noted
in contrast to concern in US Cong; Pathet Lao troops illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 7

LENGTH: 56 words

Mrs Weiss says Com of Liaison With Families of Servicemen Detained in N Vietnam
gets cable from N Vietnamese Govt confirming 14 Amers are being held; UPI repts
that Swedish Govt spokesman announces N Vietnam has submitted to Premier Palme
list of 14 US pilots held prisoner; Mrs Weiss says com now knows of total of 187
men being held

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 6 words

Local scene, Saigon, S Vietnam; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

Sharp fighting between US and N Vietnamese troops rages near Cambodian border;
21 N Vietnamese killed, 1 Amer killed, 19 wounded; enemy supply cache uncovered
in area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 109 words

M Frankel says 'ghosts' of Vietnam 'haunt' Nixon's 1st formal rept to nation on
Laos; says, if names and numbers were changed, Pres Nixon rept would read like
Johnson Adm explanation of Vietnam situation in yr preceding massive Amer combat
involvement in war; says in some ways Nixon tries to suggest present Laotian
situation differs from that of S Vietnan in '64 and '65; stresses similarity to
terms Pres Johnson used in describing events in Vietnam; holds Nixon failed to
deal with critical questions that have been raised by Cong members on Amer
involvement deepening well beyond present intentions and forcing US to make
concessions in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 53 words

S Vietnamese official Cao Van Tuong says Tran Ngoc Chau might have escaped
prosecution if US Embassy confirmed publicly his assertion that he worked with
CIA, news conf; mil prosecutor says no appeal from ct's verdict is possible;
Nixon Adm is publicly silent but Washington officials are reptdly angered by
conviction

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 7, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Sen Goodell, in series of meetings with upstate NY Repubs, says he supported
extending 5% surcharge to provide Fed budget surplus and funds for domestic
needs; calls Chicago 7 trial 'travesty' for defense and prosecution, s
explaining his positions, upstate NY

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 68, Column 5

LENGTH: 98 words

Judge I R Kaufman warns obstreperous and disorderly conduct by defendants in ct
threatens to become 'major epidemic', s, Fordham Law Alumni Assn; holds such
continued behavior will obliterate fair trials and the judicial system itself;
urges judges to respond to insult with 'wisdom and patience'; seen referring to
Chicago 7 trial and NYC Panther pre-trial hearings; gets Fordham Law Alumni Assn
achievement award; P M Flanigan, Nixon aide, holds 'pathological minority' of
young perons have turned to drugs and violent behavior because they are too weak
to meet challenges of comples soc

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 2

LENGTH: 27 words

Ed saying Amb Zorin warning that N Vietnam will break off Paris talks if US
continues to downgrade them must be taken seriously; urges US make new start in
talks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 5; Page 16, Column 5

LENGTH: 97 words

Comment on growing growing use of helicopters as 'flying ambulances' for
emergency evacuation of persons critically injured in traffic accidents; police
depts find helicopters are only way they can reach accidents on some congested
hwys in time to give most seriously hurt chance for survival; Ariz State Police
repts 240 rescues, about 40% of them hwy accidents, in 9 mos of helicopter
operations patterned after Army's rescue service in Vietnam; Los Angeles does
not use helicopters for freeway accidents because they reptdly caused further
accidents by distracting drivers; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 17 words

Defense Dept says not 1 of 27 US POWs named by N Vietnam this wk is new to list
of known prisoners

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 43 words

Sen approves Nguyen Van Thieu land reform bill to permit Govt to give free land
to soldiers and war widows; similar bill, which would give about 50% of tenant
farmers title to their lands, is stalled in Natl Assembly, where landlords are
major lobbying force

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 8, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 134 words

Pathet Lao's pol arm Neo Lao Hak Xat issues program for peace; program calls for
complete withdrawal of US from Laos, halt to US bombing of N Vietnamese supply
routes into S Vietnam, formation of coalition Govt and eventual election of
neutralist govt of natl union; demands that all nations respect Laotian
territorial integrity and neutrality as provided in '62 Geneva accords; omits
any mention of 67,000 N Vietnamese troops believed to be in country; program
broadcast by Hanoi radio; seen an attempt to insure that Communist view be
considered at any internatl conf; US studies proposals; officials view them as
move towards striking pol bargain; believe Pathet Lao demands too high a price
from Laotian govt; USSR silent on Nixon plea; illus of Laotian helicopter
bringing supplies to arty units

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 5

LENGTH: 68 words

Lr on Feb 17 ed accusing Chicago 7 defendants of not making serious effort to
force test of antiriot law says suit was brought by Natl Mobilization Com to End
War in Vietnam and 5 Chicago defendants individually to stop threatened
prosecution; says Fed and Appeals Cts denied, on ground that const question was
'plainly insubstantial,' request for 3-judge ct to rule on question; stresses
need impartial cts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3

LENGTH: 111 words

Le Duan, 1st Sec of N Vietnamese Communist party, calls for purge of leaders and
other elements 'detested by the masses' and simultaneous admission of 'young
members' to strengthen party, article appearing in Hanoi newspapers Feb 14 to
mark 40th anniv of party; advocates far-reaching reorgn of party and Govt
structure; article said to appear to establish Le Duan as undisputed leader of N
Vietnam and successor of Ho Chi Minh; US experts hold Le Duan's thrusts are
aimed at his rival Truong Chinh; details on article; Le Duan illus; Le Duan
urges econ flexibility and proclaims 'new economic policy' modeled after Lenin's
'24 program, article in Hanoi newspapers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 22 words

US helicopter gunship accidentally fires 14 rockets into village on outskirts of
Saigon, killing 3 Vietnamese civilians, wounding 11

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

Teen-agers man guns at Laotian command post near Ho Chi Minh Trail; many are
volunteers; discuss reasons for participating; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 9, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 122 words

Nixon Adm says Capt J Bush, Army capt, and 26 Amer civilians have been killed by
Communist troops or listed as missing because of enemy action over past 6 yrs; G
L Warren, Pres press aide, says Nixon stands by his original statement on
casualties in Laos, that he was unaware of Bush's death; disclosures follow D A
Schanche rept in Los Angeles Times on Bush's death as 'ground combat' casualty;
Warren says Bush's death resulted from 'hostile action'; Mansfield and Fulbright
accuse Nixon of not having gone far enough in his statement on US involvement;
illus of funeral of son of Laotian Cabinet member whose plane crashed in recent
fighting; Fulbright says he does not believe Vietnamization is policy to bring
end to war, TV int

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 15 words

Govt removes heavy tax increases on imported newsprint for Saigon daily and wkly
papers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 3

LENGTH: 23 words

Lr from Prof P Edwards scores Judge Hoffman for imposing cost of prosecution on
defendants; lauds Feb 21 ed condemning contempt sentences

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 54 words

M/Sgt W E Higdon charged with larceny, bribery and graft in connection with
allegedly illicit operations at Long Binh, Vietnam, service club at which he was
custodian from July '66 to Aug '68; is first serviceman charged in service clubs
probe; Army says charges arise from separate allegations against Higdon alone;
por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 63 words

Ex-Atty Gen Clark, in obvious reference to recent nominations, says efforts are
being made to change personnel and degrade Ct because of great strides it has
made, s, ADA dinner, NYC; warns continued US role will result in another
Vietnam; NYC Mayor Lindsay says 'benign neglect,' when it comes to urban crisis,
will only spell decline of our cities and civilization, s to ADA

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 81 words

Sen Javits calls for help for 100,000 Jews in Arab lands, holding many live in
constant fear of their lives, s, Internatl Rescue Com; says Palestinian refugees
have mounted serious threat to Israel and legitimate Arab govts; Sen Javits gets
Internatl Rescue Com Freedom Award for aiding refugees; Sen Javits says that on
recent trip to Vietnam he saw 'impressive and dedicated' efforts being made to
resettle refugees uprooted especially by '68 Tet offensive and its aftermath, s,
NYC

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5

LENGTH: 34 words

USMC turns over to US Army control of I Corps area; Lt Gen Nickerson
relinquishes his command over 150,000 US troops in 5 northern provs to Lt Gen
Zais, ceremony, Danang; marine role in conflict discussed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 132 words

White House, reacting to Sen criticism, establishes new policy of announcing
Amer casualties and aircraft losses in Laos separately from those in war in
Vietnam; such losses had been lumped with those in Vietnam; Symington, in prior
Sen debate, charged Adm had presented misleading picture of Amer casualties; Sen
Cranston accused Adm of engaging in 'quibbles' to cover up combat missions;
charged armed Amer troops had been sent into Laos on mil missions from S
Vietnam, demanded to know how many servicemen have been lost on such patrols;
White House replies that casualties from such missions will continue to be reptd
as part of casualties in Vietnam; spokesman for US command in Saigon repts
Pentagon has instructed it to begin immediately reptg to pub on Amer aircraft
losses over Laos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 262 words

Vice Pres Agnew voices irritation with media criticism of Nixon Adm, int,
Washington; scores media's failure to attack N Vietnamese presence in Laos or
Soviet position on arms control; says US press must criticize Communist actions
because those countries have no criticism from within, charges Amer media are
'falling down on the job'; says he might like syndicated column; Agnew says
better jobs and housing will do more to end de facto segregation than busing and
hopes Sup Ct will link housing patterns to segregation and begin to treat North
and South equally, int; remarks are seen as part of Adm trend away from using
schools to bridge soc gaps; Agnew holds Us has no choice but to become involved
'in small way' in Laos, int; queries reason for centering so much attention on
Laos where US has made only ltd responses to Laotian Govt's requests; says he
has seen no criticism of massive N Vietnamese aggression; denies Adm has
Southern strategy designed to appeal to whites in South as pol base; says he
will stress theme during Cong election campaign that Nixon gets things done;
notes critics' attacks on his recent s denouncing quota systems to admit
minorities to schools, int; says he meant that educationally deprived students
should attend Govt-financed preparatory schools or community colls in order to
reach achievement level of most univs; says ideas are similar to those recently
expressed by Dr C Kerr; contrasts domestic concern over alleged Songmy massacre
with what he says is lack of same interest in reptd Communist atrocities in Hue
in '68, int

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 10, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 7 words

Details on recent accident near Saigon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 39 words

S Vietnamese Sen, 27-2, passes bill to abolish absentee land ownership and
distribute free about 60% of farm land to tenant farmers; Nguyen Van Thieu asks
Natl Assembly, in recess until Apr 1, to convene special session to approve bill

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 29 words

Young Cambodians sack N Vietnamese and Vietcong embassies, Pnompenh, in protest
against Communist infiltration into Cambodia; make attacks after rally at
Independence monument

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 51 words

USMC helicopter, loaded with lumber and ammunition, crashes on take-off and
burns at Danang, killing 5 marines and injuring 5 others; 2 other US helicopters
downed in Phuoclong Prov, 5 Amers wounded; S Vietnamese Govt repts 89 civilians
killed, 185 wounded and 289 kidnapped in terrorist incidents last wk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 11, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 31 words

Over 5,000 striking students at SUNY, Buffalo, turn out to hear Rubin; he scores
4 so-called liberal jurors who, he says, betrayed their faith in his innocence
for sake of compromise

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Burlington Northern freight with 13 carloads of bombs destined for Vietnam
derails near Aurora, Neb, scattering 750-lb bombs along tracks; police advise
residents to remain in homes; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 39, Column 0

LENGTH: 27 words

Tales of Hoffman, The: ed from official tr by Mark L Levine, George C McNamee
and Daniel Greenberg; Introduction by D MacDonald; book offering excerpts from
trial

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 2

LENGTH: 34 words

Ed scores prosecution of S Vietnamese Deputy Tran Ngoc Chau; says it is only
latest incident in intensified effort by Nguyen Van Thieu to suppress
opposition; scores US acquiescence in repressive acts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 37 words

Medina's atty F L Bailey says Army has charged Medina with killing woman and
child among 4 Vietnamese; says Medina has been charged with cutting off part of
finger of enemy suspect; notes Medina has denied shooting anyone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 38 words

S Vietnamese authorities seize copies of Saigon newspaper Tin Sang that says
democracy no longer exists in S Vietnam and that Nguyen Van Thieu has lost
support of people; paper had been closed for a month after previous criticism

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 131 words

Maj Gen Vang Pao reptdly has asked Laotian Premier Souvanna Phouma to consider
evacuation of entire civilian population, about 100,000 people, in region of his
clandestine army's stronghold at Long Cheng; reptdly believes Long Cheng will be
Communists' next objective; hopes move will heighten combat effectiveness of his
troops; reptdly fears his troops, mostly Meo tribesmen, might scatter to their
homes to protect their families should Communists attack; Pathet Lao announces
that the all-Laotian pol conf it has proposed cannot be held until there is
'total and unconditional' halt of all US bombing raids in Laos; France calls for
an end to foreign intervention; US announces Amer fighter-bomber downed in Laos,
both crewmen rescued; illus of captured N Vietnamese soldiers; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 99 words

Norodom Sihanouk, in cablegram from Paris, charges sacking of embassies resulted
from plot to 'throw our country into the arms of an imperialist capitalist
power'; says certain Cambodian personalities have taken advantage of his absence
to set up plot; says he will return to Pnompenh immediately to speak to nation
and army and let them decide whom they choose to follow; suggests he may resign;
reference to 'personalities' seen as reflection on Gen Lon Nol, acting chief of
state during his absence; Cambodian officials growing concern over presence of N
Vietnamese and Vietcong troops noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 16 words

Article on S Vietnamese middle class family whose life has been disrupted by war
and inflation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 12, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 112 words

Sen Fulbright introduces resolution challenging Nixon's authority to commit Amer
troops or aircraft to combat without 'affirmative action' by Cong; resolution
would not be binding upon Pres nor inhibit him from taking mil action but may
become focal point for concerted attack upon Adm's policies in Laos; by
implication it suggests Pres has exceeded his const authority in authorizing use
of Amer planes in combat; Fulbright dismisses as 'specious' efforts to
distinguish between combat action in air and combat action on ground; holds
Tonkin Gulf resolution has not authorized use of US armed forces in action in
Laos which is unrelated to war in Vietnam; resolution text

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 2

LENGTH: 66 words

Black Panther Mrs A Shakur and Yippie leader J Rubin s to student group; City
Coll Commune members later stage campus march; some throw rocks at bldg and
guard; Mrs H Shakur, defendant free on bail, urges white radicals to 'get gun
and do something with it;' J Rubin, 1 of 7 defendants in Chicago trial, says
their courtroom strategy was designed to destroy ct system, give Hoffman a heart
attack

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 79, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

Marine Corp training of recruits and new officers lengthened to insure that
corps after Vietnam war is 'hard, lean, fully combat-ready and professional'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 8; (AP)

LENGTH: 35 words

Peace Corps has ousted 12 volunteers in last 4 mos because of pub opposition to
foreign policy, especially Vietnam war; Dir Blatchford says dissent will be
permitted but not exploitation of it in a host nation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 66 words

US and enemy troops battle in jungles around Tayninh near Cambodian border; 1 US
helicopter downed in far north; 30 enemy killed near Camlo 8 mis S of buffer
zone; Vietcong saboteurs blast hole in side of US merchant ship in Quinhon
ha"bor; other action reptd; allied and enemy casualty figures for last wk
listed; 867 Amers have been killed in '70; 40,846 Amers have been killed since
war began

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 13, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 126 words

Article on rising wave of bombings across US; incidents have accelerated
recently, causing sharp concern among citizens and investigative agencies;
police say most attacks have been planned by young left-wing militants; a few
are work of right-wingers; targets tend to be symbols of establishment and
Vietnam war; attackers seen disorganized and fragmented; bombings that have
taken place in major cities outlined; many police and acad experts agree with Dr
J Spiegel that young people have done everything they can in way of peaceful and
unplanned protest and not much has changed, that there is increasing sense of
desperation and sense of vengefulness; '69 bombings in Seattle put at 32, in San
Francisco at 62; incidents in other major cities detailed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 63, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 28 words

New Mobilization Com plans to block main door of Selective Service natl hq,
Washington, as part of antidraft wk demonstrations March 16-21 called by New
Mobilization Com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

Norodom Sihanouk leaves Paris to return to Cambodia; says he will stop off in
Moscow and Peking to ask USSR and China to curb Vietcong and N Vietnam
activities in Cambodia; arrives, Moscow; welcomed by Pres Podgorny

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 33 words

US planes find and destroy N Vietnamese helicopter on ground near Ho Chi Minh
Trail; fighting at lowest level in 3 mos; 4 well-equipped Govt Army bns
stationed at Sala Phoukhoun, key rd junction

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 19 words

Allied troops seize Vietcong jungle hospital 58 mi S of Danang after battle; 20
enemy killed; 3 US helicopters lost

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 15 words

Pope receives 9 members of S Vietnamese Assembly; tells them peace must be their
watchword

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 174 words

US HR Armed Services Com in Feb sent to floor bill proposing loan of 3 US subs
to Taiwan; original Adm-backed bill did not include Taiwan; floor fight seen
likely; Capt Hagerman, testifying for Defense Dept at hearings, backed loan;
said Taiwan has no subs and no personnel trained to operate them; com rept
censors Hagerman's reasons for security purposes; says subs would not introduce
new weapons into area but would let Taiwan replace US antisub defense where US
is cutting back forces and where Communist China has over 30 USSR subs; State
Dept says issue is under rev; Defense Dept has taken no stand on subs; repts no
cost figures available; Dem Study Group chmn Repr Fraser to propose amendment to
bar loan; aide says he opposes loan because it would introduce new weapons in
already tense area and because of costs; US HR com sent Adm-sponsored bill to
floor in Feb to extend long-term loan of 1 sub to Greece and 1 sub to Pakistan;
loan of 2 destroyer escorts to Turkey; added loan of 2 subs; loan of 2 destroyer
escorts to S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 14, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 115 words

Cambodian Govt repts it has asked Vietcong and N Vietnamese troops to get out of
Cambodia before dawn of Sunday, Mar 15; request comes while bands of angry
Cambodians rampage through Pnompenh sts, for 3d day, attacking Vietnamese shops
and houses; informed sources say sacking of N Vietnamese and Vietcong embassies
and subsequent riots were believed to have been instigated by mil to force
Norodom Sihanouk to show greater firmness against Communists; say riots, staged
in Norodom Sihanouk's absence and without his knowledge, were not intended as an
act of opposition to him but because of his ambiguous position on Communists
continued use of Cambodian territory; st demonstration illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 67, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

Appeals Ct denies petition by 10 Fed judges to intervene in appeal of contempt
convictions in effort to get definition of proper limits of contempt power of
Fed ct

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 24 words

Treatise on state of Communism in N Vietnam, written by pol leader Le Duan,
studied for possible clues on Hanoi's war strategy in Laos; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 47 words

Ed says Laotian war is too closely linked to that in Vietnam for one to be
settled apart from the other; notes Pathet Lao proposal was announced in Hanoi;
speculates that peace plan for Laos was drafted now only because some new
approach for Vietnam was also under consideration

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 3

LENGTH: 41 words

C L Sulzberger article on current unpopularity of 'domino theory' in US, notes
Norodom Sihanouk belief that US withdrawal from S Vietnam will result in fall of
other nations to Communism; holds situations in Laos and Cambodia show 'game'
has begun

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

Lr holds '54 counterrevolution, conceived and directed by US, resulted in
redistribution of land from peasants to landlords, which led to appalling
condition of peasantry, source of guerilla movement that conducted recent
5idnappings; Guatemala and Philippines compared

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 4

LENGTH: 54 words

T Wicker on Muskie's s and interpretation of it as making him front-runner; sees
little value in being front-runner at this stage; says important meaning of s is
that Dem leaders are turning to positions they fought at '68 conv and that party
is getting 'monkey' of Vietnam off its back and shifting it to Nixon; cartoon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: ADVERTISEMENTS

GRAPHIC: CARTOONS & CARICATURES

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 70 words

Sen Mansfield says he has been assured that Nixon does not plan to repeat use of
B-52s in northern Laos; Sen Kennedy warns on escalation of US mil involvement;
mil sources in Laos say downed helicopter believed to have belonged to N Vietnam
may be S Vietnamese helicopter downed 2 yrs earlier; US command in Saigon
indicates plane losses over Laos have been included in figures of accidental
aircraft losses in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 1

LENGTH: 202 words

Lawyers' Task Force on the Nov Moratorium co-chmn R Clark, also former US Atty
Gen, presents group's rept portraying moratorium as 'overwhelmingly peaceful'
and chiding Justice Dept for official statements that 'predicted--and tended to
incite--violence'; says govt must communicate effectively with dissenters; rept
based on written observations of lawyers who observed events of weekend;
declares most Amers were improperly led to believe weekend was violent;
identifies major concern as preservation of const rights of assembly and free
speech; A S Fisher is other co-chmn of group; rept scores news media for failing
to counter 'mistaken impression' of violence; other details on rept; other
statements made by Clark noted; say if, because of false notions concerning
risks, Amers believe that large numbers of fellow citizens cannot be permitted
to petition and to assemble, those who would repress pol dissent will have won
dangerous victory; say that at least there was failure of leadership; at worst,
it was calculated effort to mislead pub, to stifle dissent and to deny const
rights; says media, when questioned about poor coverage, denied that they had
been intimidated by Vice Pres Agnew's attacks

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 31, Column 7

LENGTH: 67 words

NYS Dem aspirant for US Sen T C Sorensen says he differs with P O'Dwyer, also
Dem Sen aspirant, on how to curb heroin use, int; disapproves of Brit system,
backed by O'Dwyer, of allowing drs to administer drug; believes marijuana use
dangerous because it may lead to use of more harmful drugs; says urban crisis is
closely linked to Vietnam war because money being spent on war sho1ld be used
for cities

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 39 words

Mass House gives preliminary approval to bill designed to force Sup Ct to decide
if Pres can commit troops to war without formal declaration; bill specifically
prevents Mass citizens from fighting in undeclared wars such as Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 121 words

US officials, after yrs of assuring S Vietnamese that defoliation program is
harmless to animals and humans, show signs of concern over recent repts that
chem sprays may have some little understood and alarming effects; many S
Vietnamese who live near spray areas are convinced that ailments and misfortunes
they suffer are related to sprayings; US mil command and US Embassy have formed
special com to rev effects of defoliation program; S Vietnamese regards entire
subject as taboo; concern felt by Amers is shared by many S Vietnamese
scientists, physicians, health officials and villagers; responsible S Vietnamese
scientists and officials say they know virtually nothing about effects of chem
sprays; details; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 50 words

US command spokesman confirms that US, in new crackdown on black mkt activities,
has ordered more than 30 civilian cos working under US Govt contracts to dismiss
immediately all employes punished in past for illegal currency manipulation; US
spokesman says at most about 150 people will be affected

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1; (GP)

LENGTH: 64 words

Gallup Poll shows Amers are now divided about equally in their views on rate of
troop withdrawal; 46% of all persons expressing opinion favor either immediate
withdrawal or withdrawal by end of 18 mos; 38% favor plan to withdraw all troops
at rate commensurate with S Vietnam's ability to take over fighting; 7% favor
sending more troops and stepping up fighting; details; breakdown

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 100 words

Dr M Segall, Brit dr who visited with reprs of Vietnamese Natl Liberation Front
Red Cross, says problem of malaria is becoming more serious in areas of Vietnam
controlled by Natl Liberation Front; links filling of bomb craters with stagnant
water, making them breeding grounds for mosquitoes; cites new, resistant variety
of disease; says children in areas of Vietnam controlled by Natl Liberation
Front are developing rickets because they spend so much of their time
underground and are not exposed to adequate sunshine; says Brit and Eur groups
will sent Vitamin D to Communist side to check disease

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 18 words

Article on Armed Forces Theater, Longbinh, permanent troupe of US personnel set
up by Sp 5 J Eggen in '67

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 67 words

US helicopter gunship accidentally fires several rockets into group of Amer
soldiers about 65 mi NW of Saigon, killing 3 and wounding 19; apparent failure
in firing system blamed for incident and previous one in which S Vietnamese
civilians were victims; 3 terrorist bombs explode in Saigon, 1 civilian killed,
5 injured; enemy shells 6 targets; US troops kill 22 enemy near Cambodian
border; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 2; (UPI)

LENGTH: 16 words

Mil sources in Laos say helicopter may have been S Vietnamese helicopter shot
down 2 yrs ago

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 140 words

Dem Natl Com issues statement scoring Nixon State of World Message as replete
with 'singularly empty phrases,' 'simplistic sermonizing' and 'pious
preachments'; challenges validity of Nixon concept and execution of policy;
holds message lacks substance and candor and fails to offer creative program of
action; does not mention Mideast or policy of disengagement abroad; statement
issued by W A Harriman after approval by ex-Vice Pres Humphrey and com chmn L F
O'Brien; holds Nixon Adm shows none of urgency demanded by rapid and deadly
developmen s in continuing arms race; calls decision to deploy MIRVs 'deeply
disturbing'; says it invites reciprocal escalation instead of mutual restraint
in arms race; asks Nixon policies on chem and biological weapons; commends
'initial steps taken toward improved relations with Communist China'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 22 words

S Vietnamese soldiers do not speak of the future, but of the past because they
are in army for duration of war; 2 soldiers int; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 101 words

Confs with Podgorny and Premier Kosygin; illus; Tass communique repts talks
included questions of improving relations, were held in 'atmosphere of frankness
and friendship'; Western diplomats doubt USSR will make any move that will be
considered critical of N Vietnam; Tass gives wide publicity to N Vietnam
statement scoring 'right-wing activity' in Cambodia; Soviet press makes no
mention of Norodom Sihanouk's criticism of Communists in his country, continues
barrage of articles attacking US role; N Vietnamese press agency repts Hanoi has
proposed meeting with Cambodia to settle their differences

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 29 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu says Pathet Lao peace proposal is designed to
bring Communist elements into Govt, is identical to Vietcong proposal to end
fighting in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 15, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 55 words

Defense Dept urges White House to reject Gates comm proposal to end draft by
July '71; holds all-volunteer force both desirable and feasibile but warns
sufficient manpower cannot be raised from volunteer sources as long as high
casualty rates continue in Vietnam; suggests program that would gradually phase
out draft by '72 or '73

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 87, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 20 words

Group of US veterans holds antiwar demonstration, Sacramento, Calif; some drop
their service medals into makeshift coffin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (RTR)

LENGTH: 102 words

Vietcong, N Vietnamese and Cambodian reprs agree to meet in Pnompenh to discuss
Cambodian protests over presence of Communist troops; decision announced after
expiration of Cambodia's deadline for withdrawal of all Vietnamese forces from
country; Cambodia pledges to protect Vietcong and N Vietnamese missions in
Pnompenh and consider compensation for damages caused in earlier attack by
rioters; Norodom Sihanouk, in Moscow, confs with Premier Kosygin and Pres
Podgorny on situation; Hanoi pub Nhan Dan blames US for 'complicated problems'
in N Vietnamese-Cambodian relations; hails proposal on meeting of reprs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 29 words

Sen Dodd plans probe by his juvenile delinquency subcom into possible link
between alleged massacre of civilians by US troops at Songmy, S Vietnam, and use
of drugs by troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4; (UPI)

LENGTH: 16 words

US arty fires at N Vietnamese troops in DMZ zone in 1st significant incident in
zone in 2 mos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 14 words

Cambodian officials rept clash between Cambodian and N Vietnamese troops, Nui O
area

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

US reconnaissance plane crashes and explodes while landing at Danang air base;
31 persons were aboard

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 6 words

Correction on Mar 15 rept on Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 16, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

Sen Symington suggests Philippine Govt misused funds provided by US to help
support Philippine mil detachment in S Vietnam, TV int; notes US turned over
$39-million to Govt starting in '66; his implications supported by Cong sources
familiar with testimony taken by his subcom in Oct '69; some testimony detailed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 68 words

Rappahannock crewmen, in Sattahip, Thailand, give version of incident; say 2 men
involved are 'hippies' and drug users; say Vietnam war does not appear to be
issue; Columbia Eagle crewmen are restricted from coming ashore in Vayama,
Thailand, pending completion of immigration formalities; Columbia SS repr helps
clear men through immigration; to make travel arrangements for men; ship illus
in San Francisco

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 46 words

Communist Chinese press repts that Premier Chou En-lai has informed Cambodian
Amb of his 'uneasiness and regret' over demonstrations against N Vietnam and
Vietcong missions; rept precedes by 1 day Norodom Sihanouk's scheduled visit to
enlist Govt help in resolving situation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 8 words

S Vietnam Natl Assembly approves land reform bill

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 48 words

US soldiers have killed 28 enemy in 2 days of fighting near Tayninh; 3 Amers
have been killed, 24 wounded; 81 enemy killed in scattered fighting elsewhere;
enemy downs 1 US helicopter near Cambodian border; 22 of 31 aboard killed as USN
reconnaissance craft crashes at Danang, S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8; (UPI)

LENGTH: 147 words

Cambodia Min Norodom Phourissara meets with Vietcong and N Vietnamese reprs;
site of talks kept secret; thousands of Cambodians roam sts during conf in
peaceful demonstration against presence of Communist troops; present petition at
assembly bldg demanding their immediate withdrawal; Vietcong and N Vietnamese
demand payment for damage to their embassies and reassurances that incidents
will not be repeated; Cambodian Army reptd to be in full sympathy with
demonstrators; Pnompenh press repts estimated 300 Vietcong were chased back into
Vietnam in brief fight in Soarieng Prov; Norodom Sihanouk gets pledge of Soviet
respect for Cambodian neutrality and territorial integrity; statement on Moscow
talks omits mention of crisis in Cambodia, says Norodom Sihanouk, Kosygin and
Podgorny agree that US and Saigon Govt aggravate situation in entire area;
Cambodian demonstrators illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 39 words

State Dept eases curbs on travel to Communist China; dept spokesman R J
McCloskey says Govt will permit Amers to travel to China 'for any legitimate
purpose' but will continue ban on travel to Cuba, N Korea and N Vietnam, news
conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 105 words

Lt L P Font, 23-yr-old West Point grad, asks to be discharged from Army as
selective conscientious objector because he feels that Vietnam war is immoral
and unjust; denies he is a pacifist; plans to make formal announcement at news
conf at ACLU hq in NYC; is being represented by ACLU gen counsel Karpatkin and M
N Polet; says earlier misgivings he had about war were crystallized by Songmy
incident in which several hundred Vietnamese civilians were allegedly massacred;
Font's written application for discharge is accompanied by lrs from Dr J
Swomley, pres of Meth Peace Fellowship and from other mins backing his position;
por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 17, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 215 words

Cambodian Govt to grant pol asylum to 2 crewmen; does not reach decision on US
request to free ship, cargo and crew; diplomatic efforts continue; Rives
proposals to Cambodia detailed; State Dept says Cambodian boarding party removed
2 from ship; Adm maintains tight secrecy over incident, refuses to identify 2,
refuses officially to link act with protest against Vietnam war; Defense Dept
sources say 2 are steward and mess attendant; unconfirmed repts say 2 others may
also be involved; 2 crewmen identified as C W McKay Jr and A L Glatkowski by Sen
Hatfield and Defense Dept sources; Hatfield says seizure is antiwar protest;
says 2 allegedly threatened to blow up ship or kill capt and 2 other officers
aboard if they did not sail to Cambodia; says USN at one point weighed using
force to recapture ship but abandoned plan to assure crew's safety; Govt sources
say Defense Dept did not inform White House and State Dept for nearly 24-hrs;
officials say there appeared to be considerable confusion and communications
breakdown; Friedheim gives official Defense Dept acct; says 5 US ships have been
sent to area for possible 'search and rescue' situation; R J McCloskey gives
State Dept acct; Defense and State Depts seen at odds over interpretation;
latter avoids use of word 'mutineers'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 61, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

60 anti-Vietnam war demonstrators protest outside Hercules corp hq, Wilmington,
Del, while annual meeting is conducted at another location; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 61, Column 7

LENGTH: 66 words

Bank of America annual meeting; pres Clausen rejects charges that bank is
'capitalist' orgn profiting from Vietnam war; notes recent burning of Isla Vista
branch, says he opposes punitive action against nearby Univ of Calif Santa
Barbara campus or repression of dissent; chmn Lundborg defends existence of
bank's Saigon branch; agrees to study proposal that branch profits be donated to
Red Cross

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 72, Column 5

LENGTH: 31 words

Internatl Boundary Comm, Amer-Canadian agency that maintains US-Canada border,
says it will not clear land this yr with chem defoliant used in Vietnam war
(Tordon 101, or picloram)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Some major cts-martial cases since '25 recalled in light of charges facing Maj
Gen Koster in connection with alleged massacre of civilians at Songmy, S
Vietnam, Mar '68

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 6

LENGTH: 11 words

Censored pages of Peers rept on Vietnam Songmy incident; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 42 words

N Vietnamese and Vietcong reprs at Pnompenh talks reptdly ignore Govt request to
withdraw their troops from Cambodia, concentrate on discussing compensation for
damages to their embassies; US State Dept says it has not offered mil aid to
Cambodian Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 61 words

Norodom Sihanouk vows recent demonstrations against N Vietnam and Vietcong will
not change Cambodia's pol orientation; ends Moscow visit with evening meeting
with L I Brezhnev; lauds USSR leaders but gives no indication on whether they
agreed to use their influence with N Vietnam and Vietcong to withraw; Brezhnev's
meeting with him viewed as special show of support

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              134 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 81 words

N Vietnam is slowly increasing flow of information from Amer POWs to their
families in US; has also begun to answer inquiries from Amer peace groups and
Swedish Govt; US officials say they have seen hopeful signs increase in
information will continue; point to recent rept saying 320 pilots have been
allowed to write to their families; Com of Liaison With Families of Servicemen
Detained in N Vietnam spokesman says 266 lrs from prisoners have been received
and sent to their families

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              135 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 359 words

US Army, following investigation by panel headed by Lt Gen W R Peers, accuses 14
officers, including US Mil Academy (West Point) supt Maj Gen S W Koster, who was
comdr of Americal Div in Vietnam at time, of involvement in suppression of
information about Songmy incident; Koster steps down from his post; Peers says
inquiry has established that 'tragedy of major proportions' occurred in Songmy,
news conf; Koster tells West Point cadets he requests assignment elsewhere to
spare them from publicity; Army's charges also filed against brig gen, 3 cols, 2
lt cols, 3 majors and 4 capts; charges include dereliction of duty, failure to
obey lawful regulations and false swearing; Koster charged with first 2; charges
against officers expected to lead to grand jury action; Pentagon says team of
Army lawyers went over testimony developed by Peers panel to help draw up
charges against officers; Peers makes available heavily censored version of
225-page rept prepared by panel; declines to discuss specifics of cases;
declines to characterize initial handling of case as 'cover-up'; says there is
testimony and evidence to indicate certain individuals kept information about
incident from being passed up chain of command; expresses hope that rept and
actions stemming from it will prevent occurrence of similar incident; says he
has recommended tightening of regulations dealing with war crimes and quick
reptg of atrocities; Pentagon sources say that as result of Peers inquiry mil hq
in Saigon has directed all subordinate commands to pass down all directives on
such things as treatment of prisoners and civilians without altering language;
Peers said to have found Army devotes enough training in US to impress soldiers
with need to handle suspected enemies humanely, but it is understood he believes
character of instruction should be changed; excerpts from Defense Dept
announcement of charges; officers accused and charges against them listed;
Medina and Willingham are among those charged; Sec Resor comments; civilian atty
R MacCrate says he concurs in findings of panel; some details on case; Resor,
Peers and Westmoreland at news conf illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              136 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 70 words

Koster resigns as US Mil Acad supt after being accused with 13 other officers of
involvement in suppression of information about alleged mass slaying of
Vietnamese civilians at Songmy, Mar '68 s before cadets, West Point; afterwards,
declines further comment on case; resignation said not to take mil academy by
complete surprise; cadets said to feel sorrow and bitterness towards news media;
Koster por; cadets illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              137 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

Cambodian troops reptdly called on S Vietnam arty fire, on 2 successive days, to
help drive Vietcong bn back across border; incidents detailed; Amer mil
officials surprised by joint action; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              138 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 18, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 96 words

Swann says McKay and Glatkowski warned that incident is 1st of such mutinies
designed to impede war effort in Vietnam, radio message from ship; US Govt
begins urgent study designed to protect civilian ships transporting mil cargo to
war zones; Defense Dept confirms rept that USN ordered warships to recapture
freighter by force but rescinded order 30 min later following consultation with
White House, Defense and State Depts; move linked to pol situation in Cambodia;
US officials fear pol situation will lead to long delay by Cambodia on whether
to release ship and cargo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              139 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 32 words

S Vietnam Govt denies its arty helped Cambodian troops trying to drive Vietcong
forces back into S Vietnam; 2 clashes reptd in Mekong Delta and in central
highlands; 59 enemy killed in delta

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              140 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 2

LENGTH: 33 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu hopeful of resuming relations with Cambodia in
wake of coup; backs mil cooperation along their borders; announces coup at
Saigon reception for visiting Asian newsmen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              141 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 47 words

Wives of 2 US airmen missing over N Vietnam stage brief sitdown strike in bldg
of Hanoi's Paris diplomatic mission in unsuccessful effort to learn fate of
their husbands; went to mission because N Vietnamese had said they had lr for
women; lr contained no news of their husbands

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              142 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 51 words

M B Abram announces candidacy for Dem US Sen nomination; says he qualifies as
Dem under obscure provision of NYS election law but will request Dem state com
permission to run anyway; scores Nixon Adm policies on inflation, Vietnam; T K
Finletter, Mrs M Field, C R Vance, C Carter among those at news conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              143 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3; (AP)

LENGTH: 74 words

Evacuation of civilians and soldiers from key army hq at Long Tieng, Laos begins
after fall of Sam Thong; Long Tieng is last stronghold that can send
reinforcements to Vang Pao's forces; Pathet Lao envoy bringing peace message to
Souvanna Phouma is now in Hanoi; expected in Laos soon; US State Dept confirms
fall of Sam Thong to Communists; US jet crashes in Thailand after being hit by
ground fire over Laos; illus of evacuation at Sam Thong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              144 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 186 words

Highly placed sources say Pentagon investigation into alleged massacre indicates
apparent failure of 2 separate Army command channels to provide any word of
incident; charges against 14 officers are based on allegations that key officers
in Americal Div, whose units participated in Songmy operation, failed to rept
killings to higher hq; are also based on allegations that other Amer officers,
advisers to S Vietnamese and in no way connected with div, failed to notify
superiors of Vietnamese rept about same event; latter rept, made more than 3 wks
after Amer troops swept Mylai 4 hamlet, said nearly 500 civilians had been
herded into groups and shot; Americal Div officers and Amer advisers reptd to 2
entirely different chains of command; Peers inquiry has also turned up
assertions of previously unknown atrocity, involving only S Vietnamese, that
took place in Songmy area on day of alleged atrocity by Amers but was not reptd
as required by Army regulations; details on charges and Peers rept; heavy
censorship of Peers rept noted; members of Peers bd listed; Maj Gen Knowlton
named supt of West Point; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              145 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 82 words

M Frankel comment on coup repts US surprised but not yet prepared to write
Norodom Sihanouk off as force in Cambodian pol; some Washington officials fear
coup may provoke new encroachments by N Vietnamese forces, others hope new
leadership may conduct more sustained effort against Communist forces operating
in border areas; some tentative, often conflicting, theories on coup discussed;
Brit sources warn against hasty judgments about nature of coup; stress
complexities of Cambodian pol

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              146 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 19, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 106 words

Pnompenh radio announces Chief of State, Prince Norodom Sihanouk has been
overthrown; power apparently seized by Premier Lon Nol and Deputy Premier
Sisowath Sirik Matak, cousin of Norodom Sihanouk; Cambodia cut off from world
except for broadcasts; closes its 2 commercial airports; Natl Assembly Pres
Cheng Heng designated as interim Chief of State pending elections; he accepts,
radio s; Govt accuses Vietnamese Communists of spreading false rumors, bribing
officials and trying to set Cambodians against each other; relieves Pnompenh
police chief of his functions but gives no reasons; Kosygin and Norodom Sihanouk
illus in Moscow

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              147 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 6

LENGTH: 64 words

Tons of mail reach NYC despite blockade, causing chaotic situation; nearly all
communication services rept 30% to 300% increase in business; Fleet Messenger
Service and Western Union have busy day; families of US servicemen, in terms of
human emotions, said to probably be most disturbed by US mail strike; officials
of striking unions say they are willing to handle lrs from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              148 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 54 words

182 arrested for blocking entrances to NYC draft bds hq as part of antidraft
demonstrations promoted by New Mobilization Com to End the War in Vietnam;
illus; 2,000 demonstrators from Cornell and Syracuse Univs and Harpur Coll block
busload of inductees from entering Armed Forces Examining and Entrance Station,
Syracuse

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              149 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 6

LENGTH: 12 words

Cambodian demonstrator pulling flag from atop embassy March 11 illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              150 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 123 words

US State Dept spokesman C Bartch says US recognition of Cambodia is unaffected
by coup; statement follows secret high-level White House conf reptdly called to
assess opportunities and risks presented by current events; Sec Laird says he
believes that whichever govt finally results from present turmoil will be
tougher on N Vietnamese influence in Cambodia; repts communications between
Washington and Amer Embassy in Pnompenh have been restored, that all Amers
appear to be safe after recent demonstrations; Washington officials now
optimistic on situation; note new regime appears to be taking firm hold and that
pub criticism of Norodom Sihanouk will block his efforts to return to power;
doubt he will be able to set up govt-in-exile

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              151 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 83 words

France says Laos and Cambodia must be neutral, calls upon 'all interested
parties' to help prevent spread of Vietnam war; Min Schumann repts he has recd
assurances from Cambodian embassy, which has re-established contact with
Pnompenh, that no change has been made in Const, that nation continues to be
monarchy and that there will be no change in its policy of independence,
neutrality and territorial integrity; Vietnamese reprs at Paris peace talks
accuse US of seeking to spread Vietnam war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              152 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 118 words

Defense Sec Laird says he would urge Pres Nixon to continue heavy Amer bombing
of infiltration routes in eastern Laos even if Communist regime takes over
nation and demands an end to such activity; says total level of US air strikes
outside S Vietnam has declined since Nov '68 bombing halt, and B-52 raids have
been declining; says he and Nixon have 'religiously' steered clear of Army
investigation and charges against soldiers accused of involvement in or
supression of information about alleged massacre; dsyd USSR is believed to be
deploying more ABMs around Moscow and is continuing ICBM buildup; says it will
be impossible to eliminate draft by July '71 as recommended in Gates comm rept,
news conf

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              153 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1

LENGTH: 45 words

9 Amers killed after their armored personnel carrier hits mine near Danang;
terrorist bombs damage Saigon bldg; other action reptd; allied and enemy
casualties for last wk and war listed; US helicopter crashes near Chulai; 2
persons killed, Maj Gen L B Ramsey injured

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              154 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 5

LENGTH: 38 words

Philippine mil officials rebut Symington charges, Sen com; say Amer aid for
contingent sent to Vietnam consisted only of $95-million worth of mil equipment,
ammunition and petroleum products, not for 2,300-man construction force

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              155 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 20, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 223 words

Cambodia; Lon Nol and Sisowath Sirik Matak assure foreign govts that Norodom
Sihanouk's ouster means no change in policy of 'independence, sovereignty,
peace, strict neutrality and territorial integrity'; diplomatic missions in
Pnompenh resume communications with outside world from which they had been cut
off; describe city as quiet and without any armed clashes or violent incidents;
Pnompenh rebroadcasts of closed Parliament session that ousted Norodom Sihanouk
reveal many deputies charged him with domestic abuses, nepotism, tolerance of
corruption and repeated insinuations, often heard in Cambodia, that his wife,
Princess Monique, was linked through members of her family to widespread
smuggling operations; details mechanics of ouster; Natl Assembly grants 'full
power' to Lon Nol, declares natl emergency; Govt announces suspension of certain
Articles in Const because of 'dangerous situation'; 2 sr officers reptdly have
been dismissed by Natl Assembly, another has resigned; swiftness and smoothness
of coup described; Eng-language transcripts of Cambodian broadcasts disclose
Cambodian Army chased 700 Vietcong soldiers from Cambodia on Jan 24 in 1st
battle involving both sides; reveal depth of feeling in Natl Assembly against
Vietnamese Communists; illus of Cambodian demonstrators attacking Vietcong
Embassy on Mar 11

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              156 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

4 US ex-servicemen charge there is widespread use of narcotics by servicemen in
Vietnam, Korea and in mil hosps and bases in US, news conf, NYC, attended by
their parents and Haven Clinic dir Dr Baird; describe their experiences; Baird's
campaign for Cong probe into use of narcotics in armed forces and his call for
revision of mil law to give med discharge, not dishonorable discharge, to
addicts noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              157 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 2

LENGTH: 115 words

Fed officials to determine if Chevron Oil has poured excessive amount of chems
into Gulf of Mex while capping wells; observers say co is using about 10 bbls
daily of chems that Interior Dept has not evaluated for damage to sea organisms;
co spokesman denies charge; Pollution Control Adm repr Biglane says chems being
used are known to be toxic and Interior Dept is reluctant to allow their use,
telephone int; says similar chems, used in '67 Torrey Canyon incident, proved
more harmful than oil; Geological Survey says co has been given permission to
use chems for safety; chems mfrd by Enjay Chem Co and Paul Adair Will Well
Fighters; Gulf Oil well damaged by barge is reptd under control

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              158 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 29, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 30 words

Leaders of Washington draft protest say it was 'thundering success' and shows
that antiwar movement has numbers and power; details on demonstrations in some
cities; arrests in Phila

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              159 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 2

LENGTH: 34 words

Nixon awards Pres Unit Citation to 41st Tactical Wing of Vietnamese Air Force;
proclaims Apr cancer control mo; Baker confirmed as Transportation Asst Sec;
Tarr approved by Sen for Selective Service head

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              160 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 3

LENGTH: 40 words

Article on 7 women who are being held as Vietcong suspects at 1 of 44 dentention
centers in S Vietnam as part of Operation Phoenix; women are waiting for local
security council to decide if they are guilty; some details on operation; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              161 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6; (RTR)

LENGTH: 14 words

N Vietnamese troops kill 10 Amers, wound 11 during attack on US arty base near
Hue

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              162 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6; (AP)

LENGTH: 45 words

S Vietnamese Govt denies S Vietnamese arty has aided Cambodian troops; US and S
Vietnamese officials in Chaudoc confirm incidents; Nguyen Cao Ky also confirms
repts, says actions are unofficial; Pentagon officials say there has been no
change in Amer policy in Cambodia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              163 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 160 words

Cambodian Army comdr calls in Amer spotter plane and S Vietnamese arty during
2-hr battle against Vietcong troops inside Cambodia; clash erupts during sweep
of Vietcong sanctuary by Cambodian force, 10 mi N of Anphu; S Vietnamese dist
chiefs along border in Chaudoc prov have been ordered, in recent days, to give
all possible assistance short of troops to Cambodian units operating across
border; US mil advisers stationed in border dists have been instructed to try to
establish communications with Cambodian comdrs on opposite side; S Vietnam mil
comdrs authorized to provide forward arty spotters for Cambodians if requested;
S Vietnam Govt denies S Vietnam arty supported Cambodian troops earlier in wk,
US and S Vietnamese officials in Chaudoc confirm it; Pentagon officials say
there is no change in US policy on Amer mil action in Cambodia which allows Amer
troops to respond to protect themselves if they are fired on from Cambodian
territory; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              164 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 82 words

Cambodian Govt-approved newspapers and radio broadcasts denounce Norodom
Sihanouk on varied charges; Pnompenh residents show few signs of nervousness and
appear unconcerned; some observers speculate on remote possibility that Norodom
Sihanouk and his followers are acting out an elaborate ploy to lessen presence
and influence of N Vietnamese and Vietcong in Cambodia; communications blackout
lifted; airports remain closed; thousands of tourists stranded; illus of armored
car guarding st

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              165 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 21, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2; (AP)

LENGTH: 90 words

2 Thai bns reptdly have been flown to Long Tieng to help defend base; N
Vietnamese have advanced to within 1 mi of it; Laotian Govt determination to
stiffen resistance reptdly linked to anti-Communist demonstrations and coup
d'etat in Cambodia; Pathet Lao repr Col Pradith Thiengtham arrives from Hanoi
with peace message; Laos and Thailand deny there are Thai troops in Laos; White
House spokesman and other Washington officials confirm that there are; US
fighter-bomber crashes, Lower Panhandle; cause unknown; pilot and co-pilot
rescued

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              166 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 3

LENGTH: 6 words

Lr on plight of Amer POWs in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              167 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 4

LENGTH: 4 words

Lr on Tran Ngoc Chau case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              168 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 25, Column 1

LENGTH: 90 words

Defense Dept repts sharp rise in number of servicemen seeking discharge or
noncombat status as conscientious objectors; repts 943 Army personnel sought
discharges in '69, more than 3 times the number for '68; repts there were only 5
applications in '62 and 101 in '65 when Vietnam buildup began; repts 924
soldiers sought noncombat status in '69; repts similar increases in other
services; discusses procedures for processing applicants; repts Army approved
21% of applications for discharge and 64% of requests for noncombat status, '69

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              169 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 28 words

Marijuana in S Vietnam is burned and uprooted in Amer effort to destroy it so
Amer soldiers cannot smoke it; US aide W C McCammon comments; details on
marijuana problem

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              170 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 38 words

Lt Gen Mildren named deputy comdg gen of Continental Army Command, succeeding Lt
Gen Rich who is retiring; Lt Gen W J McCaffrey named deputy commanding gen or
Army in S Vietnam; replaces Lt Gen F T Midlren, who will return to US

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              171 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1; (RTR)

LENGTH: 18 words

Saigon students decide to stage protests unless Govt releases student leader
accused of being Vietcong agent

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              172 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnamese police rept they have smashed Communist spy cell in Saigon and have
seized 14 members; still seek 2 Chinese-trained spies; Lt Col Nguyen Mau
comments

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              173 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 21 words

26 marines wounded after arty round detonates prematurely during operation near
Danang; enemy shells 4 targets during night

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              174 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 250 words

Cheng Heng sworn in as Cambodian Chief of State, ceremony; reaffirms Cambodian
neutrality and pledges to drive out Communists using Cambodia as sanctuary; Natl
Assembly votes to arrest Norodom Sihanouk and press charges of treason against
him if he attempts to return to Cambodia; newspapers and radio broadcasts in
Pnompenh continue to be filled with lurid tales of his personal life and attacks
on his leadership; Govt bans all pictures of him from pub view;
Cambodian-language newspaper front-page display deriding him described; new Govt
informs all diplomatic missions in Cambodia that it will respect all treaties
and agreements signed with other nations but that Norodom Sihanouk cannot
represent nation; some circles question legality of his ouster; Cambodian troop
reinforcements reptdly are taking up positions near Vietcong and N Vietnamese
base areas along border; Vietcong troops reptdly have seized hundreds of
Cambodians at Svayriend and are holding them as hostages; Lon Nol appeals to GB
and USSR to enforce '54 Geneva accords that guaranteed Cambodian neutrality;
says his Govt will begin direct negotiations with Communists on withdrawal of
their troops; in radio statement, says Cambodians reject idea of having foreign
troops occupy their country and serve as masters under 'pretext of solidarity';
Norodom Sihanouk appeals to his country's 'people and youth' to prepare to
resist new regime; says he will give up his duties as head of state after
overthrow of present regime; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              175 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 136 words

Pres Nixon hints strongly that US will not accede now to Israeli request for
more jets, says decision can be easily reversed if USSR arms shipments to Arabs
upset balance of power, impromptu news conf; refuses to disclose details of
decision; concedes arrival of SAM-3 missiles in UAR with USSR troops to operate
them could change balance, but says news of arrival reached him after he made
decision on Israeli request and did not persuade him to alter decision; says US
seeks cut in 'flow of arms', balance of mil power and pol settlement; suggests
Israeli request for econ aid might be granted; Israeli officials withhold
comment on remarks; Nixon asserts Communist activity in Laos will not interrupt
present round of US troop withdrawals from Vietnam, and in all probability will
have no impact on next round

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              176 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 22, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 88, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

Maj Gen A L Milloy named to take over command of Americal Div in Vietnam from
Maj Gen L B Ramsey, who recently broke his arm in helicopter crash

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              177 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 40, Column 1

LENGTH: 43 words

Ed backing validity of some claims of selective conscientious objection cites
Judge Wyzanski observations in case of J H Sisson Jr; on request by Lt L T Font
that he be discharged from armed forces as conscientious objector because
Vietnam war is immoral

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              178 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 4

LENGTH: 46 words

L H Zisman, after sending 5 lrs to Pres Nixon critical of Adm's Vietnam policy
and getting no reply, sends 1 favorable to policy and gets reply; charges Adm
responds only to those who agree with it; Ziegler says Adm policy is to reply to
all lrs to Nixon, favorable or not

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              179 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 150 words

New Cambodian Govt leaders call on GB and USSR, as Geneva conf co-chmn, to
return to Cambodia the Control Comm which Norodom Sihanouk suspended in '69; ask
comm help in halting occupation of Cambodia; rept talks with N Vietnamese will
be resumed immediately; presence of Cambodian policeman at Vietcong Embassy
apparently assessing damages noted; campaign against Norodom Sihanouk and his
wife continues; Govt orders all pictures of Queen Kossamak removed from pub
view; Queen reptdly remains in royal palace in Pnompenh; armed guards seen in
front of homes of several Govt officials following death of army col reptdly
loyal to Lon Nol; Norodom Sihanouk denies repts that he is 1 of world's richest
men; says he will spend time of his exile alternately between Peking and Moscow;
says those Govts have agreed to take care of his material needs; N Vietnam
accuses US of masterminding his overthrow

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              180 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 55 words

R S Shriver int on his tenure as Amb to France; diplomats agree it has had good
effect on ties; leaving as US Amb to France, to return to Md to study pol
picture before deciding on gubernatorial bid; recalls former Pres Johnson's
decision in March '68 to limit bombing of N Vietnam; notes former Pres de
Gaulle's disapproval of war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              181 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 3

LENGTH: 65 words

US Embassy acknowledges that some of its officers met with alleged N Vietnamese
spy Bui Van Sac, but says meetings were part of routine monitoring of pol
opinion in S Vietnam; sources close to embassy indicate that officials are
annoyed by what they regard as attempt by some S Vietnamese authorities to
suggest that Amers were dealing with N Vietnamese behind back of Saigon's
leadership

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              182 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 90 words

US officers in Saigon view increased fighting between Cambodia and enemy as 1 of
most potentially significant aspects of Cambodian pol situation; agreements
between Cambodians and enemy in border sanctuaries have broken down; S
Vietnamese have been pressing to capitalize on situation; have taken initiative
along border to establish contacts with Cambodians and propose mutual exch of
intelligence; results have been meager, but S Vietnamese said to be delighted
with tentative communication; opinions of Amer officials on situation noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              183 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 63 words

Bomb explodes at Buddhist meeting NW of Saigon, killing 14 women and children
and wounding 20 others; S Vietnamese spokesman says bomb was hurled by woman and
that act apparently was instigated by Vietcong; 1 Amer and 1 S Vietnamese
wounded by grenade thrown into shop near Tansonnhut airport; 5 persons killed,
24 wounded in 2 enemy shellings; 57 enemy killed in various actions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              184 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 23, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 76 words

Cambodian traders continue to cross border to mkt in Tayninh Prov; despite
widespread rumors that waves of Vietnamese residents in Cambodia are streaming
across border for protection, traders said to still outnumber refugees; mil
officials say border situation is quiet; open free mkt in Cambodia, on Vietnam
border, described; goods destined for US mil forces in Vietnam sold, as well as
others originally Communist Chinese or N Vietnamese; map; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              185 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 45 words

Special session of S Vietnamese Sen concludes that Tran Ngoc Chau should have
been tried by civilian ct instead of mil tribunal; finding is termed
'observation' and has no force of law; S Vietnamese Sup Ct to consider 2 legal
challenges to Tran Ngoc Chau's conviction

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              186 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 26 words

Group fasting for peace in front of White House; set Good Fri march; sponsored
by Clergy and Laymen Concerned About Vietnam and Fellowship of Reconciliation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              187 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 56 words

Laos Premier Souvanna Phouma reiterates his readiness to consider Pathet Lao
peace proposal, s marking 20th anniv of Royal Laotian Army; scores N Vietnam;
lauds US and GB for supporting his appeal for new conf of Geneva signatories,
deplores failure of other powers to back him; 2 more US planes downed over Laos;
Souvanna Phouma illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              188 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 35 words

Gen ct-martial of Lt J B Duffy, charged with premeditated murder of Vietnamese
civilian, opens, Longbinh; Duffy pleads not guilty; his lawyer H B Rothblatt
says he was doing his duty as he saw it; Duffy illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              189 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 120 words

Norodom Sihanouk announces he will form 'natl union govt' and 'natl liberation
army' to free Cambodia from dictatorship of reactionaries and for 'struggle
against Amer imperialists, their masters', statement issued in Peking; Cambodian
Embassy in Peking repts Norodom Sihanouk has talked with N Vietnam Premier Pham
Van Dong who is currently visiting in China; repts it has decided to support new
Govt in Pnompenh; says Cambodian amb in Moscow has resigned after proclaiming
his loyalty to Norodom Sihanouk; Hanoi radio announces N Vietnam support for
deposed ruler; S Vietnamese Vice Pres Nguyen Cao Ky sends wire of support to new
regime; Vietcong delegation to Paris peace talks pledges support for Norodom
Sihanouk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              190 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 115 words

Sec Rogers repts Pres Nixon has sent another lr to Prem Kosygin asking USSR to
exercise its responsibilities under '62 Geneva accords and call conf of
signatories, news conf; lr reptdly was 'tough' in tone, pointed out that
Kosygin's rejection of original appeal ignored presence of an estimated 67,000 N
Vietnamese soldiers in Laos; Rogers says US will not stop bombing in Laos unless
N Vietnamese withdraw; says US withdrawal of its troops from S Vietnam will not
be affected by fighting in Laos; Sec Rogers doubts new Cambodian Govt will
request mil aid from US, news conf; says US had nothing to do with coup; holds
current situation will not affect US troops withdrawal from S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              191 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 24, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 111 words

Lon Nol says his Govt, Cambodia, is determined to recover nation's 'active
neutrality' through removal of N Vietnamese and Vietcong troops, int; discloses
that Vietcong delegation, in talks with Govt leaders, admitted presence of
Vietcong troops in Cambodia; stresses legality of Norodom Sihanouk's ouster;
denies charges of CIA involvement; says his Govt has decided to inform UN of
current situation and Cambodia's wish to settle issue of Vietnamese forces
through negotiations; repts plans to recruit 10,000 more men for army; is
optimistic on improving domestic conditions; illus with Cheng Heng and Sisowath
Sirik Matak at Cheng Heng installation ceremony

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              192 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 6

LENGTH: 38 words

US mil command spokesman says mail delivery to US soldiers is about normal,
except for marines based in Danang; Army and Air Force men get mail through Army
POs in San Francisco and Seattle, apparently not much affected by strike

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              193 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 94 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu will sign bill at special ceremony in Cantho;
bill will prohibit virtually anyone from owning land he or his family is not
tilling and distribute more than 2-million acres free to 1-million rural
families who have been tilling land for absentee landlords; high-ranking US
pacification official charges some of local officials who will adm program are
corrupt or inefficient; his recommendation that US Embassy take immediate and
firm stand against pol apptmts that could jeopardize program's success has
spurred debate within embassy

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              194 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 271 words

C West, former Army squad leader, says 5 of 12 members of his squad were smoking
marijuana as late as 11 o'clock night before unit was involved in alleged
massacre, Sen juvenile deliquency subcom; says about 60% of men he knew in Co C
smoked marijuana; says he did not see anyone smoking marijuana during Songmy
operation; Dr J H Kaplan, testifying on effects of marijuana, says marijuana
could have contributed to alleged killings if it could be shown that Amers were
'chronic potheads'; Kaplan, who was comdr of Army neuropsychiatric team at
Nhatrang in '68 and '68, says 3,000 soldiers, or 70% of those his unit saw in
its outpatient clinic, had used drugs 'heavily day in and day out'; estimates
between 50% and 80% of all Army personnel in Vietnam use marijuana at least
once; says before g3ing to Vietnam, he did not consider marijuana a dangerous
drug; Dr L Lasagna discusses effects of marijuana, telephone int; says effects
of smoking marijuana which is available in US last from a few mins to a few hrs,
but that it is not clear how long-lasting would be effects of a stronger drug
than that obtained in US; Sen Dodd says marijuana in Vietnam is more potent than
that in US; Army has mailed West restraining order directing him not to discuss
Songmy; West says his lawyer told him he could testify; Sen Cook interrupts
hearing to make sure West received restraining order; Dodd questions West about
whether marijuana might have played a role in massacre; West says some men on
mission were 'chronic users' of marijuana; says, as far as he knew, none of the
officers in co smoked marijuana; his other testimony noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              195 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 3

LENGTH: 47 words

Ninhquoi, village in Mekong Delta, has 1 television set, gift of S Vietnamese
Govt; set receives 1 channel, audience is mostly children; impact of television
on lives of villagers noted; Information Min estimates there are 2,330
community-owned televisions in all of country; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              196 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 66 words

Newsday columnist F Lewis repts serious differences exist between Amb Bunker and
State Dept over handling of Chau case; says dept ordered Bunker not to make
planned pub statement that no Amer amb had ever been involved in Tran Ngoc
Chau's meeting with his bro because it conflicted with recent testimony given at
Sen com hearing by J Vann; says Bunker and dept knew proposed statement was
untrue

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              197 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 25, 1970, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 149 words

US officials say Nixon Adm hopes to cut level of Amer forces by more than 1/2
during next 15 mos; say reduction will coincide with plans to turn over full
responsibility for ground combat to S Vietnam; say optimistic planning has been
written into defense budget for fiscal yr starting July 1; budget assumes total
Amer force of 225,000 men in S Vietnam by mid-'71, drop of 229,000 from current
strength of 454,000; defense planners estimate cost of war as $28.8-billion for
12 mos that ended June 30, '69; figure is expected to drop to $23.2-billion for
fiscal yr ending June 30; after planned pullout, remaining force would be
composed largely of air, arty and supply units, with only enough combat troops
to provide protection for their bases; US officials stress budgetary assumptions
are keyed to continuation of low level of enemy combat; other details on budget
and troops withdrawal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              198 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 46, Column 2

LENGTH: 47 words

Ed holds developments pose imminent danger of wider war but do offer opportuity
for fresh diplomatic initiatives; urges high-level Geneva-style meeting to
consider broad settlement for all of Indochina; says pol events in Cambodia and
Laos are inescapably linked to war in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              199 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 95 words

Cambodian Prince Sisowath Sirik Matak repts N Vietnam and Vietcong are recalling
all their diplomats; deplores closing of embassies because it will disrupt
peaceful negotions; says Govt will continue peaceful efforts, turn to UN for
help if necessary; ambs of other Communist nations reptdly are meeting at Polish
Embassy to consider current situation and future moves; Cambodia closes down
port of Sihanoukville to ships bearing munitions for Vietnamese Communists;
Communist China links coup to US plot to 'expand its aggression'; Cambodian
mission to UN backs new Govt

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              200 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 15, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

Mil ct-martial acquits Pvt R C Armstrong of charges of having murdered S
Vietnamese boy near Pleiku

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              201 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 131 words

Glatkowski and McKay give details of seizure of ship Colombia Eagle, int at
detention qrs, Pnompenh; say action is SDS plot against war in Vietnam, although
they are not SDS members; deny being hippies or drug takers; say they are aware
they are guilty of mutiny, piracy and threatened murder but see them less
serious than delivering napalm bombs; say they are still under detention but
have received friendly welcome; US Cpl L Humphrey, in same room with 2, says he
crossed border from Thailand to be with 'partners'; says he neither defected nor
asked for asylum; says he too opposes war; US officials say they are aware
Humphrey is in Cambodia and have begun inquiry; say Swann is being held
incommunicado by Cambodian authorities; say Rives again asked for release of
ship; por

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              202 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 159 words

3 more Vietnam war veterans (Cpl K Schiel and Sp 4s W F Doherty and R W T'
Souvas) charged with murder in connection with Songmy incident; to undergo
pre-trial investigations; Defense Dept says marijuana use by US troops in
Vietnam is a 'very serious' problem but that there is no evidence that any
soldier involved in alleged Songmy massacre was under the influence of drugs,
news conf; Asst Sec Henkin and Vice Adm Mack comment; Vice Adm W P Mack, at
Pentagon briefing on drugs, says investigations of marijuana use increased from
522 to 19,000 from '65 to '69, most of them in Vietnam ex-Army psychiatrist, Dr
J W Teague, tells Sen subcom that in survey of enlisted men leaving Vietnam, 32%
said they used marijuana there; Dr A LaVerne testifies 'marijuana could have
been a factor' at Songmy, that in ints with 120 soldiers all reptd 'profound
effects' from marijuana smoking; R L Ridenhour testifies on widespread marijuana
use by Amers in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              203 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 18 words

White House says no decision has been made by Nixon Adm on next reduction of US
combat forces from Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              204 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 26, 1970, Thursday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 68 words

Saigon sources say S Vietnamese Air Force planes have struck inside Cambodia at
least twice in last wk in support of Cambodian Army operations against Vietcong;
strikes requested by Cambodian area comdrs in meeting with Anphu dist chief Lt
Col Truong Dinh Chat; sources say S Vietnamese arty has provided close combat
support for Cambodian units at least 4 times since March 16; details on mil
situation; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              205 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 32, Column 3

LENGTH: 27 words

C L Sulzberger discusses importance of Cambodian sanctuaries to N Vietnamese and
Vietcong for conducting war in Vietnam and threat to them from current upheaval

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              206 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 24 words

Vietnam Moratorium Com announces plans for taxpayer rallies in 33 cities April
15 to protest war spending, calls for peace fast April 13 to 15

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              207 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 1

LENGTH: 50 words

Vermont gubernatorial contest between Gov Davis, conservative, and Lt Gov Hayes,
liberal, revd; seen result of Repub party's increasing conservatism in state;
Hayes may run as Repub, Dem or ind; has participated in Vietnam anti-war
demonstration, clashed with Davis on this and other issues; pors

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              208 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 12 words

Reprs Riegle and McCloskey ask HR to cut off Vietnam war appropriations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              209 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1

LENGTH: 34 words

Former Philippines Defense Sec Mata says Philippines has received regular checks
from US made out to Philippine Defense Dept since '65, but says money was not
connected with Philippine unit in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              210 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (RTR)

LENGTH: 24 words

Duffy tells ct-martial that he permitted Sgt J R Lanasa to shoot unarmed
Vietnamese prisoner; pleads not guilty to premeditated murder charge

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              211 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 83 words

Cambodian Govt appeals for calm, communique; withholds news on withdrawal of N
Vietnamese and Vietcong embassy staffs; Penn Nouth, adviser to Norodom Sihanouk,
repts latter will soon go to Moscow and perhaps to Hanoi; says ambs in Moscow
and Cairo support him; Cambodia repts group of youths, encouraged by Vietcong,
rioted in Kompong Cham and sacked Govt offices; says all were arrested; GB makes
formal request to USSR to back new Govt's request to recall control comm to help
oust foreign troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              212 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 39 words

Sen Muskie charges Nixon Adm is 'shortchanging' negotiated settlement of Vietnam
war, s; announces he will speak out once a wk until Adm names new high level amb
to talks and takes 'some meaningful steps' toward negotiated settlement

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              213 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1

LENGTH: 38 words

Vietcong delegation at Paris peace talks charges US with responsibility for
overthrow of Cambodian Govt; N Vietnam, at 60th session of Paris talks, rejects
S Vietnamese offer to repatriate 343 sick and wounded N Vietnamese POWs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              214 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 1

LENGTH: 52 words

Nixon Adm officials acknowledge that despite instructions from Under Sec
Richardson, Bunker delayed in pressing for dismissal of charges against Tran
Ngoc Chau; concede Bunker took up case with Nguyen Van Thieu after criminal
proceedings had already begun; State Dept refuses to comment on any aspect of
case

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              215 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 1; (UPI)

LENGTH: 38 words

S Vietnam Pres Nguyen Van Thieu signs land reform bill; Amb Bunker and other US
officials attend ceremony; program is expected to cost $470-million over next 11
yrs, with US providing at least $10-million; Nguyen Van Thieu illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              216 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 49 words

US planes attack N Vietnamese gun positions in Cambodia after they fire on S
Vietnamese troops operating on frontier SW of Saigon; S Vietnamese Govt says 152
enemy and 30 S Vietnamese killed in 6-day operation; 3 Amers killed, 4 wounded
in accident near Cambodian border; other action reptd; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              217 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 27, 1970, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 242 words

Peers rept concludes each successive level of command received more watered-down
account of what actually occurred in Songmy; higher rept went, lower its
estimate of civilians allegedly killed by Amers; rept concludes Amers committed
individual and group acts of murder, rape, sodomy, maiming and assault that took
lives of large number of civilians; rept calls victims noncombatants and labels
event 'massacre'; says Amers familiar with event estimate number killed at from
175-200; also mentions unverified estimates that up to 400 Vietnamese were
killed; Amer Div hq, where account of incident stopped, received information
that 20-28 civilians were killed; Peers rept says massacre took place after Amer
officer introduced 'revenge element' in preparations for operation; says
Vietnamese as well as Amers who saw events reptd them to Amer mil channels; says
Amers mistreated Vietnamese in their custody; says Lt Col F A Barker Jr, task
force comdr, told his subordinates in briefing that most civilians would be away
to mkt on morning of day of sweep into Songmy, and that only Vietcong and
Vietcong sympathizers would be left in Songmy; Barker was killed in helicopter
crash in subsequent operation; Pentagon refuses to discuss way in which
information about Songmy has been suppressed; says publication of Peers rept
might prejudice rights of those who might be brought to trial; details on
excerpts from rept; See also Vietnam Atrocity Charges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              218 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 34, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Lent observances, NYC: NY Cath Peace Fellowship holds anti-war (Vietnam)
demonstration opposite St Patrick's Cathedral; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              219 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 35, Column 4

LENGTH: 42 words

About 125 people, conducting Good Friday service in sts, Washington, DC,
organized by Clergy and Layman Concerned About Vietnam and Fellowship of
Reconciliation, demonstrate in front of Interior Dept to protest against Govt's
environmental programs

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              220 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 24 words

K Daley, who served with Special Forces in S Vietnam, arrested on various
charges for allegedly throwing bomb devices at Bronx Jewish center

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              221 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 67 words

Reprs Kyros and Blanton, concluding 3-day investigation in S Vietnam on use of
drugs by US soldiers, rept soldiers smoked drug during combat in 'very isolated
instances'; say if soldiers smoked marijuana before they came to Vietnam, they
probably continued smoking it after they came; cite probability of converse;
conclude there is really no evidence soldiers took narcotics before going into
battle

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              222 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 5; (AP)

LENGTH: 12 words

N Vietnamese diplomats, who were in Cambodia, leave Laos for N Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              223 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 78 words

Washington sources say US blocked visit to US by Tran Ngoc Chau after embassy in
Saigon advised US trip would displease Nguyen Van Thieu; Vann testimony, which
has been returned to Sen com pending decision on its release, noted; visa for
Tran Ngoc Chan reptdly was refused on Bunker's recommendation; Sen Fulbright
reptdly suggested to Richardson that Adm intervene; State Dept silent on case;
White House press sec says Nixon is not displeased with Bunker's conduct

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              224 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 186 words

4 US officers, testifying at Duffy ct-martial, say US Army policy, as they
understand it, is not to take prisoners in combat operations; Rothblatt's
contention that Army's stress on 'body count philosophy' as measure of mil
success is underlying reason for killing of Vietnamese civilians noted; 4
officers say their instructions were to take no prisoners during combat; Duffy's
defense regards testimony about body count and no prisoner policy as evidence
that Duffy was performing his duty in having Lanasa kill prisoner; hearings are
being held to determine if Lanasa will be tried for murder; Sp 4 D G Walstad
testifies on killing of civilian; 3 psychiatrists testify that Duffy had no
intent to commit crime but was convinced he was doing his duty by ordering
execution; Rothblatt comments; lawyer H B Rothblatt, who is defending Lt J B
Duffy, charged with murdering Vietnamese civilian, maintain's Army's stress on
'body count philosophy' is underlying reason for killing of civilians; 4 US
officers, testifying at Duffy's ct-martial, agree their command places great
deal of stress on body count; Duffy illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              225 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 134 words

S Vietnamese troops, supported by arty and advance air strikes, launch their 1st
major operation into Cambodia; sweep known Vietcong sanctuary in Kandal Prov;
encounter 300 enemy, kill 53 of them; operation is launched with agreement of
Cambodian authorities after several days of consultations between officials;
there is no evidence Cambodian forces take part in action; 2 teams of Amer
gunships support operation; 3 S Vietnamese killed in clash, 7 wounded; details
on operation; S Vietnamese mil spokesmen deny their troops entered Cambodia; US
mil spokesman denies Amer helicopter gunships provided air cover; Amer mil
sources say directive was sent last wk to all Amer comdrs and advisers telling
them not to participate on ground in any cross-border operations conducted by S
Vietnamese troops; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              226 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 163 words

US officials, in commenting on raid into Cambodian territory by S Vietnamese
troops; say rules of engagement have not been changed to allow Amer forces to
enter into or fire into Cambodian territory except in self-defense; Washington
officials say operation was undertaken without prior knowledge or approval of
US; say they lack complete information on incident; reaffirm US policy of not
widening war; say rules of engagement have not been changed to allow Amer forces
to enter into or fire into Cambodian territory except in self-defense; raid into
Cambodia said to leave several questions unaswered; US officials say they hope
raid is isolated instance; confirm raid took place; Vietnamese diplomatic
sources say Saigon Govt has not changed its policy of respect for Cambodian
neutrality, sovereignty and territorial integrity; say overthrow of Prince
Norodom Sihanouk and exposure of Communist sanctuary have been 'positive
developments'; some comments of US officials noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              227 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 28, 1970, Saturday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 140 words

Cambodian Govt imposes 6 PM-to-6 AM curfew in Pnompenh, closes down its airport
and intensifies mil security measures throughout country; curbs follow mass
demonstration in Kompong Cham in which 2 members of Natl Assembly were knifed to
death; Sisowath Sirik Matak says demonstration was fomented by Vietcong
agitators; other Govt members say demonstration was staged by peasant youths who
marched on town, stirred up Vietcong and began to sack bldgs; say Natl Assembly
members were killed after In Tam had flown into Kompong Cham at height of
disorders, appealed for calm and returned to Pnompenh; Govt statement renews
charges of aggression against Vietnamese Communists, appeals to Cambodians to be
wary and lauds those nations that recognize new govt; 28 N Vietnamese and
Vietcong diplomats leave by plane for Hanoi on control comm plane

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              228 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 4

LENGTH: 21 words

Comment on repts of Amer soldiers' use of marijuana in S Vietnam; comment on
testimony to Sen subcom on marijuana use; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              229 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 7

LENGTH: 6 words

Comment on S Vietnam land reform

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              230 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 133 words

US reptdly secretly gave Taiwan Govt planes, destroyers, missiles, tanks and
rifles worth about $157-million in '69; with exception of about $1-million paid
for 4 destroyers, weapons were given free out of stocks declared surplus by US
Defense Dept; transfer of weapons to China was not disclosed publicly or to
Cong; was revealed by Deputy Asst Sec Warren at HR subcom hearing; Defense Dept
silent on details of gift; State Dept officials describe it as part of gen
program of using surplus arms to bolster defenses of 'forward defense
countries'; such large-scale use of surplus weapons as indirect form of mil aid
is relatively new and raises unresolved policy questions in State Dept and Cong;
billions of dollars worth of weapons now being declared surplus with reduction
of forces in Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              231 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 7; (AP)

LENGTH: 17 words

B-52s raid Ho Chi Minh trail; 2 more US helicopters downed, no casualties reptd;
other action reptd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              232 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 4

LENGTH: 109 words

Mil judge Col P S Wondolowski rules in effect that Vietnam war is no different
from any other war in determining what constitutes a war crime; disallows
Rothblatt argument of putting blame on 'body count' principle; disallows Duffy
defense's main argument the he ordered shooting of prisoner without evil intent
because he believed he was following Army policy, out-of-ct hearing; says he
will instruct mil ct that it must not consider argument; says he will tell
members of ct to follow precedent from similar cases; Rothblatt argues against
ruling; defense and prosecution present final arguments; Rothblatt concentrates
testimony on Duffy's character

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              233 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 1

LENGTH: 104 words

Legis enabling Mass servicemen to refuse combat duty unless there is formal
declaration of war is due to reach Mass Gov Sargent in coming wk; measure has
been passed by Mass House and Sen by wide margin; would require state's Atty Gen
to represent servicemen in ct; supporters of bill seek to force test of its
constitutionality in US Sup Ct by setting up conflict between State and Fed
laws; re-election implications for Gov Sargent of Legis-approved bill
challenging legality of Vietnam war discussed; signing would risk offending
conservative Repubs and Nixon Adm but might also win him support of Dems
considerations

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              234 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1; (AFP)

LENGTH: 6 words

N Vietnamese diplomats reach Hanoi

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              235 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 91 words

Thay Sok, Cambodian charge d'affaires in Washington, says his govt has adequate
mil equipment 'for time being', news conf; says 'wait and see' to query on
whether US will be asked for mil aid; scores N Vietnamese and Vietcong,
statement; makes personal attack on Norodom Sihanouk; accuses him of inciting
great powers to intervene in Cambodia's internal affairs; demands GB and USSR
reconstitute control comm; S Vietnam Min Tran Van Lam doubts it will be
necessary for S Vietnam to intervene militarily in Cambodia; comments on recent
incursion

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              236 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

Prospects for negotiated settlement in Laos remain remote; Souvanna Phouma
stresses that Communist proposal has not been rejected even though Pathet Lao
courier has left for Hanoi without any reply; concedes that demand for end to
all US bombing before peace talks can be held poses formidable obstacle to
talks; insists N Vietnamese troops must 1st withdraw

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              237 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

S Vietnamese Min Tran Van Lam says recent incursion into Cambodia by S
Vietnamese troops has nothing to do with confrontation between Cambodian Govt
and Vietcong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              238 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 85 words

Attys for Green Beret Capt J J McCarthy, convicted of killing member of
Cambodian Khmer Serai sect employed by US mil forces in S Vietnam in '68, appeal
for new trial; charge Army deliberately ordered Lt Col Fontaine, vital defense
witness, away from original trial to prevent disclosure of extent of secret Amer
operations in Cambodia; claim FBI rept was kept hidden from defense and that
prosecution witness had changed part of his testimony; Khmer Serai's dedication
to overthrow of legitimate Govt noted

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              239 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 58 words

Outcome of Pres Nixon's Vietnamization program said to possibly rely on
Vietnamese Natl Mil Academy, where future officer corps is being trained; nearly
1,000 cadets are enrolled in academy; pursue 4-yr course that mixes mil with
academic; men who run academy and Amer advisers hope academy will produce
necessary high-quality leadership; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              240 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 128 words

S Vietnamese troops cross border for 2d consecutive day in effort to trap
Vietcong force estimated at 2 bns; S Vietnamese officials in Saigon deny repts;
sources in Chauduc confirm operation; say operation is being conducted with
active cooperation of Cambodian Army; operation is scheduled to continue for
several more days; is being conducted on both sides of border; S Vietnamese
spokesman denies repts that S Vietnamese troops entered Cambodia yesterday;
another S Vietnamese official says he has been ordered not to discuss
cross-border aspects of sweep; Amer advisers also say they have been ordered not
to discuss sweep on the record, but privately several of them describe action
and confirm S Vietnamese activity across border; details on operation; illus;
map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              241 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 29, 1970, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 98 words

Cambodia, demonstrations demanding return of Norodom Sihanouk reptdly continue
in provs along frontier with S Vietnam but open pro-Norodom Sihanouk activities
appear on wane; most demonstrations take place in Takeo Prov; reptdly are under
control; N Vietnamese and Vietcong reptdly increase pressure in frontier
regions; details on rioting at Kompong Cham; many of the 1,000 demonstrators
arrested to be released soon; Govt announces mobilization of all former
servicemen in face of reptd advance on Pnompenh by 3,600 Vietcong soldiers;
Vietcong and N Vietnamese diplomats arrive, Hanoi

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              242 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 30, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 42, Column 5

LENGTH: 37 words

Lr by Prof R S Miller and 6 other law profs at Ohio State U says US aid to Greek
Govt makes clear 'emptiness and cynicism' of Adm's assertions that it fights in
Vietnam to insure self-determination for Vietnamese people

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              243 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 30, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 4; (AP)

LENGTH: 25 words

US Col E P Terrell and S Vietnamese mil officers conf with Cambodian outpost
comdr in Cambodia in move to encourage more such exchs along border; illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              244 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 30, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 78 words

Laotian officals watch Cambodian situation carefully, realize developments there
will have far-reaching repercussions in Laos; are aware that closing of port of
Sihanoukville and other sources of supply for Vietnamese Communists increases
importance of Laos as supply route for Communists; Laotians long-standing
dislike for Norodom Sihanouk discussed; some Laotian officials hold Vietnam war,
in view of situations in Cambodia and Laos, is becoming all-Indochina war

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              245 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 30, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 72 words

Over 1,000 ethnic Vietnamese have fled their homes in Cambodia during past week
and crossed into S Vietnam at Khanan; rept bitter fighting between Cambodian and
Vietcong forces, charge Cambodians organized them into labor gangs after coup
and forced them to cut down trees in Paknam Forest, Vietcong sanctuary; say they
were frightened by rumors of Cambodian atrocities against Vietnamese living in
country; some refugees illus; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: CHRONOLOGIES (TABULAR SUMMARY)

GRAPHIC: COMBINATION (ANY 2 OR MORE)

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              246 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 30, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 231 words

Cambodian Govt repts Vietnamese Communists are intensifying their invasion
throughout frontier regions and moving deeper into Cambodia, communique; repts
Govt is 'still doing her best to resolve problem by peaceful means'; repts
Vietcong soldiers sighted near Neak Luong, 40 mi SE of Pnompenh; details other
alleged Vietnamese incursions; repts demonstrations in support of Norodom
Sihanouk continue, that about 700 demonstrators burst into Govt bldg in
Angtassom, ransacked and burnt files; says 9 persons were reptd killed, 7
injured; like incident reptdly has taken place in town of Skoun Skoun; says it
has instructed Foreign Min to inform all embassies in Cambodia of its continuing
desire for peaceful settlement; scores foreign propaganda organs spreading
'absurd slanders'; lists 265 pol prisoners of former regime whom it says have
now been freed; Lon Nol, in separate statement, appeals to Vietnamese not to
invade Cambodia; Cambodian airports re-opened to internatl flights; N Vietnam
protests 'illegal arrest' of Vietnamese residents in connection with anti-Govt
demonstrations in Kompong Cham; Cambodian Govt issues communique disclosing to
population that N Vietnamese and Vietcong embassies have been closed; N
Vietnamese troops attack Amer base near Cambodian border, killing 13 Amers,
wounding 30; 74 enemy killed; Cambodia soldiers guarding sts of Komgpong Cham
illus

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              247 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 30, 1970, Monday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 7

LENGTH: 83 words

Mil ct convicts Duffy of premeditated murder of Vietnamese civilian and then
moves to reconsider decision when told that conviction carries mandatory
sentence of life imprisonment; lawyers say they can recall no other instance of
a ct's seeking to change its verdict after being informed of sentence; ct pres
Col R W Selton comments; Rothblatt's defense noted; he raises anew allegation
that cts-martial are not fair trials because they are subject to influence by
higher ranking Army authority

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              248 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 31, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 3; (UPI)

LENGTH: 69 words

12 Saigon U students arrested for trying to start hunger strike near Natl
Assembly bldg to protest arrest of another student, bringing to at least 40
number of students arrested on charges of pro-Communist activities in last 3
wks; 7 other students stage sit-in inside bldg, say they will hold hunger strike
on behalf of their arrested companions; Govt spokesman says arrested students
will be tried before mil ct

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              249 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 31, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 103 words

Intelligence projections of infiltration flow into S Vietnam, based primarily on
aerial reconnaissance of route from N Vietnam through Laos, indicate
10,000-15,000 N Vietnamese soldiers are expected in April; figure is 2 to 3
times rate maintained over last several mos; mil analysts say that as long as US
air strikes continue along Ho Chi Minh Trail, make-up of Laotian Govt and amt of
territory controlled by Communist-led forces should not make much difference
militarily in S Vietnam; US mil planners say closing of Cambodian ports to N
Vietnamese shipping could deal substantial blow to enemy plans in S Vietnam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              250 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 31, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 1; (AP)

LENGTH: 36 words

S Vietnamese troops pulled back from Cambodian border and moved SW into Mekong
Delta to reinforce targets that have been battered by 2 days of enemy attacks;
30-40 persons have been killed in attacks, 200 wounded; map

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITORIAL PAGE COLUMNS

GRAPHIC: MAPS

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              251 of 251 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 31, 1970, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 222 words

Premier Lon Nol repts UN Security Council will be asked to send team of
observers to Cambodia to verify charges that large numbers of N Vietnamese and
Vietcong troops have invaded country, news conf; says if Council verifies
Cambodian charges and Cambodia finds itself in need of more arms to resist
aggression, it will accept such aid from any friendly country; says he considers
those nations who have diplomatic relations as friends and as such US qualifies
as donor; denies Saigon repts of confs between S Vietnamese, Amer and Cambodian
officers; Govt reptdly will call on all men between ages of 18 and 45 to
volunteer for mil duty; move designed primarily for psychological effect;
call-up of reservists is expected to add 10,000 to 15,000 men to standing army
of 35,000; infiltration of Vietnamese Communists continues; infiltrators reptdly
force villagers in border areas to listen to tape recordings of Norodom
Sihanouk's appeal to Cambodians to join him in countercoup; Hanoi radio
broadcasts appeal after Cambodia succeeds in jamming broadcast from Peking;
Cambodia bans sale of his recordings and postcards bearing his image; Sec Gen
Thant agrees to 'look into the matter' of N Vietnamese and Vietcong troops in
Cambodia after appeal from Cambodian UN repr Or Kosalak; no formal request for
UN observers has yet been made

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1970 The New York Times Company: Abstracts
