
                               1 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LILLIAN HELLMAN, PLAYWRIGHT, AUTHOR AND REBEL, DIES AT 79

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 3285 words


Lillian Hellman, one of the most important playwrights of the American theater,
died of cardiac arrest yesterday at Martha's Vineyard (Mass.) Hospital near her
summer home. She was 77 years old and also lived in Manhattan.

The playwright had been taken to the hospital by ambulance from her home at
Vineyard Haven. Isidore Englander, her lawyer and one of her executors, said
that Miss Hellman had suffered from a weak heart for several years.

Among Miss Hellman's plays that have entered the modern repertory are ''The
Children's Hour,'' ''The Little Foxes'' and ''Watch on the Rhine.''



Wrote for Motion Pictures

She was also one of the most successful motion-picture scenarists, and the three
volumes of her memoirs were both critical and popular successes - and even more
controversial than her plays.

Yet the Hellman line that is probably most quoted came from none of these, but
from a letter she wrote in 1952 to the House Committee on Un-American Activities
when it was investigating links between American leftists and the Communist
Party in this country and abroad.

''I cannot and will not cut my conscience to fit this year's fashions,'' Miss
Hellman wrote.

She offered to testify about her own opinions and actions, but not about those
of others, because ''to hurt innocent people whom I knew many years ago in order
to save myself is, to me, inhuman and dishonorable.''

For this, she risked imprisonment for contempt of Congress, was blacklisted and
saw her income drop from $150,000 a year to virtually nothing.

Although she had participated with Communists in many causes, she was not a
Communist. ''Rebels seldom make good revolutionaries,'' she explained.

And Lillian Hellman was a rebel, possessing a headstrong, argumentative,
stubborn - some said arrogant - streak that seldom enabled her to admit she
could have been wrong. She also found it difficult to admit that viewpoints that
conflicted with her own might possess some merit, a trait that in her late years
embroiled her in public disputes with the authors Diana Trilling and Mary
McCarthy.  She rebelled first against her family, especially the wealthier
branch of her mother, the former Julia Newhouse. They were Southern merchants of
German-Jewish origin, who had settled in Alabama, then New Orleans, where she
was born on June 20, 1907.

Her father, Max, moved to New York after a business reversal and began a
successful career as a salesman. An only child, Miss Hellmann spent her girlhood
shuttling between upper West End Avenue and the genteel boardinghouse kept by
two maiden aunts in New Orleans.

Her memoirs, which are less an autobiography than a montage of the people who
meant most to her, portray relations of love and tension between the girl and
her wet nurse, her aunts, a cousin who was a ''lost lady'' and other
extraordinary kinfolk and friends. A loner, disaffected from family and school,
she took refuge in books.



Revealing Anecdotes

After a scolding, she ran away at the age of 14. Received with love on her
return two days later, she recounted that she learned something ''useful and
dangerous - if you're willing to take the punishment, you are halfway through
the battle.'' She added, ''That the issue may be trivial, the battle ugly, is
another point.''

In another revealing anecdote, she said she pawned a ring given her on her 15th
birthday by her maternal uncle, Jake Newhouse, and bought books with the money.

''I went immediately to tell him what I'd done,'' she said, ''deciding, I think,
that day that the break had to come. . . . He laughed and said the words I later
used in 'The Little Foxes': 'So you've got spirit after all. Most of the rest of
them are made of sugar water.' ''

After graduation from Wadleigh High School, Miss Hellman was enrolled at the
Washington Square campus of New York University for three years and later
studied journalism at Columbia University. But, she said, she often cut classes
to explore Bohemian Greenwich Village. This led in 1924 to her first job,
reading manuscripts at the venturesome new publishing house of Boni & Liveright.

She left the next year and married the writer Arthur Kober. The marriage ended
in a friendly Hollywood divorce in 1932. In between she did book reviews, wrote
short stories that she said she did not like, visited France and Germany and
read scripts for Metro- Goldwyn-Mayer.



Met Dashiell Hammett


It was a period, as she recalled it, of frequent idleness, discontent and
drinking. It terminated when she met Dashiell Hammett, with whom she would live
off and on for 31 years. Mr.  Hammett told her that she was the model for Nora
Charles, the cool and witty wife in his book ''The Thin Man'' - but was also the
model for his villainous women as well.

Miss Hellman wrote a play, a comedy, with Louis Kronenberger. She said it amused
them both enormously, but nobody else found it funny, and it was never
performed. Thereafter, each of her plays were written in several drafts, after
long research and under harsh coaching by Mr. Hammett.

The next, ''The Children's Hour,'' was suggested by a book about a lawsuit in
Scotland. It is the story of a vicious girl destroying the lives of two teachers
by falsely accusing them of having a lesbian affair. Miss Hellman, who was then
reading scripts for the producer Herman Shumlin, took it to him and sat in a
corner while he read it.

After the first act, she recounted, he said ''Swell!'' After the second, ''I
hope it keeps up.'' After the third, ''I'll produce it.''

It opened in 1934, and was an immediate hit. Although it was banned in Boston,
Chicago and other cities, and in Britain, Miss Hellman earned $125,000 from its
first run, and a $50,000 contract from Samuel Goldwyn to turn it into a movie.



A Play About Slander


It was a period, as she recalled, when a film could not show a man on a couch
with a girl unless at least one foot was touching the floor. But with what would
become her legendary skill, she revised her tale of slander to one involving
jealousy and a love triangle, rather than lesbianism. The picture, called
''These Three,'' was considered daring enough in that age of Pollyanna films,
and it was a success.

Speaking of ''The Children's Hour,'' Miss Hellman said, ''I never see characters
as monstrously as audiences do.'' For her, it was a play not about a vicious
child but about the evil power of a slander, and to some degree anticipated the
political investigations of the left that were to come.

By 1935, she was able to dictate terms for an occasional scenario for Hollywood
(''The Dark Angel,'' ''Dead End''), and was one of the country's highest-paid
writers. Yet she drew closer to the left.

She wrote a drama about a strike, ''Days to Come,'' which appeared in late 1936
and was unsuccessful. She then went to Spain, helped write Joris Ivens's film,
''The Spanish Earth,'' and came home to campaign for aid to the Loyalists
fighting the Franco forces in the Spanish Civil War.

Meanwhile, she was working hard on a play about a Southern family obsessed with
money and power - the play, she later said, that got out of her system her own
resentment toward her mother's family. Her close friend Dorothy Parker suggested
the title: ''The Little Foxes.''



Frightened by Success


It was a great hit on stage and in the screen version, which Miss Hellman also
wrote. She fled New York after the Broadway opening; she explained that she was
frightened by success and what it did to people.

With her earnings, she bought an estate in Westchester County and converted it
into a working farm. For 13 years, she lived there and helped run it, while
writing plays, books and magazine articles and carrying on an active social
life.

Interviewers, conditioned by the toughness of her writing, were surprised to
find her intensely feminine, fond of clothes and cooking, a short, attractive
person with reddish hair and an aquiline nose. Late in life her face was
generously lined and her voice was raspy, a condition she attributed to nearly a
lifetime of chain-smoking.

While conceding the taut excitement of her work, some critics complained that
her plots were melodramatic. She replied: ''If you believe, as the Greeks did,
that man is at the mercy of the gods, then you write tragedy. The end is
inevitable from the beginning. But if you believe that man can solve his own
problems and is at nobody's mercy, then you will probably write melodrama.''

Deeply engaged with the fate of Spain and what she foresaw as the coming war
with Nazism, Miss Hellman was widely attacked as a Communist. But when her
anti-Nazi play, ''Watch on the Rhine,'' opened in early 1941, the Communist
press criticized her for supporting the Allies in what it then called the
''phony war.''

Inspired by Childhood Friend

The play, named the best of the year by the New York Drama Critics Circle,
describes a tragic encounter between a German foe of the Nazis and a cynical
Rumanian in the home of a cultivated, liberal American family. The hero's
American wife seems to have been inspired by a girlhood friend of Miss Hellman's
who joined the anti-Nazi underground and was killed.

One of the Hellman memoirs, ''Pentimento,'' tells the story of ''Julia,'' and
recounts that Miss Hellman once smuggled $50,000 to her to be used in bribing
Nazi guards to free prisoners.

Last year, Yale University Press published a memoir by Muriel Gardiner, a
psychoanalyst who was active in the Austrian underground in World War II, and
suggested that Dr. Gardiner's experience was the model for the Hellman story.
Since the Hellman story ends with her bringing Julia's body back to the United
States, some critics raised questions about the authenticity of the Hellman
story.

Miss Hellman responded that Miss Gardiner ''may have been the model for somebody
else's Julia, but she was certainly not the model for my Julia.''

Two War Movies


During the war, Miss Hellman wrote a scenario for a movie about the Eastern
front called ''The North Star,'' extolling the bravery of the people of the
Soviet Union, by then an American ally. After heavy rewriting, it emerged as a
simplistic affair and she deplored it, although it was well received.

She also wrote a play, later a movie, ''The Searching Wind,'' about an American
diplomat and prewar appeasement of Hitler, and visited the Eastern front outside
Warsaw as a guest of the Soviet Government.

Then came ''Another Part of the Forest'' (1946) and ''The Autumn Garden''
(1951), both returning to the theme of bitter strife over money and power in
genteel Southern settings. Both were successes.



Never Denounced Stalinism

Miss Hellman was attacked by a number of critics for never denouncing the
excesses of Stalinism, as others on the left did.

Mr. Hammett was jailed in 1951 for refusing to submit a list of contributors to
what the Federal Bureau of Investigation had branded a Communist front, the
Civil Rights Congress, of which he was a trustee. He emerged with his health
shattered. Miss Hellman received her summons the next year.

She formally offered to testify about herself but not about others. Further, she
refused to let her lawyers cite the fact that she had been criticized by the
Communists. She said that to use this ''would amount to my attacking them at a
time when they were being persecuted.''

Balmain Costume for Courage


Wearing a new Balmain costume to give her courage, she said later, Miss Hellman
appeared before the House committee, repeated her offer to testify about
herself, then invoked the Fifth Amendment on questions about others. The
committee did not choose to cite her for contempt. But she suddenly became an
untouchable in the movies and the theater.

Her income dropped from $150,000 the year before to a pittance. She had to sell
her farm. She worked briefly in Italy on a scenario that was stillborn, and
briefly as a salesclerk in a department store, under an assumed name. Not until
''Toys in the Attic'' appeared in 1960 did her financial straits end. This play
again won the drama critics' award, but the Pulitzer prize board rejected the
recommendation of its drama jury that it receive that honor as well.

In ''Scoundrel Time,'' a memoir that was a best seller in 1976, Miss Hellman
recalled that era with bitterness - not so much for those hunting Communists as
for the former leftists who named names, and for those liberals who remained
silent or who participated in anti-Communist efforts that she said were
subsidized by the Central Intelligence Agency. These events, she said, led
directly to Vietnam and the Watergate affair.

''Such people would have a right to say that I, and many like me, took too long
to see what was going on in the Soviet Union,'' she wrote. ''But whatever our
mistakes, I do not believe we did our country any harm. And I think they did.''

Twice Planned to Marry


Mr. Hammett died in Jan. 1960. In an introduction to a collection of his short
stories, Miss Hellman said of his last years with her, ''It was an unspoken
pleasure, that having come together so many years, ruined so much and repaired a
little, we had endured.''

In an interview in 1973, she shed a bit more light on that relationship,
troubled by his drinking, their tempers and a ''modern'' attitude toward
marriage.

''We did have two periods of planning to be married,'' she said. ''The first
time, he disappeared with another lady. That's not really fair - I was
disappearing too. . . . We were both of that nutty time that believed that
alliances could stand up against other people. I should have known better,
because I had a jealous nature.''

During the decade when she was blacklisted by Hollywood, Miss Hellman wrote four
adaptations for the stage: ''Montserrat,'' based on a novel by Emmanuel Robles;
''The Lark,'' from Jean Anouilh's play about Jeanne d'Arc; the book for
''Candide,'' an operetta, with music by Leonard Bernstein, and ''My Mother, My
Father, and Me,'' based on a novel by Burt Blechman.

All of the later plays got mixed reviews, but are occasionally revived. ''The
Lark,'' which Miss Hellman also directed, was described as much better than a
Christopher Fry version staged in London. The critics' judgments of some of
these shows, as with the Hellman plays that were smash hits, have improved as
time passed. ''The Little Foxes'' was revived in 1980 as a vehicle for Elizabeth
Taylor and had a successful run on Broadway and a national tour.

Her Last Play

By the end of the 1950's, motion-picture offers were coming in again, but Miss
Hellman was no longer interested. She explained that she did not want to work in
a medium where directors were free to revise a writer's work at will.

''Toys in the Attic,'' still another drama about a doomed Southern family, was
hailed as perhaps her finest play. It was also her last.

''I do not like the theater at all,'' she said in a lecture in 1966. ''I get
restless.''

Elsewhere, she quoted Mr. Hammett as telling her, ''The truth is you don't like
the theater except the times when you're in a room by yourself putting the play
on paper.''

But she was not idle. Occasionally, she taught classes in writing at Harvard,
Yale and the City University of New York. She edited the letters of Chekhov and
the Hammett stories and worked on her memoirs: ''An Unfinished Woman'' (1969),
''Pentimento'' (1974) and ''Scoundrel Time.'' In her town house on the Upper
East Side and her cottage on Martha's Vineyard, she held court for a circle of
younger writers.

'Julia' Story Filmed


Miss Hellman at first turned down an offer of more than $500,000 for the movie
rights to these books, on the ground that they involved living persons who might
be hurt. But she later sold movie rights to the ''Julia,'' story and it was made
into a film in which Miss Hellman was played by Jane Fonda.

She herself had criticized her friends Lionel and Diana Trilling, among others,
for their writings on the cold war. But when Miss Hellman's publisher, Little,
Brown & Company, rejected a book by Mrs. Trilling because it responded to Miss
Hellman, the latter commented, ''My goodness, what difference would that make?''

Mrs. Trilling had to find another publisher, however, and the feud between the
two women continued, at one point, in 1981, coming down to battle-by-interview
in which they exchanged sharp words.

Mrs. Trilling said that on Martha's Vineyard ''anyone who entertains me is never
again invited to Lillian Hellman's house.'' Miss Hellman issued a formal
statement in which she acidly denied the charge.

Mary McCarthy Feud

The playwright also, in 1979, plunged into a headlong feud with the novelist
Mary McCarthy after Miss McCarthy, in a television interview, characterized Miss
Hellman as ''a dishonest writer'' whose every word, ''including 'and' and 'the,'
'' was a ''lie.'' Miss Hellman sued Miss McCarthy, the Educational Television
Corporation and the interviewer, Dick Cavett, for damages of $1.75 million for
''mental pain and anguish.''

Last May 10, Miss Hellman won a preliminary round in the lawsuit when Justice
Harold Baer Jr. of State Supreme Court denied Miss McCarthy's motion to dismiss
the suit. While Miss McCarthy had argued that her statements were expressions of
opinion about a public figure, Judge Baer said that the strong statements seemed
to fall ''on the actionable side of the line - outside what has come to be known
as the 'marketplace of ideas.' ''

Many of her admirers and other observers were apprehensive about the fact that
Miss Hellman had become obsessed with the action and that she might squander a
great deal of her energy and wealth on the lawsuit. They also feared that she
might erode the freedom of critics like herself to comment.

It was ironic, some said, that despite Miss Hellman's lifelong championing of
civil rights, a victory in the case might seriously erode First Amendment
protections. Mr. Englander said yesterday that he did not know what impact Miss
Hellman's death would have on the lawsuit.

Miss Hellman's veracity also came under attack in 1980 by Martha Gellhorn, a
writer once married to Ernest Hemingway. Miss Gellhorn accused Miss Hellman of
having passed off fiction for fact in ''An Unfinished Woman'' when she wrote
about Mr. Hemingway.

Sued for Nixon Tapes


Throughout her life Miss Hellman continued to raise her voice for such causes as
civil rights and peace, and with others filed a suit that won a court ruling
that the Nixon White House tapes were public property. She also signed petitions
seeking the release of Soviet dissidents.

In ''Scoundrel Time,'' she commented on her disillusionment: ''My belief in
liberalism was mostly gone. I think I have substituted for it something private
called, for want of something that should be more accurate, decency. . . . but
it is painful for a nature that can no longer accept liberalism not to be able
to accept radicalism.''

For many reviewers, Miss Hellman's position and her dramatic art were best
expressed in the wistful closing lines of ''An Unfinished Woman'':

''I do regret that I have spent much of my life trying to find what I called
'sense.' I never knew what I meant by truth, never made the sense I hoped for.
All I mean is that I left too much of me unfinished because I wasted too much
time.''

Miss Hellman left no survivors. A private graveside ceremony will be held at
2:30 P.M. Tuesday at Abel's Hill Cemetery on Martha's Vineyard. A memorial
service in New York City will be held at a date still to be determined.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Lillian Hellman

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR PBS'S NEW PRESIDENT, THE CHALLENGE IS STILL SPELLED M-O-N-E-Y

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1355 words


WASHINGTON

''The programming may be elitist, but our audience is not elitist,'' said the
new president of the Public Broadcasting Service, an association of 302 stations
across the United States that calls itself the largest television service in the
world.

Bruce L. Christensen took his post May 15, so he has not had time to make a mark
on programming, but he should be among the most knowledgeable people in the
country on PBS programs and who is watching them, since his previous job was as
the chief Washington lobbyist for the service.

As president of PBS, Mr. Christensen has to find ways to get the Administration
to provide more money instead of the reduced amounts sought by President Reagan;
to encourage stations to raise more money by alstations to raise more money by
aleuphemism that permits corporate supporters to say more about themselves while
stopping short of outright advertising on noncommercial television, and to
increase the audience with the expectation that more viewers will result in more
contributions to local stations.

Almost all of that depends on how good the programs on PBS are and how many
people can be drawn to watch them. In a recent interview, Mr. Christensen told
of some of his hopes and plans. The first order of business was to confront the
notion that PBS offered programs that appealed only to the upper strata of
society and therefore should not get Federal funds.

''That's an undeserved reputation,'' he said. ''Research shows the demographics
of our audience mirrors the demographics of the country. People interested in
opera may not realize that farmers and steelworkers like opera.''

In fact, opera does not play that great a part in PBS programming which is
aimed, its supporters say, at middle America, not some elitist minority. Of the
15 most-watched programs in PBS history, nine were National Geographic specials.
Two National Geographic programs (''Sharks'' and ''The Incredible Machine'')
lead the list, while two Grand Ole Opry broadcasts rank as third and fourth.
There is not a single opera, ballet or symphonic broadcast among the 25
highest-ranked PBS programs. During any given week, Mr. Christensen said, half
the people in the United States will watch public television and during any
month three-quarters will.



Financing has always been a problem at PBS, something illustrated by the delays
in completing two of next season's big series, ''The Brain'' and ''Heritage:
Civilization and the Jews,'' both of which are being produced by WNET/13 in New
York. The series were in production for so long that frequent changes had to be
made to take into account a changing world, particularly scientific advances in
the study of the human brain.

Both WNET-produced series are now scheduled to begin on PBS in the fall - Oct. 1
for the series on the Jews and Oct. 10 for the series on the brain. It has taken
the producers of these programs years to get this far because of the limited
funds available for PBS programs. ''Sometimes it takes us years to get
funding,'' Mr. Christensen said. ''We don't have a single source of revenue that
would finance the programs in a given year.''



Last year's series on Vietnam, which drew the largest audience for a documentary
series shown on PBS, took six years to produce, Mr. Christensen said, largely
because of the need to raise a lot of money in advance. A rerun of ''Vietnam: A
Television History'' starts Tuesday at 9 P.M., and this time there is some
controversy attached to it. Accuracy in Media, a lobbying group that scrutinizes
the media for bias in news reporting, has complained that the Vietnam series
contained ''errors and omissions,'' and has obtained a Federal grant of $30,000
from the National Endowment for the Humanities to produce an assessment.

The author and producer of the series, Stanley Karnow, has denied that the
series was biased, asserting that criticism of it has come only from the extreme
left and from very conservative critics, such as Reed Irvine, the head of
Accuracy in Media. Mr. Christensen defended both Mr. Karnow's fairness and Mr.
Irvine's attempt to air an assessment.

''I'm not uncomfortable with it,'' he said of Mr. Irvine's criticism. ''I think
public television programming has to be examined. The Vietnam series was a
balanced and accurate series, and anyone asserting that it was slanted is simply
off the mark.''

It is not at all certain that Mr. Irvine will be able to gain access to the PBS
network to broadcast the rebuttal he is planning. ''We will look at the program,
see what merit it has, and make our own decision,'' Mr. Christensen said. If PBS
declines to broadcast the rebuttal, he said, it could transmit it to its
affiliates, which could then make their own decisions.



Every discussion involving PBS comes back to money. ''Stations do not have a lot
of risk capital,'' Mr. Christensen said, and because of this, ''Every project
has to work because our resources are so limited.'' The financing system, which
has evolved over the past two decades, works as follows:

The Federal Government provides funds to the Corporation for Public
Broadcasting, which distributes the money to public television and radio
stations and to producers of programs. The presence of the corporation is
intended to assure that neither Congress nor the President can exert direct
pressure on the programmers or the stations. The individual stations take some
of their Federal money, some of their local contributions and some of their
corporate underwriting money and send it to PBS.

THUS, PBS would have to drum up more dollars for its member stations in order to
get more for itself. One way would be to get more money for the Corporation for
Public Broadcasting, whose annual appropriation for the next three years is $130
million. Another would be to encourage the tentative move into advertising by
public stations. Ten stations, including New York's Channel 13, participated in
the experiment, which ended last June, and which Mr. Christensen said had netted
$1.5 million. The experiment is over and, Mr. Christensen said, all stations can
now use ''enhanced underwriting,'' which would permit Ford, for example, to show
a picture of a Mustang, but would not allow the company to say that it is better
than any other car.

''I think we're going to have some trouble,'' Mr. Christensen said when asked
how a distinction would be made between enhanced underwriting and outright
commercials. ''Many will see them and consider them commercials. It is a fine
line.''

Mr. Christensen said that guidelines for the stations regarding the enhanced
underwriting would be in place by the fall. As to the amount stations might
expect to raise, Mr. Christensen said, ''Most licensees believe it will bring in
more money.'' He said he was especially encouraged by the enhanced underwriting
that WNET was able to attract, including Piper-Heidsieck and Gucci. ''It was
done in a subdued manner and was quite upscale,'' he observed.



Cable is an area of unrealized potential. Public television has increased its
audience through cable linkups, but there has not been an accompanying increase
in viewer donations, Mr. Christensen said, because viewers pay for the cable
service but are reluctant to make a contribution on top of that. He ruled out
any likelihood of the Government collecting from commercial broadcasters a so-
called spectrum fee, in effect a tax in return for allowing commercial use of
the public airwaves that would then be earmarked for public broadcasting. Such a
fee is politically impossible, Mr. Christensen said, as is a tax on the sale of
television receivers. That was the best way, he said, but the opportunity was
lost 20 years ago. He sees that defeat as a mixed blessing, since it has forced
public television stations to be more reliant on their communities.

''A trust fund from a receiver tax would have made public television much less
vulnerable to political pressure,'' Mr. Christensen said. ''But if such a fund
were used, public television may have been less responsive to the community.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
DAVID RABE EXPLORES A DIFFERENT KIND OF JUNGLE

BYLINE: By Benedict Nightingale

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1775 words


David Rabe's ''Hurlyburly'' is set in an all-male household somewhere ''in the
Hollywood hills.'' So the program at the Promenade Theater tells us, so the
dialogue of the play itself confirms.  But if you look through the panes of
glass that serve as the back wall of Tony Walton's set, you actually see nothing
but leaves, stems, rushes, grass, a wild tangle of green thickly straggling out
to the wings, up to the flies, and (so you feel) out into the dressing rooms
behind the stage. It could be part of some Amazonian rain-forest. It could be a
slice of jungle in the country which did so much to shape Mr. Rabe and his
earlier work: Vietnam.

And so it is, in a way. Mr. Rabe has set his plays in Army barracks, in
Philadelphia clubland, in the supposedly average home of a supposedly average
American family; but there's a sense in which all his locations are the same.
They're jungles or, more accurately, jungles- within-jungles, reflecting a
personal view of people, society, the world itself, which stretches from the
glum to the grim and beyond. So one can hardly be surprised if Mr. Rabe's
dramatic foray into sleazy-smart California should leave its audience feeling as
if it's been collectively dropped by parachute into a subtropical war zone
mainly inhabited by the lost, the fearful, the callous, the vicious and the
frankly reptilian.

The afternoon I saw ''Hurlyburly,'' several spectators failed to see its
three-odd hours through to the end. Perhaps they found the trip into the heart
of Hollywood's darkness too uncomfortable, or Mr. Rabe too unsettling a
tour-leader, or both. Or maybe they thought the play too like a jungle in
another, surely unintended sense. The boundaries between density and clutter,
complexity and confusion, have misled many dramatists in their way; and there
are times when one feels that David Rabe, too, has strayed onto the wrong side
of the technical tracks. He has, God knows, an accomplished enough director in
Mike Nichols. He has a cast that looks good on paper and even off paper. But one
sometimes wishes he and they had managed to cut a rather cleverer, quicker path
through the play's undergrowth.

Still, there's plenty to arrest and wryly amuse you in the passing terrain,
especially if you're a New Yorker anxious to confirm your worst prejudices about
the West Coast. It's no accident that the biggest laugh of the evening comes in
response to the old gibe about the continent being tilted and all the nuts and
screws rolling to California. Here's a composite picture of the movie subculture
at its more tawdry and aimless. Offstage, a TV celebrity is intimately assaulted
by a star-crazy women while her child listens from the front seat of their car.
Onstage, a screenwriter arrives with a girl drifter, whom he donates to his
hosts as a ''Care package,'' for their collective use. The qualifications for
residence in this chic swamp seem to be as follows. You should be separated or
(better) divorced, and mildly promiscuous; frequently high on drugs or drink or
both; hard of skin and soul, as if marinated in movie-lab chemical, then baked;
and, of course, earnestly self-absorbed 24 hours a day.



One of Mr. Rabe's funnier scenes shows William Hurt, playing a casting director,
diving beneath the skirts of Sigourney Weaver, his sometime mistress - and the
two of them solemnly dissertating on their anxieties, their guilts, their
emotional scar-tissue, their need for ''space,'' everything but the business
feverishly in hand. The common verbal currency in these parts is a mixture of
the idiomatic and the pretentious, the sort you might expect to hear from a
hustler whose bedtime reading consisted of psychological manuals, sociological
surveys and Roget's Thesaurus. To someone annoying you: ''Don't get clandestine
on me, Eddie.'' Of someone still worse: ''This guy is a debilitating experience,
this guy is totally without redeeming social value.'' These people often seem to
be saying extremely crude things in extremely clever ways. They're crass and
coarse with a kind of professorial intricacy.

Sometimes, of course, they're crass and crude, period. That's certainly the case
with the low-life character chunkily impersonated by Harvey Keitel, a
pock-marked heavy who has spent his acting career saving cheap soap- operas from
unreality by standing in the background and looking authentically horrible. He
it is who gives some shape and direction to a plot disconcertingly apt to lurch
from incident to incident. When we first meet him, he's just beaten up his wife.
Later, he pulverizes a stranger whose mere appearance has irked him. Then he
flings a girl, whose smile he's chosen to misinterpret, from a moving car.
Gradually he emerges as the crazed and dangerous side of California, an erratic,
unpredictable ogre unable to stop himself lashing out at whatever he imagines to
be threatening his shaky self-esteem. His frightening and forlorn existence
seems itself to be a judgment on Hollywood, or at least on Hollywood as
represented by Mr. Hurt, who casually befriends him, equally capriciously
rejects him, and ends up, with true Californian crankiness, trying to find
arcane anagrams in his suicide note.

For all his sly and rueful humor, Mr. Rabe has always been a moralist, and a
pretty pessimistic one, more inclined to nod his head in resigned repugnance
than to shake it in indignant disbelief. He once said he'd like the word
''inhuman'' struck from the language, because people used it to distance
themselves and the species from evils that were ''all too human.'' Certainly,
his ''Vietnam trilogy'' suggests that he believes, or came in the forests and
paddy fields to believe, that moral oafishness, cruelty, callousness, murderous
rage, and the need of men aggressively to prove themselves ''men,'' were
more-or- less permanent fixtures in quite a few human hearts. Much of the same
dark furniture is to be found in ''Hurlyburly,'' too, most noticeably the
suspicion, fear and hatred of women so brutally communicated by Mr. Keitel.



Mr. Rabe has been accused of sharing this misogyny, a slur that's actually
testimony to his ability to think and feel his way into stunted minds. So far
from justifying the abuse of women, or blaming them for it, he is at pains to
condemn those men who attempt such justification or attribute such blame. After
all, what are we to make of someone who, confronted with the bruised and
bleeding women his friend has just hurled into the passing highway, keeps
insisting ''You must have done something,'' ''Yes, you did something,'' and
''Well, Phil's been having a hard time recently''? We'd regard him as a parody,
indeed rather an exaggerated parody, of the kind of cop who makes rape victims
feel like criminals themselves; and, though Mr Rabe may not agree with words
like ''parody'' and ''exaggerated,'' he undoubtedly shares that general
sentiment. Again and again in ''Hurlyburly'' he comes up with instances, verbal
and physical, of men's nervous contempt for the opposite sex, and rarely if ever
is his principled disgust in even the slightest doubt.

Of course, disgust is not necessarily the most reliable creative impulse,
especially if you're writing a naturalistic play. There are occasions when one
feels that severe moral opinion, not plain human observation, is responsible for
''Hurlyburly.'' So eager is Mr. Rabe to shock us with the spiritual dereliction
of Hollywood that he sometimes serves up exemplary illustration rather than
coherent character or credible relationships. The casting director played by Mr.
Hurt is probably the play's most important figure, yet one ends up with a
curiously patchy impression of him. He emerges as a more or less random series
of troubled and troubling thoughts and acts, culminating in some implausibly
high-minded reverie about the neutron bomb and the immorality of selling dried
milk to the Third World. Whether he's criticizing the character, or using him to
criticize others, or both, Mr. Rabe often seems more concerned with his moral
significance than with his reality - or, for that matter, the reality of his
relationships. His roommate and closest chum is another casting director, who is
played by Christopher Walken with silky pout and fastidious sneer. But when,
toward the end, they start worrying about the state of their friendship, we're
untouched and unimpressed, because there hardly seemed any friendship to begin
with.



Yet there's a danger of seizing on Mr. Rabe's intentions and proclaiming them
faults. What we may find artistically unsatisfactory in ''Hurlyburly'' is, at
least to some extent, what he finds unsatisfactory in a rather larger way. He's
writing about empty friendships, fragmentary people, a confused world, and can
hardly be expected to make them solid, consistent and clear. This is hard luck
on some of the performers, notably Mr. Walken, a sad case of charisma in
hopeless pursuit of character. It creates difficulties even for those who get
more psychological and dramatic opportunities, such as Mr. Hurt. The impression
he gives, and does well to give, is of someone remote, ruminative and pretty
cold, a melancholy narcissist occasionally emerging from endless, unrewarding
self-contemplation for a sporadic display of ennui or anger. Think of a jumble
in search of definition and shape, or even an absence trying to become a
presence, and you'll have some sense of Mr. Hurt's performance. Think of empty
telephone booths scattered round an uninhabited shopping mall, and you've Mr
Rabe's own description of the character's mind - and, perhaps, of the play's
tacky, desolate world.

Or is this to explain away what's awkward and untidy in ''Hurlyburly''? If so,
there are still telling lines, lively encounters, deft touches from a cast that
also includes the excellent Judith Ivey as a raunchy but good-natured dancer and
Jerry Stiller as a cross between a turtle and a cockroach, all tiny, bent back
and wavy orange hair. For instance, there's a marvelous moment when Mr. Keitel
brings on the baby girl he's briefly borrowed from his now-estranged wife. The
men cluster round the bundle, cooing, clucking and making other unwontedly
gentle noises; and for an instance we see what they might have been in better
times and climes. But, of course, their cynicism soon reasserts itself. ''A
broad of the future,'' shrugs one, and another opines ''at a certain age they go
nasty.'' And then the little girl's diaper begins to leak, spoiling someone's
jacket. ''Just like a broad,'' they agree. There, summed up in that line, you've
the mean, maimed world of ''Hurlyburly.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT MEN;
IN ENEMY WATERS

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1076 words


Richard F. Shepard

is a reporter for The New York Times.











 WE WENT, MY SON and I, to see the movie ''Das Boot,'' and, when it ended, with
the German submariners being machine-gunned by an Allied plane on an Italian
pier, I burst into applause. My son, in his 20's and very tolerant of his
father's eccentricities, was amused at my predictable reaction, but others in
the theater threw looks that could only be construed as hostile to my
insensitivity. Here were young men - on the wrong side, to be sure - who were
cut off at the start of their manhood, and here was this old guy, a man in his
60's, who was clapping his hands in satisfaction. What could the death of these
unfortunate lads possibly mean to this New York type?

The problem was that ''Das Boot'' was a persuasive, realistic film, one that
gave me a look at an enemy I had never met but had dreaded. As a merchant
mariner in World War II, I had been wakened in the small hours of the night to
the deep, shaking thud of depth charges loosed by Navy escort ships as they
tried to kill U-boats that were trying to kill us in the North Atlantic. More
than once I had come on deck to see a neighboring merchant ship lift out of the
water and plunge into the sea, gone forever, or to see another transformed into
a pillar of flame and smoke, with her crew leaping over the side into burning
water.  I feared das Boot and therefore I hated it and all of its breed. When I
saw the film, those feelings flooded back into my mind, and those young men on
the screen became, once again, the villains out to destroy the young man that
was me at that time. It was all very difficult to explain to an audience to many
of whom even Vietnam was fast receding into ancient history.  When we emerged
into the hard light of an East Side afternoon, I thought about my reactions, and
I was shocked to realize that we are now further from World War II than I was
from the Spanish-American War when Hitler sent his troops crashing into Poland.
It was a thought full of relativity, one that gave me, for a moment, some
comprehension of the reaction to my passionate response to the movie.

Back in the 1930's, American Legion conventions brought throngs of high-
spirited World War I veterans to New York for conventions and parades that my
friends and I thought were the height of irrelevance in a period when we were
worried about the spread of racism. Those men seemed old, smug and far too
jovial about an ancient event. The Great War was then not quite 20 years in the
past, but it had happened before we were born, and therefore it was one with the
Civil War, the American Revolution, Caesar's Gallic wars. Small wonder that
younger generations should disapprove of a 60-year- old troglodyte getting
emotionally agitated over events that hark back to the ages!

I have, like everyone else, met the enemy of those war years, Germans and
Japanese, former fighters now in their late middle-years. Once I shared a box
seat with a one-armed gentleman about my age during a holiday in Vienna at a
performance of ''The Merry Widow.'' He was a polite and gentle person,
solicitous of our comfort and enjoyment, yet even the lovely, whipped- cream
waltz could not stop me from wondering, somewhat wickedly, ''What did you do
during the war and how did you lose that arm?''

Mostly, though, these former enemies do not recall the war to me. They come
across as ordinary folk relishing the things that we relish, fearing the things
that we fear. This is what the crew of das Boot would be today, I suppose, and I
would not have the feeling of enmity that welled up within me when I saw them
reconstructed in their wartime youth on film. Time does not heal all wounds and
absence does not always make the heart grow fonder, but one goes into later
years linked by a certain sharing of enmity with old foes, a curiosity about
whatever became of them. More so, perhaps, with the personal enemies from one's
own private life than with national enemies.

Much has been made of generation gap enemies - don't trust anyone over/under 30.
But, as age will eventually reveal, this is not true enmity. It falls more in
the zone of exasperated misunderstanding. Enmity runs much deeper. Although it
can be handed down generation to generation, like a family heirloom, I suspect
that each generation has to make its own enemies, enemies that may make little
sense to another layer of age. Can I understand my son's wrangles, personal
conflicts that seem as incomprehensible to me as they did when he was a little
boy wrestling with some other kid who seemed to be not much different than he
was? There is nothing more inane than the enmities of others, hostilities that
obviously could be ironed out more easily than one's own run-ins. Younger people
have not learned from history, meaning that they have not studied us closely
enough. It is probably more true that they have studied us too well and persist
in the tradition of confrontation.

Yet younger generations, on the large scale, not only inherit hand-me-down
enmities (the Middle East, Northern Ireland, India, all will suffice as models),
but they have found themselves immersed in new and no less intangible battles
that have come up in their own times. There are sides taken on issues of
environment, health, nuclear energy, economy, controversies even more difficult
to comprehend because they are rooted in cool, scientific fact of the rational
civilization. But they arouse no less passion than the old schisms did.







 ACH GENERATION BElieves that somehow it is more open-minded than the one just
going out, that it is more reasonable and more susceptible to settling things
fairly. This may, sadly, be an illusion and one fears that the human being is
still programmed in old formats. Not long ago, I saw two men pummeling each
other in the gutter, where each had a car half-parked, one frontward, one
backward, in a parking space. It was an appallingly violent eruption of
mankind's ancient scourge, territoriality, and I walked away with mixed
emotions. The irrationality of it all was emphasized by a sign that said, ''No
Parking.'' In a world that believes it has radically changed, the scene was most
depressingly reassuring.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LEARNING FROM LOSING

BYLINE: By Richard H. Ullman

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1221 words


Richard H. Ullman is professor of international affairs at Princeton University
and the author of ''Anglo-Soviet Relations, 1917-1921,'' a history of British
intervention in the Russian Civil War.  VIETNAM AS HISTORY

Ten Years After the Paris Peace Accords.  Edited by Peter Braestrup.  160 pp.
Washington: University Press of America.  Cloth, $17.75. Paper, $8.75.  VIETNAM
RECONSIDERED Lessons From a War.  Edited and introduced by Harrison E.
Salisbury.  335 pp. New York: Harper & Row. Cloth, $17.50. Paper, $8.50.



WHAT can hindsight tell us about the painful American experience of the Vietnam
War? That question is the focus of these books. They are the products of
conferences held almost simultaneously in early 1983, just 10 years following
the Paris agreements that ushered in not peace but merely a truce before the
stunningly rapid military collapse of South Vietnam two years later.

''Vietnam as History'' brought to the Woodrow Wilson International Center for
Scholars in Washington some 50 analysts to focus on what was termed the ''higher
conduct'' of the war. For the most part, that phrase meant decision making in
Washington, and particularly the process by which President Johnson managed the
ever-deepening involvement of the United States. It also meant the strategic and
tactical choices made by the uniformed services and by those responsible for the
often extremely violent ''pacification'' programs.

The organizers of this conference write that their purpose was ''looking back at
the war's conduct in a dispassionate way.'' Accordingly, the meeting's
participants seem to have checked their sensibilities at the door. Their topic
was not whether Americans should have come to fight in Vietnam but how the war
might have been more effectively fought. (The volume's introduction,
incidentally, praises the ''bravery'' of the Americans; the adversaries receive
notice only for their ''tenacity.'' So much for dispassion.)

Within these constraints, the papers and conference discussions are very much
worth reading for their shrewd and informed analyses of the civilian and
military politics that gave rise to the kind of war the United States fought.

Late in the Wilson Center conference, one participant complained: ''I haven't
heard in two days anyone say about Vietnam that it was a morally wrong war.'' If
the published proceedings are a guide, his complaint went unanswered. Like all
but five participants, he did not attend the second conference, an even larger
gathering at the University of Southern California, whose proceedings gave rise
to ''Vietnam Reconsidered.'' Had he done so, he might have found his need for
expressions of moral outrage amply fulfilled.

The 85 participants at U.S.C. included a few social scientists and military men.
But for the most part, Harrison E. Salisbury's effectively edited distillation
of four days of talks consists of the reflections of journalists, literary
figures, born-again former C.I.A. operatives, Vietnamese exiles and refugees,
and leaders of the antiwar movement and Vietnam veterans' organizations.

They are reflections filled with anger - anger with Presidents from Truman
through Reagan (only Jimmy Carter is exempted) for viewing third-world
nationalist struggles merely as extensions of the superpower rivalry; anger with
the public for turning its back on the Vietnam veterans, and anger at the United
States (on the part of former Saigon officials) for ''forcing'' its way into
Vietnam with half a million troops, for fighting a war the like of which no
Vietnamese had ever dreamed, for consistently failing to consult its ''ally''
and then for turning around and leaving.

The most interesting parts of Mr. Salisbury's book are the (often eloquent)
efforts by veterans to document their claims that the nation has been far less
generous to them than to the survivors of any other recent war; accounts by
former C.I.A. agents of how they systematically (and successfully) fed
disinformation to the news organizations, and lengthy exchanges among
journalists (both broadcast and print) about techniques of covering the war and
how those techniques affected the coverage. Many of the journalists used the Los
Angeles conference to reply to allegations that biased and defeatist reporting
caused the public and Congress to lose in Washington the war that American arms
had won in the field. These are not new themes. Indeed, none of the larger
themes in either volume are really new. The veterans, the journalists, and even
the disaffected former C.I.A. agents have not lacked for platforms. Neither have
the analysts who have argued that President Johnson was well aware that the
circumscribed war that he permitted (circumscribed for fear of bringing in China
and the Soviet Union and of wrecking his Great Society at home) was likely to
lead, not to victory, but at best only to forestalling the ''loss'' of South
Vietnam to Communism.

Yet presenting new information, or even new ideas, was not the purpose of either
conference. Rather, each was intended to encapsulate a portion of the current
conventional wisdom about the American war in Vietnam. As such, despite their
differences in tone, the two books complement each other rather well.
(Occasionally they contradict each other: for example, the Wilson Center volume
contains short, sharp statistics-based papers that argue, contrary to the U.S.C.
volume, that blacks did not suffer disproportionately numerous combat deaths in
Vietnam and that the antiwar movement often aroused public opinion against
itself, at least through 1968.)


NEITHER book, it should be noted, deals with the effects that the Vietnam
experience has had on American foreign policy since the Paris accords. That is a
pity. Right-of-center critics have for years railed against the ''Vietnam
syndrome'' that they claim has made subsequent Administrations squeamish about
using force to defend American interests. Now, pointing to Grenada, they assert
that the Reagan Administration has at last exorcised this debilitating ghost.

Their exaltation may be premature, however. Surveys indicate that two-thirds of
the public opposes Mr. Reagan's policies in Central America precisely because it
suspects that he will get into a nasty little war there. That opposition stems,
one surmises, not from fear that the United States cannot work its will against
Nicaragua or the Salvadoran insurgents or even against Cuba, but from the
assumption that the third-world revolutions do not threaten this country.

If a decade of war that lacerated both Vietnam and the United States offers any
lesson to Americans, it is that they should not rely on their Government to
define the conditions of their security. During the 1960's the Government
consistently linked that security to the survival of a ''free, non- Communist
South Vietnam.'' Yet neither the Presidents nor their advisers were ever able to
demonstrate convincingly why that should be so. Now, two decades later, Ronald
Reagan has evidently failed to convince a skeptical public that the ''loss'' of
El Salvador, any more than the ''loss'' of South Vietnam, would jeopardize
either the United States or its allies. That skepticism is perhaps the only
healthy product of America's Vietnam experience. B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Truth and Trials

SECTION: Section 7; Page 27, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 141 words


To the Editor:


Arthur R. Miller is not quite accurate in his review of Don Kowet's ''A Matter
of Honor'' (June 3) when he says that a trial is a search for the truth. E. M.
Morgan in his 1955 James S. Carpenter Lecture at Columbia University Law School
was more to the point when he said: ''We must concede that the trial is a
proceeding not for the discovery of truth as such, but for the establishment of
a basis of fact for the adjustment of a dispute between litigants. Still, it
must never be forgotten that its prime objective is to have that basis as close
an approximation to the truth as is practicable.''

Whether we shall know more of the truth of the Vietnam War after Gen. William C.
Westmoreland and CBS have their days in court is at best problematic.  AVERN
COHNDistrict Judge

Eastern District of Michigan

Detroit

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words


This Week Fiction Last Week Wees on List

1 THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer
is caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world. 4 17

2 THE WALKING DRUM, By Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from
Brittany sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia. 3 6

3 FULL CIRCLE, By Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years. 1 6

4 '...AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.) Life
in an Ohio town, 1968 to 1932. 2 3

5 THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land. 5 12

6 LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency. 7 2

7 DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Astan shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.

8 THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updlike. (Knopf, $15.95.) Three wtiches wreak
havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town.  6 5

9 HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet. 11 13

10 BOOK WITHOUT A NAME, by Kit Williams. (Knopf, $10.95.) New picture story by
the author of 'Masquerade,' offering a prize of the finder of the book's true
title. 8 3

11 THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The
legends of an old manor haunt four generations of an English family. 10 5

12 THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures. 12 16

13 HIM WIT HIS FOOT IN HIS MOUTH AND OTHER STORIES, by Saul Bellow. (Harper &
Row, $15.95.) A novella and four short stories by the Nobel laureate. 14 3

14 WARDAY, by Whitley Strieber and James W. Kunetka. (Holt, $15.95.) What
follows the first nuclear war in 1988.  9

15 POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A
woman discovers the truth about her husband after he disappears. 13 3

And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

DIANE ARBUS, by Patricia Bosworth. (Knopf, $17.95.) Although much has been
written about Arbus's startling photographs of freaks and misfits, this
biography is the first extended treatment of art and artist, who was a suicide
at 48 in 1971.

INE XILE FROM THE LADN OF SNOWS, by John F. Avedon. (Knopf, $18.95.) A
1,500-year history of Tiubet, centering largely on the period from 1950 to the
present, when the country suffered the brutal Chinese invasion and occupation.

LYING IN BED, by Mark Harris. (McGraw-Hill, $14.95.) Another epistolary novel,
the protagonist being the letter-writing and receiving Lee Youngdahl of 'Wake
Up, Stupid.' Full of Mr. Harris's unique sense of fun and playful misadventure.

THE MIRROR MAKERS: A History of American Advetising and Its Creators, by Stephen
Fox (Morrow, $17.95.) A fascinating and detailed account, by a scholar, of what
may well be this country's most characteristic institution.

OVERLORD: D-Day and the Battle for Normandy, by Max Hastings. (Simon & Schuster,
$17.95.) History's greatest amphibious operation, the Allied invasion of France,
re-created by a young military historian with almost eyewitness vividness.

A WAVE, by John Ashbery. (Viking, $14.95.) A collection of 44 poems and prose
pieces, marked buy inspired phrasings, elusive images and difficult changing
surfaces, all written with an air of sovereign intelligence. Mr. Ashbery's 11th
book.

WHY WE NEVER DANCED THE CHARLESTON, by Harlan Greene. (St. Martin's/Marek,
$12.95.) A romantic novel, set in Charleston, 1923, about a doomed passion
between two young men, counterpointed by the themes of class and race barriers.

This Week Nonfiction Last Week Wees on List

1 WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The troubled life of the
late entertainer John Belushi. 1 3

2 THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent. 4 4

3 BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock. (Putnam, $14.95.) The san Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Tankees. 3 7

4 THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda. (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery. 3 7

4 THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W. Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam. 6 16

6 MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world. 13 20

7 ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty. (Harvard, $10.) The novelist recalls
her childhood in Mississippi. 2 17

8 CAVEAT, by Alexander M. Haig Jr. (Macmillan, $17.95.) President Reagan's first
Scretary of State gives his views on foreign policy. 12 9

9 FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter. (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs. 6 8

10 MOTHERHOOID: The Soncd Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever. 8 41

11 PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The
autobiography of the star of the 'Dynasty' television series. 5 10

12 STRIKE TWO, by Ron Luciano and David Fisher. (Bantam, $14.95.) Stories about
baseball's historic moments recalled by a colorful former umpire.  1

13 GOOD MORNING, MERRY SUNSHINE, by Bob Greene. (Atheneum, $14.95.) The
syndicated columnist's journal of his child's first year. 15 2

13 THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and David Horowitz.
(Summit, $20.95.) The dark as well as the glamorous sides of four generations of
a prominent family.  1

15 POWERPLAY, by Mary Cunningham with Fran Schumer. (Linden Press/Simon &
Schuster, $16.95.) The rise and fall of a woman executive at the Bendix
Corporation 10 3

Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1 EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities. 1 14

2 WEBSTER'S NINTH COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard
work updated in 1983. 2 14

3 RANDOM HOUSE COLLEGE DICTIONARY. (Random House, $14.95.) New revised edition.
3 5

4 NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money. 5 79

5 CHEF PAUL PRUDHOMME'S LOUISIANA KITCHEN, by Paul Prudhomme. (Morrow, $19.95.)
Recipes for Cajun and Creole cooking by a New Orleans chef.  1

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every regionof the United State, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
A Vietnamese Discusses The Missing Americans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 166 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, July 1


A senior Vietnamese official says continuing United States unfriendliness toward
Vietnam after a war that ravaged the civilian population has hurt Hanoi's
efforts to get villagers to cooperate in searching for missing Americans.

''Members of my family were killed,'' the official said in an interview here
last week with visiting foreign journalists. ''Even my friends, even those who
are alive, I don't know where they are. Now the Americans are not friendly to
us. How can we get the people's support?''

He said that the United States, without reciprocating, is ''imposing'' efforts
on Vietnam and Cambodia to resolve cases of Americans listed as missing in
action.

BANGKOK, Thailand, July 1 (AP) - A United States Embassy spokesman, responding
to the Vietnamese official's remarks, said, ''The Vietnamese authorities have
agreed with us at a very senior level that resolution of the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue
is a humanitarian matter to be dealt with separate from other issues.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM SENATOR MOYNIHAN'S REPORT

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words


Following are excerpts from a study of the relationship between the Federal
Government and New York State conducted by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan:

For over a century, manufacturing led the growth of the American economy. After
completion of the railroad network and the electricity grid, our nation built an
unparalleled succession of prosperous manufacturing industries: steel,
machinery, appliances, chemicals, computers, along with continued growth in
older industries - textiles, apparel and paper.

About two decades ago, growth in manufacturing slowed, and our national economy
entered a period of fundamental change and great instability: productivity
slowed, imports loomed larger and OPEC created an energy shock that affected all
industrialized nations.

An overvalued dollar, disruptive fiscal policies and even more erratic monetary
policies have all contributed to our national manufacturing declines.

According to Data Resources Inc., the structural change in our manufacturing
industries has had a profound effect on employment.

In the years 1948-1952, manufacturing represented 34 percent of all payroll
employment; but by 1978-1982, the share had dropped to 22.5 percent.

500,000 Jobs Are Lost


New York State's economy was one of the first in the postwar period to
experience an end to growth in manufacturing, and since 1969 alone, the state
has lost over 500,000 manufacturing jobs.

One of every four working New Yorkers was engaged in some form of manufacturing
at the close of the 1960's; by the late 1970's, about one in five; and with
current trends, by the end of the 1980's, only one in six.

In other parts of the nation, declines in manufacturing are frequently offset by
surges in service- sector employment - new jobs are created in business
services, finance, information services and newer, high-technology
manufacturing. Yet there is evidence that this may not hold for New York State
over the long run.

Certainly New York State has experienced some growth in service industries in
the later years of the 1970's. Yet this growth has not been strong enough.

Other states in the nation, including states in the Northeast (such as
Massachusetts) are growing faster, and resources and people are evidently
attracted to these states and away from New York.

Gains Do Not Offset Losses


In March 1984, total national nona gricultural employment had increased 2.5
percent over the 1982 level, while nonagricultural employment in New York State
grew by 1.3 percent, half the national rate.

New York's gains in services do not make up for steady manufacturing losses.

Economies change during recessions, especially deep declines such as 1975 and
1982. At the bottom of the cycle, firms make judgments as to where to increase
production when the recovery comes.  In this process major transfers are made
from one part of the country to another. As in 1975, New York came out of the
1981-1982 recession with a still-further-contracted manufacturing base.

One of the reasons for this is the defense budget. The composition of the
defense budget has changed. For the first time since the Vietnam War, the
Federal Government demand for capital goods is causing renewed growth in the
national manufacturing employment.

According to a study produced by the Department of Defense at our request, an
internal shift in the Pentagon's procurement budget, both in size and
composition, has been increasing manufacturing jobs in those areas of the
industrial Northeast and Middle West that lost manufacturing employment over the
last two decades.

State Sees No Benefit


But what does this mean for New York?

The data are not encouraging so far. In the recent recovery, manufacturing
employment growth of all types has accelerated faster outside New York State.
Since 1982, due in large part to the continuing defense buildup, national
manufacturing employment has grown nearly 3 percent. In the same period, New
York's manufacturing employment has dropped by 3.4 percent. The state has lost
126,000 manufacturing jobs since 1981 alone.

Could anything have been done? I joined with Governor Cuomo to request that the
Nelson A. Rockefeller Institute of Government of the State University of New
York assist in analyzing our state's economic condition with respect to the
Federal budget. The Rockefeller Institute now has completed a set of
calculations.

This study concurs with our contention that New York State has not received a
share of the defense budget that is proportionate with either our Federal tax
burden or our population. The study goes on to calculate just what this means
for manufacturing employment in New York State.

The Rockefeller Institute estimates a defense shortfall for the state of between
$4.3 billion and $5.3 billion for each year in the period 1981-83.

Thousands of Jobs


They observed historical ratios between employment and defense procurement, and
calculated the loss in employment from lower defense spending.

If New York had received a fair share of defense spending, the Rockefeller
Institute estimates that 275,000 defense-related jobs would have been created in
1981, 294,000 in 1982 and 280,000 in 1983.

Indirect jobs which result from direct defense expenditures would add an
additional 350,000 jobs in each of these three years.

These calculations are not final.

Yet these jobs could have made the difference between a continuation of the
industrial decline in New York State and the state's equal participation in the
economic recovery.

We do not argue that it would be prudent policy to allocate defense spending
either on the basis of tax burden or population. Yet we must be aware that
Federal fiscal policies, and now increasingly the defense budget, are critical
determinants of our economic fortunes.

As other states grow, we lose population, and in turn the political
representation to help solve the problem. A disturbing cycle is in place.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HART ASSAILS REAGAN ON U.S. DEFICIT

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 691 words


In a speech attacking President Reagan as the ''Babe Ruth of big spenders,''
Senator Gary Hart yesterday continued to demonstrate the kind of campaign he
would run should he achieve what one top aide called his ''slim chances'' of
getting the Democratic Presidential nomination.

Mr. Hart told nearly 400 people at Columbia University that the Federal budget
deficit ''is a potent issue for the Democrats to run on in 1984.''

He said several aspects of the deficit's effect on the economy will offer the
Democratic nominee evidence to disprove the ''old notion that the national debt
doesn't matter because we owe it to ourselves.'' Mr. Hart cited the deficit's
effect on interest rates and the international debt of developing countries, the
diversion it causes of capital that could otherwise create new jobs, and the way
the deficit hurts the dollar in relation to other currencies.

''Put bluntly, the deficits are Ronald Reagan's economic Vietnam,'' said Mr.
Hart.

Better Answer Sought


He went on to caution the Democratic Party about what it must do to offer voters
a ''better and more responsible'' answer to the deficit problem.

''The answer must link fiscal responsibility with real economic growth and
opportunity and I am afraid there are elements of this party who are not
prepared as yet to offer that answer,'' he said.

That comment sounded much like the kind of line that, weeks ago, Mr. Hart would
have used to criticize Walter F. Mondale. But, as he has in the past few weeks,
Mr. Hart stopped short of saying that Mr. Mondale was a representative of that
kind of thinking.

The speech was the second of four that the Colorado Senator expects to deliver
on ''areas of vulnerability'' of the Reagan Administration before the Democrats
convene in San Francisco July 16 to pick their nominee. Subsequent speeches are
to focus on the Reagan Administration's record in civil rights and in foreign
policy.

In this speech and others, Mr. Hart avoided direct criticism of Mr. Mondale, the
likely party nominee, while keeping himself visible as an alternative to the
former Vice President.

In responding to questions from the audience of mainly students and about 20 of
his delegates from New York State who gathered in Ferris Booth Hall, Mr. Hart
said he was still running and that ''anything could happen'' between now and the
convention to improve his own chances.

He noted the pressure coming to bear on Mr. Mondale to name a woman as his
running mate and the threats of floor fights from those who advocate a woman on
the ticket that have dogged the former Vice President. Mr. Hart also noted that
an increasing number of polls showed him running better than any other Democrat
against Mr. Reagan. These factors, Mr. Hart said, could cause some shifts in
delegate votes.

The Delegate Count


According to Mondale campaign headquarters, as of yesterday, Mr. Mondale had
2,093 delegates committed to voting for him on the first convention ballot, more
than 100 above the 1,967 needed to win the nomination. Mr. Hart is 600 to 700
delegates short of 1,967. Kathy Bushkin, Mr. Hart's press secretary, said
yesterday that the candidate had gained about 10 uncommitted delegates in the
past weeks and had lost none.

In his speech, Mr. Hart threw back at Mr. Reagan many of the lines that Mr.
Reagan used as a candidate in 1980 to criticize the $57.9 billion budget deficit
of the Carter Administration. Referring to the more than $200 billion deficit
amassed under the Reagan Administration, Mr. Hart said:

''Let me put it in more graphic terms: If these deficits continue to grow as
they have during the last three years, by the time a 3-year-old child is 18, she
will have to earn $10,000 a year just to pay her share of the interest on the
national debt.''

Mr. Hart noted that in adopting a draft of the platform, the Democratic Party
Platform Committee had adopted language on the party's goals for the economy
that he and his supporters had advocated. Mr. Hart said this amounted to a
''fundamental shift from focusing only on economic opportunity to economic
growth as well.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gary Hart and Mark Alan Siegel

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. NAVY MAY GET MIG'S FROM CHINA

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1134 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 2


A major American defense corporation has arranged with the Chinese Government to
buy Soviet-designed MIG-21 jet fighters that are intended to be used by the
United States Navy in combat exercises.

Julian Scheer, senior vice president for corporate affairs at the LTV Aerospace
and Defense Company, said today that China had agreed ''within the last nine
months'' to supply the company with MIG-21's from its production lines.

The planes, he said, will be modified in the United States in hopes that they
can be sold to the Navy, which is seeking so-called ''adversary aircraft'' for
its pilot training program.

A Navy spokesman at the Pentagon confirmed that LTV had offered to provide
MIG-21's. He said that no decision had been made and that the final award of a
contract for the fighters was expected at the end of September.

In addition to the offer from LTV's Vought Aero Products Division in Dallas, the
General Dynamics Corporation proposed to supply adversary versions of the F-16
fighter it builds for the Air Force, the spokesman added.

Jets Cost Up to $4 Million Each

Mr. Scheer called LTV's arrangement a ''direct buy'' between the company and the
Chinese Government, with no participation by the United States Government. He
said LTV would pay $3 million to $4 million for each MIG-21, then add several
million dollars in modifications to make them suitable for Navy purposes.

The MIG-21 was developed by the Soviet Union during the 1950's and evolved
through many versions into one of the most widely used fighter aircraft in the
world. More than 5,000 are believed to be in service in at least 36 countries,
including Egypt, Finland, India, Peru and Nigeria.

Early Chinese production of MIG- 21's was based on copying Soviet-built jets
supplied before the 1960 political freeze between Moscow and Peking, according
to Jane's All The World's Aircraft, the industry reference. The Chinese
production line was thought to have been closed by the mid-1960's, reopening
only recently.

American pilots have been using MIG-21's in realistic air combat training for
years, operating out of Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada. Those MIG- 21's were
believed to have been obtained from Egypt.

Public attention was drawn to the Nellis program in April when Lieut. Gen.
Robert M. Bond, deputy commander of the Air Force Systems Command, was killed
while flying what the Pentagon officially identified only as ''an Air Force
specially modified test craft.'' Air Force sources said after the accident that
the plane was a Soviet MIG-23.

Problems in Combat Training

For fiscal year 1985, the Reagan Administration requested $66.8 million to buy
eight adversary aircraft for the Navy. The Senate Armed Services Committee,
citing ''serious deficiencies in the aerial combat training of U.S. military
pilots'' revealed during the Vietnam War and a current shortage in the Navy's
inventory of American-made adversary fighters, recommended an additional $50
million.

The Senate committee's report noted that ''to be most effective, aerial combat
training should take place against dissimilar aircraft, one with visual and
performance characteristics that simulated the enemy threat.'' Even though the
MIG-21 is obsolete by today's standards, military experts consider it a sound
fighter that can provide valuable experience for student pilots.

The committee said the Navy should combine the recommended $50 million with
$28.7 million authorized for fiscal year 1984 to expand the purchase of
adversary fighters.

Because the House of Representatives approved only the original Reagan request,
members of the House and Senate conference on the 1985 military budget
authorization bill must forge a compromise.

A MIG-21 Repair Opportunity

Mr. Scheer said that while the Navy program did not represent a large economic
stake for LTV, it might give the company the ability to perform MIG-21
maintenance and repair work around the world.

LTV announced in December that it would offer up to 24 modified MIG-21's to the
Navy, but it did not disclose its source for the jets.

LTV's Vought subsidiary has been building the Navy's A-7 Corsair attack aircraft
since the 1960's but has won no major military aircraft contracts in recent
years.

A Navy spokesman said that pending awarding of a contract and the delivery of
the first of the MIG-21's in 1986-87, it will lease 12 Kfir jet fighters from
Israel for combat training. Under the terms of the loan, Israel Aircraft
Industries will be paid to maintain the aircraft but Israel will retain
ownership.

The Navy uses McDonnell Douglas A-4's and Northrop F-5's in adversary roles.

Although Northrop did not submit a bid earlier this year to sell its heavily
advertised new F-20 aircraft to the Navy for this purpose, Senate action that
would expand the program is believed to have kindled the company's interest,
with a possible bid after conclusion of the House-Senate conference.

The MIG-21

 History

The MIG-21, a single-seat air superiority fighter, was developed to answer the
need that arose out of the Korean War for a lightweight supersonic combat
aircraft for jet- to-jet combat. The first versions were limited-range day
fighters carrying relatively light armament, but subsequent development
emphasized improvments in range, weapons and all-weather capability. The MIG-21
is now the most widely used fighter in the world and for many years formed the
backbone of the Soviet tactical air force. The prototype of the MIG- 21 made its
public debut on June 24, 1956, in Moscow. A version is built in Xian, China,
under the designation J-7, and is a standard fighter in the Chinese Air Force.

Performance

Maximum level speed above 36,000 feet is about 1,350 miles per hour. At lower
altitudes, it can fly at 807 miles per hour. Its practical ceiling is 50,000
feet and it has a range of 683 miles without external fuel tanks. Its combat
radius is between 230 and 460 miles, carrying four bombs, and it can climb at a
rate of 21,000 feet per minute at sea level. The plane is powered by one
Tumansky R-13-300 turbojet engine.

Dimensions

The MIG-21 has a wing span of 23 feet 5 1/2 inches and a length of 51 feet 8 1/2
inches. Its overall height is 13 feet 5 1/2 inches.

Armament

There is a twin-barrel 23-mm gun in the belly pack holding 200 rounds. Four
underwing pylons hold weapons or drop-tanks. Typical loads for interception are
two K-13A ''Atoll'' air-to-air missiles and two radar homing ''Advanced Atolls''
or two rocket packs, or two drop-tanks and two Atolls. For ground attack, a
typical load is four rocket packs, two 500-kg and two 250-kg bombs or four
air-to- surface rockets.  Source: Jane's All The World's Aircraft, 1983-84

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

On the Record;
Hart on the Deficit

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 347 words


From prepared remarks yesterday at Columbia University:

From prepared remarks yesterday at Columbia University:

The election of 1984 is not just another national election, another partisan
choice. It takes place during an urgent national hour. And on no issue is that
more true than on the deficit. No single domestic issue is a greater danger to
our workers and to us all.

Ronald Reagan's deficits are costing millions of jobs. They are forcing the
continued decline of our manufacturing industries and suffocating the birth and
growth of new technologies.

And they are stealing from our future. Mr. Reagan's modest and temporary
election-year recovery is being paid for entirely out of the pockets of coming
generations, to whom Mr. Reagan will bequeath a few films, a smiling countenance
- and a two trillion-dollar national debt.

Put bluntly, the deficits are Ronald Reagan's economic Vietnam. They are as
serious an election issue as any we face this year and as serious a threat to
our future as the Vietnam war was a decade earlier.

The deficit is a potent issue for Democrats to run on in 1984 - but only if we
can convince the American people that we have a better and more responsible
answer.

As President John Kennedy said over 20 years ago, ''Our primary challenge is not
how to divide the economic pie, but how to enlarge it. To fight now over larger
slices of the existing pie can only weaken our effort to expand the economy of
the United States.''

I share that view. And this year, the Democratic platform for 1984 also made the
fundamental shift from focusing only on economic opportunity to economic growth
as well.

If we will challenge ourselves, and accept some sacrifice for the greater good,
we can have the opportunity economy that deadly deficits are throwing away.

But if we are to achieve that vision, we must have leadership that will
challenge us, that will test us, that will call forth the best in the American
people.

I believe we are the kind of people who will heed the call, answer the challenge
and share greatness again.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE LITERARY TRAIL OF ERNEST HEMINGWAY THROUGH SPAIN

BYLINE: By JOHN DARNTON

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column "; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1311 words

DATELINE: MADRID, June 30


The group of people with camera straps around their necks peered down the gorge
into the Rio Eresma and across the bridge toward the pine trees on the other
side. They were looking for a man who never lived.

But the man was vivid in their imaginations as he held the submachine gun
tightly, resting his elbows against the pine needles, waiting.

The group that traveled high into the Guadarrama mountains, to the rock and pine
country of the Navacerrada Pass 40 miles out of Madrid, was the Hemingway
Society. The group was on the spoor of Robert Jordan and his final existential
moment in ''For Whom the Bell Tolls,'' a novel by Ernest Hemingway set during
the Spanish Civil War.

The outing was a break in five days of papers, discussions and gentle
disagreements over the work of the American author, nearly 23 years after his
death. The conference, which took place last week, the first major one on
Hemingway outside the United States, has drawn more than 100 scholars and
Hemingway enthusiasts from at least 10 countries, from Japan to Yugoslavia.



Students' View Questioned

The event is one of the signs that interest in Hemingway and his work, which
fell into a critical shadow in the late 1960's and 70's, is undergoing a
revival. The themes of war, death, machismo, bullfighting and grace under
pressure seemed out of keeping with the mood of the Vietnam War, the Beatles,
ecology and the women's movement. Now the popularity of the writer who once was
an international cult figure is returning, the literary scholars say.

''During the social upheavals of the 60's and 70's, the concern of university
students in the States was for social problems, and Hemingway was seen -
incorrectly, I think - as being on the right,'' said Dr. James Nagel of
Northeastern University, in Boston, president of the four-year-old Hemingway
Society. ''Now, the climate is sufficiently neutral that Hemingway is being
appreciated as an artist.''

The scholars here say that six or seven major new books on Hemingway are in
progress. And a film crew is currently somewhere in France shooting footage for
a four-hour, two- part television dramatization by NBC-TV and 20th Century-Fox
of ''The Sun Also Rises.'' The crew will follow Hemingway's wayward souls, Brett
Ashley, Jake Barnes and the rest, into Spain, some time in July.



Popular With Spaniards

The overwhelming majority of scholars at the conference were American, and for
many of them this was a pilgrimage as much as a scholarly event; but in the
course of it they discovered new things about the novels they had been teaching
for years.

''Don Ernesto,'' as the Spaniards call Hemingway, out of tribute but also
because they have difficulty pronouncing his last name, is popular in Spain. But
here like everywhere else, he has tended to get lost in his own self-
aggrandizing myth, the hard-drinking, womanizing, big-game hunting ''Papa.''

''His myth has made him extremely popular but also a prisoner,'' said Dr.
Agostineo Lombardo of the Univerity of Rome. ''It's become a cage from which we
have not yet liberated him.''

Hemingway found in Spain a country of legend and ruggedness that matched his own
muse. He set two of his three most important novels here, as well as numerous
short stories, and his homage to bullfighting, ''Death in the Afternoon.''



His Haunts Visited

He came here some nine times in the 1920's and 30's, sent back some 28 war
dispatches, propagandized for the Republicans during the Civil War, and struck
something of a bargain of silence with the Franco regime so that he could return
during the dictatorship. He prided himself on knowing the good bars, the best
dives, the renowned matadors.

The conferees went to the site of the Hotel Florida on the Gran Via, now an
annex to a department store, drank at Hemingway's favorite bar, Chicote, chatted
with reminiscing waiters at Cerveceria Alemana, the bullfighters' hangout, and
climbed to the top of the Telefonica, where war correspondents filed their
dispatches.

A small group of aficionados made a pilgrimage to Botin's, where Jake and Brett
took their final meal. This occasioned a debate as to whether, after downing
three martinis in the Palace Hotel bar, the two had consumed five or six bottles
of rioja alta. ''We run the risk of getting bogged down in details,'' observed
Dr. Edward Stanton, an associate professor at the University of Kentucky. ''But
actually it's important to know just how drunk Jake was. It affects the
interpretation of the ending.''



Goya Parallel Drawn

A similar concern for details expressed itself in many of the papers, whose
narrow focus hinted at a field of scholarship that is becoming crowded. None
appeared to break new ground, but they added to the continually growing body of
literature on biography, interpretation and influences. Jose Luis Castillo
Puche, a Spanish novelist who was a friend of Hemingway, found an affinity
between his sharp, pure prose and the brushstrokes of Goya. Dr. John Erickson of
Louisiana State University, in a psychoanalytic approach, maintained that
Hemingway was consumed by ''the threat that came in his own otherness to
himself'' and interpreted his suicide as ''the final act of exorcism.''

For Millicent Bell, of Boston University, Hemingway's realistic style ''seemed
to say that we live in a world of unmeaning, but our nostalgia for lost meaning
is so powerful that we can hear music to silence.''

The difficulty of separating fact from fiction in the author's own life was a
preoccupation for many, who felt Hemingway still had to be demythologized. ''The
bohemian, iconoclastic 'Papa' mask,'' said Dr. Zvonimir Radeljkovic of the
University of Sarajevo in Yugoslavia, ''was a blown-up persona, invented to
cover up his life and the artistic process.''



Linguistic Errors a Topic

For some of those present, a disconcerting theme began with a paper on
''Hemingway's Paris'' by Dr. Jacqueline Tavernier-Corbin of the Univerity of
Ottawa. She said Hemingway misspelled street names, put buildings in the wrong
places and, all things considered, was not a slave to accuracy.

Then came a paper by Dr. Allen Josephs of the University of West Florida, on
Hemingway's poor Spanish. He pointed out that, in one of some 60 linguistic
errors in the novel, Robert Jordan's affectionate nickname for Maria,
''Rabbit,'' has a sexual connotation in Spanish slang. He said the ''inadvertent
Freudian blunder ruins the novel.''

Professor Ramon Buckley, who teaches an American program in Madrid for the
University of Southern California and Southern Methodist, concentrated on some
of the liberties that Hemingway took with the civil war in ''For Whom the Bell
Tolls,'' concluding that the novel was ''a mixture of reality and fantasy'' that
really described ''a third Spain,'' neither Republican nor Nationalist.

For some, such poetic license seemed perfectly permissible. ''Nit- picking,''
responded one of the participants. ''Hemingway himself said that writing is
lying,'' said another, ''and what's created is truth that is truer than facts.''



'A Little Embarrassing'

But Mr. Buckley's theories seemed borne out during the outing to Navacerrada.
The terrain did not have caves for Pablo's band of fighters to live in. Nor was
it likely, as Mr. Buckley noted, that any single mountain band of Republican
guerrillas included such an odd-lot assortment of peasants, gypsies, Basques and
Castillians. ''It's a little embarrassing.''

The lesson for Mr. Nagel, he said, was that Hemingway ''distorted the realistic
details to present a true but metaphoric vision of Spain.''

It was Mr. Nagel's first trip to Spain, and he said the trip was ''awesome'' to
him. ''Just imagine,'' he said, pointing down the way to the Alpine Club.
''Robert Jordan came up that very road and stayed at that hotel.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM REFUGEES FACE AN INCREASING SAVAGERY

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1559 words

DATELINE: GENEVA


In some ways, May was a relatively good month for those Vietnamese refugees
whose small boats completed their voyage across the Gulf of Thailand.

No more than 6 of the 21 boats that reached Thai shores were attacked and robbed
by fishermen. Only 12 refugees were raped and only 7 other women were abducted
and remain lost. Just two other refugees were reported missing. Not one of the
Vietnamese was killed, and no injured victims of assault landed.

These statistics, provided by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
made May one of the least cruel months since the commissioner's office began
compiling data on pirate attacks on Vietnamese in 1982. But no definite
conclusion can be drawn from the statistics: the refugee boats that never reach
shore, those whose passengers drown or are put to death without a survivor to
tell their tale remain an unknown that makes all statistics on the so-called
boat people incomplete.

What is certain is that piracy against Vietnamese refugees has never been more
savage than now, although the number of refugee boats, and thus the number of
attacks, is declining. Good sailing weather has brought the outflow up to around
5,000 a month, but arrivals last year dropped to 28,055 throughout Asia, from
the 1979 peak of 202,158.

'Murder, Robbery and Rape'

''Even if the quantity has gone down, the quality of the attacks, if you can say
that, is going up,'' said Poul Hartling, a former Danish Prime Minister who has
been serving as High Commissioner since 1978.

''What we hear is even more horrifying than in the past,'' he continued in an
interview in his office here. ''The reports are the most horrifying I have seen.
They tell of cruelty, brutality and inhumanity that go beyond my imagination.
The refugees are attacked with knives and clubs. There is murder, robbery and
rape, everything in this world.''

Mr. Hartling said that in a recent talk with Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda of
Thailand here he received assurances that Thailand would pursue vigorous
antipiracy action.

A compilation of survivors' accounts to the United Nations agency since 1982
puts the number of people killed by pirates at about 1,800. More than 2,300
women have been raped; almost all rape victims were assaulted repeatedly,
usually by all or many of the fishing boat's crew members. In addition, 850
women who were abducted remain missing. From the accounts of women who were
abducted and then let go, it is evident that the fishermen take them on their
boats to rape them, often over several days, and frequently pass them on to
other crews.

'Violence for No Reason'

In conversations and interviews with refugee officials, diplomats, officials of
humanitarian organizations and voluntary refugee workers in Thailand, Europe and
the United States, a consensus emerged that rape and violence, rather than
robbery, are now the principal objects of the attacks. With prices of boats
rising, the refugees now carry far less gold, currency or jewelry than they did
when fishing craft were less scarce. Many now make their escapes on river boats,
even less suitable for the high seas.

''There are increasing reports of frenzied violence for no reason, especially
when there is resistance,'' an official said.

On April 2, for example, a boat carrying 12 men and 3 women was attacked by a
Thai fishing boat. All were robbed of their valuables. The men's hands were
bound with nylon ropes. The women were carried onto the Thai boat, raped
repeatedly and returned to their craft. Then the pirate boat rammed the
Vietnamese boat and capsized it. One survivor, Nguyen Van Hai, was rescued by a
Thai fishing boat. The 14 others are presumed drowned.

Occasionally, the pirates will assist refugees as well as victimize them. On
April 11, two Thai fishing boats attacked a boat carrying 44 refugees. The crews
robbed them of their gold and dollars, repaired their engine, gave them food,
and before casting off raped eight women. Two days later, another fishing boat
searched them for valuables, found none and gave them food and water.

Force the Men Overboard

Later that day, three Thai fishermen came aboard. They separated the men from
the women and children and searched them for valuables. Then they forced the men
to jump overboard and dragged four of the women onto their boat. They smashed
the engine and chopped holes into the boat's sides. It sank, with the remaining
women and children aboard.

The sole known survivor, Nguyen Thanh Trong, stayed afloat, together with a few
other men, women and children, clinging to a plank. They drowned one by one, he
said, leaving only him to be rescued two days later by a Malaysian fishing
craft. No trace has been found of the abducted women.

The reasons for the increase in gratuitous brutality are a subject of
speculation. Some refugee workers attribute it to the fact that Thai fishermen
have been emboldened by nine years of virtual impunity in preying upon refugees.
It is also suggested that the increasingly hard Thai policy not only toward the
Hanoi Government but also everything that is Vietnamese, which has resulted in
an increase of refugee boats turned or driven away from Thai shores, may have
given pirates a sense of ''open season'' on refugees.

Others speculate that the very existence of an antipiracy program, even if
largely ineffectual so far, may heighten anxiety among the pirates to allow no
witnesses to survive.

The small numbers of Vietnamese who escape by land across the Cambodian border
are largely male and often military deserters surrendering to the Thai military.


'The Thais Are Very Touchy'

Few of those interviewed agreed to be identified by their organization. Only Mr.
Hartling allowed his name to be used, and he declined comment on several
questions. ''It is clear the Thais are very touchy,'' he said. ''If you say bad
things, they react very badly.'' Since Thai Government action offers the only
hope for combating the pirates, all concerned take pains not to offend Thai
sensitivity, which is so great that the Bangkok Government has considered
criticism of pirates as a slur on the nation.

Last month, the High Commissioner's office concluded in Bangkok a one- year
renewal of the Thai antipiracy program. The $3.7 million effort, which finances
Thai naval patrols and police action at sea and in fishing ports, is financed by
12 nations, with the United States as the leading contributor. Although Bangkok
is obliged to report on its actions under the program, critics have charged that
the reports are late and incomplete. ''This is not untrue,'' Mr. Hartling said.

A senior American official said in a telephone interview in Washington that the
United States was encouraged by a more positive attitude by Thai officials.
President Reagan expressed concern to Mr. Prem, who visited him in May.
Moreover, Thailand is sensitive to Congressional criticism, led by
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, particularly over its
possible effect on military assistance. Thailand is eager to obtain F-16 jet
fighter planes.

Protecting Thailand's Image?

Some dilomats and others involved in refugee work doubt the earnestness of Thai
efforts to prevent piracy. They argue that the Thai efforts are largely
undertaken to protect the country's public image. They pointed to the fact that
shortly before Mr. Prem's Washington visit and the arrival of Pope John Paul II
in Bangkok, one of the rare trials of pirates took place and four men were
convicted of rape, abduction and attempted robbery with record speed. Their
18-year sentences were later reduced to nine years because they confessed.

These critics asserted that despite the abundance of attacks and availability of
witnesses, only 20 cases have been investigated by Thai authorities. In a
reported total of only five trials since 1982, 17 men have been charged and 13
convicted.

Asked to comment on allegations that Thailand has failed to crack down because
piracy might deter refugees from coming, Mr. Hartling said: ''I am not going to
support that in any way. How can I know? I know there are many opinions on
this.''

But the High Commissioner said that ''some people in Thailand have a clear
position that refugees should not be there and should be kept away.'' He cited
Thanat Khoman, former Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, who strongly
opposes the Thai Government's continued willingness to give temporary asylum to
Vietnamese, Cambodian and Laotian refugees. About 127,000 refugees live in Thai
camps.

Officials see a link between the comparative impunity of pirates and Thailand's
official policy of ''humane deterrence'' to refugee arrivals. New arrivals are
put into intentionally austere, prison-like camps, and immigration officials of
potential countries of asylum find access to them difficult. Thailand is said to
believe that this deters the refugee inflow.

Beyond such deterrence, there have been cases in which Thai naval or marine
police craft have towed refugee boats back out to sea. Last January, Mr.
Hartling said, he was so ''horrified'' by a report by survivors that 23 refugees
had drowned after being towed out that he wrote to Mr. Prem to say that ''it
cannot be what you like to see in your country.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Vietnamese refugees

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

RAOUL SALAN DIES; LED ALGERIA PLOT

BYLINE: By ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 916 words


Gen. Raoul Salan, once France's most decorated soldier, who led an attempt in
1961 to overthrow President Charles de Gaulle and who organized a terrorist
group opposed to independence for Algeria, died yesterday in Paris. He was 85
years old.

General Salan, who had been treated for several weeks in Val de Gr,ace Hospital
in Paris, ''died the quiet death of old age,'' a hospital spokesman said.

He had been pardoned by President de Gaulle in 1968, after serving six years of
a life prison term, and in 1982 President Francois Mitterrand restored him to
the rank of full General and reinstated his pension.

General Raoul Albin Louis Salan's 44-year French Army career had not been
characterized by flamboyance or even imprudence until the mid-1950's, when,
shortly after his last tour of duty in the Indochina War, which had just ended
in France's defeat, he was put in command of France's efforts to quell the rebel
uprising in Algeria.

Served in World War I

Born June 10, 1899, in the village of Roquecourbe, near Toulouse, General Salan
was the son of a physician. He was graduated from the militarty academy at St.
Cyr and went to war in 1917, when he was 18 years old. He received the Croix de
Guerre, and, in years to come, 35 other decorations.

He later served in the colonial infantry in Algeria, Morocco, the Middle East,
and Indochina.

Until France's surrender in World War II, Colonel Salan commanded a battalion of
Senegalese troops. At first he sided with the Vichy Government, but when the
tide turned to the Allied side, he campaigned hard and successfully in southern
France with General Jean de Lattre de Tassigny's troops.

After the war General Salan commanded all French colonial troops, until 1950,
when General de Lattre, then High Commissioner of France for Indochina, called
him there as comander in chief of French forces fighting nationalist rebels in
Vietnam and elsewhere.

Ordered Back to Paris

The general was ordered back to Paris before the fall of the French forces at
Dien Bien Phu.

By then the Fourth Republic had been systematically making efforts to give
France's overseas territories some self-government and a measure of
independence, while not surrendering its sovereignty. But it was apparent the
French Empire, in Africa and the Middle East as well as in Indochina, was
crumbling.

Only six months after the Geneva conference on Indochina, rebellions against
French control had broken out in Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria, where more than a
million European settlers had put down roots, and made it plain they intended to
stay there.

General Salan assumed command of French forces in Algeria in 1956, but his
taciturn nature won him few friends among his troops or the European population.
The war against Algerian terrorists dragged on, and because he was suspected of
lacking conviction about the justness of the French settlers' cause, General
Salan was the target of a right-wing assassination attempt in January 1957.

After the fall of Prime Minister Felix Gaillard's Cabinet in the spring of 1958,
Pierre Pflimlin, who was thought to favor a negotiated settlement of the
Algerian war, assumed power. But on May 13, right-wing European activists in
Algeria, in bloody fighting in the streets, won control of Algiers and set up an
emergency government called the Committee of Public Safety. The activists, many
of whom supported General de Gaulle, won General Salan to their cause.

De Gaulle Assumes Power

Back in France, political leaders in the Fourth Republic turned to General de
Gaulle as a last hope of preventing a right-wing coup.

General Salan at first supported President de Gaulle, expecting him to continue
to oppose the Algerian rebels. But soon after President de Gaulle assumed power
he removed General Salan from his military command.

General Salan retired in Algeria in 1959, and eventually joined with three other
generals, colonial troops, and European settlers who, in May 1958, had refused
further obedience to France. As President de Gaulle moved toward negotiations
with the Algerians, General Salan continued to plot to keep Algeria French.

Exiled to Spain

He was exiled in 1960 to Spain, from which he and others in the ''revolt of the
generals'' formed the Secret Army Organization, an underground band of Europeans
in Algeria who used terrorist methods, notably planting plastic bombs in cafes,
buses, and crowded meeting places.

In April 1961 General Salan and the other three generals led a coup in which
their followers held Algiers for four days.

But President de Gaulle made an emotional broadcast in which he successfully
appealed to the patriotism of French soldiers and implored them not to support
the outlawed Secret Army Organization. Algiers fell to loyal forces, and General
Salan went into hiding, a period during which he was sentenced in his absence to
death for treason.

Captured in 1962, he was sentenced to life imprisonment for having led a plot
from Algiers to kill President de Gaulle and to overthrow the French Government.
Throughout his trial he refused to deny he was responsible for the attepmted
coup, and he was the last of the four generals to be pardoned by President de
Gaulle, who also pardoned 3,459 others connected with the plots.

General Salan, who was married to the former Lucienne Bouguin just before World
War II. He had one son and one daughter. He spent his last years writing books
and articles on Algeria and Indochina.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Raoul Salan

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MAJ. GEN DONALD MORELLI, 51; HELPED DESIGN STRATEGIC PLAN

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 337 words


Maj. Gen. Donald R. Morelli, retired, one of the major architects of the United
States Army's new fighting doctrine of mobiity and quick counterattack behind
enemy lines, died last week of cancer after a long illness. He was 51 years old.

General Morelli was a native of Greensburg, Pa., and graduated from West Point
in 1956. He served in combat with the 9th Infantry Division in Vietnam and at
several command posts before joining the Training and Doctrine Command at Fort
Monroe, Va.

There he was credited with helping to develop a new strategic doctrine, AirLand
Battle. The new doctrine, which has been described as the most fundamental
change in strategy since the Civil War, departs from the traditional emphasis on
a war of attrition with massed firepower on a well-defined front.

AirLand Battle, as described in the new Army field manual, calls for deep
counterattacks behind enemy lines coupled with a tactical use of agility,
deception and surprise.

To illustrate the new tactics in briefing members of Congress, reporters, Reagan
Administration officials and other military officers, General Morelli often
showed contrasting slides of football games and soccer matches. The Army, he
would argue, should stop thinking of battle as football with fixed positions and
start imitating soccer, where the players often shift independently around the
field.

Before he retired for medical reasons this year, General Morelli was deputy
chief of staff at the Training and Doctrine Command. He had received the
Distinguished Service Medal with one oak leaf cluster, the Combat Infantryman's
Badge and awards from the Governments of Germany and Brazil.

He died on June 27 at Hampton, Va., and was buried at West Point on Saturday.

He is survived by his wife, the former Patricia Ann Gianatasio; two sons,
Michael and Mark, and a daughter, Nancy, all of Hampton, Va. He also leaves his
parents, Mr. and Mrs. Dan J. Morelli of Greensburg, Pa., and a brother, Thomas
R, Morelli, of Huntingdon, Pa.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JESSE JACKSON'S PROPER INITIATIVE AND STRATEGY

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 316 words


To the Editor: James Reston unfairly invokes the Logan Act in his claim that the
Rev. Jesse Jackson ''may have broken the law'' in attempting to negotiate a
variety of U.S.-Cuban issues. Goodwill trips and private diplo

macy have traditionally been the preserve of those in power, both in business
and in government. Sometimes, however, trips by those out of the chain of
command in Washington and on Wall Street can produce startling results very much
in the interest of the United States.  Two private citizens shuttling between
Hanoi and Washington during the summer of 1980 were able to break a
five-year-old stalemate on Vietnam-to-U.S. immigration procedures - resulting in
the current Orderly Departure Program, which brings thousands of Vietnamese and
Amerasian children to the U.S. each year. They acted only after the U.S.- U.N.-
Vietnam talks had become stalled.  Washington's initial response to this private
effort was to mutter about the Logan Act and to ask ''whose side'' this
diplomatic effort was intended to help. So, too, with Jackson's Cuban visit.
Animosity toward Vietnam's new rulers pales in comparison to the 24-year hate
fest, by seven Democratic and Republican administrations, toward Cuba.

While not being a Garden of Eden, Cuba has faced American embargoes of
commercial and multilateral aid (extending at times to medicines for Cuban
children) and yet has managed to create the most effective health-care and
educational systems in Latin America. Interviews with Fidel Castro over the
years which have appeared in U.S. publications have shown him to be a tough but
enlightened leader greatly interested in normalizing relations with the U.S.

Reston may not like Jackson for impinging on the Washingtonian ''prerogative,''
but the results of his efforts should speak for themselves.

RICHARD M. WALDEN Beverly Hills, Calif., June 28, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ SEEKS TO ASSURE ASIANS ON CHINA ARMS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 5


In advance of the expected sale to China of antitank and other military
equipment, Secretary of State George P. Shultz, plans to reassure other Asian
countries that the United States will not provide Peking with any weapons that
might jeopardize their security, a senior State Department official said today.

The official said that during a two- week trip to the Far East that begins
tonight, Mr. Shultz also intends to reaffirm the American refusal to have any
relations with Vietnam until it agrees to a formula for withdrawing its 160,000
troops from Cambodia and to free elections in that country.

Mr. Shultz, underscoring the Administration's increased interest in improving
ties with the nations of Southeast Asia and the Pacific, will visit Hong Kong,
and the capitals of Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Australia and New Zealand on
his fourth trip to the area in the last two years.

There are about 300 million people living in the countries he will visit and
they produce roughly $400 billion in gross national product, the official said.
''It's of course been a very rapidly growing area of the world economically, and
that is part of the reason we have such a big stake.''

''It's also a very strategically located region, a very important part of the
Asian-Pacific region in which the United States has such a large stake,'' he
said.

Key Meeting in Jakarta

The chief diplomatic activity will occur at the end of next week when Mr. Shultz
attends the annual meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in
Jakarta. The members of Asean are Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines,
Singapore, and Thailand. Foreign Ministers from other countries with close
connections to those nations, such as the United States, Japan, Australia, New
Zealand, Canada and the European Community, send representatives to the annual
Asean meeting. As a result, that turns the session into a global discussion of
issues of particular importance to Asia.

In the aftermath of the visit to Washington last month of the Chinese Defense
Minister, Zhang Aiping, several of the Asian countries expressed their concern
through diplomatic channels about an American ''rearming'' of China, State
Department officials said.

This concern has been stated ever since the United States several years ago
expressed an interest in selling some military arms to China. The officials said
countries such as Indonesia and Malaysia, with significant Chinese populations,
are concerned that a strengthened China might turn its attention to supporting
insurgency movements.

During Mr. Zhang's visit, no specific arms sales were announced, but officials
said they expect by the end of this year that China will request so-called Tow
antitank missiles, modern antiaircraft equipment and coproduction with the
United States in the manufacture of artillery and artillery shells.

Proceeding 'Very Carefully'

To alleviate their concerns, Mr. Shultz will tell the Asian countries that
''we're proceeding in this area very slowly and very carefully,'' a senior State
Department official said.

''The concerns of the Asean countries are very much one of the things that we
have in mind,'' he said. ''We do not want to take any actions in this area that
weaken their security.''

But the official added that Mr. Shultz would also emphasize that the United
States believed that ''it is in the interests of all of us to see China better
able to deal with the military pressure that China faces on its northern
border'' with the Soviet Union, and that ''China's ability to do that, we think,
contributes to continuation of the very constructive policy that China has
followed in the region for roughly the last 10 years.''

The chief security problem in the region is the instability along Thailand's
borders, caused by actions of the 160,000 Vietnamese troops in Cambodia, and the
continuing struggle against them being waged by the anti- Vietnamese coalition
of Pol Pot forces, aligned with the non-Communist Cambodians of former Prince
Norodom Sihanouk and the nationalist leader Son Sann.

Emphasis on Humanitarian Aid

Singapore, Thailand and Malaysia, in particular, have urged Washington to
provide the Sihanouk and Son Sann forces with military equipment or cash to buy
arms. But Washington has taken the position that it will provide humanitarian
aid alone, through international organizations helping out the refugees inside
Thailand, and political support, as evidenced by the strong American backing at
the United Nations for the deposed Pol Pot regime, now part of the coalition.

In the last month, the Vietnamese have also been accused by some Asian countries
of provoking Laos to engage in border clashes with Thailand over disputed
villages along the Mekong river.

The Asean nations and the United States have agreed not to establish diplomatic
relations or provide assistance to Vietnam until it accepts a plan for pulling
its troops out of Cambodia and having internationally supervised elections. The
Asians have expressed concern over the growing Soviet military presence in
Vietnam, particularly its base at Cam Ranh Bay, once an American air and naval
base. This has led to increased requests for American military equipment.

Thailand's military is pressing to buy American F-16-A's, to replace their aging
F-5's.  The Administration is reluctant to sell an advanced aircraft such as the
F-16-A to Thailand for fear that this would lead to an arms race in the region
with Moscow upgrading the Vietnamese MIG- 21's to MIG-23's in return.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SUMMARY OF MAJOR ACTIONS BY NEW YORK'S LEGISLATURE IN '84

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 4730 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, July 5


The 207th session of the Legislature acted on a range of issues and put off
consideration of others. By the time the Assembly recessed at 1:41 A.M. last
Sunday, legislators had passed 1,154 bills. Nearly 800 await the Governor's
signature or veto.

Following are the major actions of the session:


Finance

After a year of tax increases, recession and retrenchment in 1983, Governor
Cuomo proposed a state budget in 1984 that sharply increased spending, without
significantly increasing or cutting taxes.

The Legislature completed action on the budget March 31, the second year in a
row a budget was adopted before the new fiscal year. Spending was up by a total
of 11 percent, the largest spending increase in more than a decade.

The spending was made possible by an improving economy and by the politics of an
election year that saw $40 million approved for projects requested by individual
legislators, the most ever.

Republicans called for a five-year $1.5 billion tax cut plan, but this was
dismissed as a ''political ploy'' by Mr.  Cuomo and Assembly Democrats. They
agreed to consider tax cuts later, depending on the the economy.

The Governor, who played a highly visible role in budget negotiations last year,
was left out of this year's talks until after the legislative leaders announced
the outlines of an agreement.

For the first time, the legislative leaders included provisions in the budget
fixing staff levels at four agencies.

The leaders said they were angered because Mr. Cuomo had violated agreements
reached last year to protect jobs at the four agencies, and they provided funds
to restore 1,600 of those agencies'jobs.

The budget, as adopted, included an increase of $460 million in education aid in
the next school year, the largest increase ever. There were new programs to
purchase computers, improve attendance and train teachers.

About $48 million was added for student aid at public and private universities,
and new programs were created to aid part-time students and give tuition breaks
to Vietnam veterans.

More than $200 million was provided for prison expansion, $3.3 million was added
for the arts, $5 million for grants to fight pregnancy among teen-agers and $20
million to house the homeless.

Along the way, the legislative leaders rejected a proposal by the Governor to
increase tuition at city and state universities, and a plan to raise $100
million through a sports betting game that Attorney General Robert Abrams said
was unconstitutional.

After the budget was adopted, Moody's Investors Service raised the rating on the
state's short-term notes, but Standard & Poor's Corporation, citing a ''built-in
fiscal imbalance,'' did not.

As the legislative session drew to a close, Senate Republicans said the state
would end the fiscal year with a $644 million surplus, and they renewed their
call for tax cuts.


Taxes and Fees Legislation Signed

Exempts Social Security benefits from state and city taxes.

Authorizes Yonkers to impose new taxes and provides $14.9 million in new state
aid to enable the city to balance its budget.  Legislation Passed

Would provide more-uniform property tax exemptions for veterans who served in
combat zones.

Would allow New York residents to subtract taxes paid to Ontario and Quebec from
their New York personal income taxes.

Would allow cantors to receive property tax exemptions available to clergymen.

Would bar paying taxes by checks made out to individuals.  Legislation Killed

Would have provided for a multi- year $1.5 billion tax cut.


Criminal Justice Legislation Signed

Eliminates the requirement for corroboration of the testimony of a child who is
the victim of a sexual offense.

Requires the state to devise a ''fair treatment standard'' for crime victims.

Requires prompt payment of some personal property losses for crime victims and
provides trauma counseling for families of homicide victims.

Requires that half of the fines for drunken driving go to local programs to
combat such offenses.  Makes it a crime carrying an additional sentence to wear
a bulletproof vest while committing a violent crime.

Raises to four years imprisonment and a $25,000 fine the penalties for those who
sponsor, or train animals for, dog or cock fights.

Bars convicted felons from appointment as correction officers.

Makes it easier to prosecute owners of ''chop shops,'' which dismantle stolen
cars.

Provides state aid to localities to buy bulletproof vests.

Makes centers to handle neighborhood squabbles a permanent part of the court
system.

Requires that correction officers be at least 21 years old.

Makes the illegal storage and transport of explosives a felony.  Legislation
Passed

Would make it a crime to fail to remit sales taxes to the state.

Would eliminate the right to a jury trial in certain misdemeanor cases.

Would shift the burden of proving insanity to defendants offering that as a
defense.

Would expand the definition of a sexual crime against children to ''touching
through clothing.''

Would make it easer for prosecutors to seize planes and vehicles used in drug
trafficking.

Would set up a statewide registry of missing children.

Would eliminate the right of separate trials for individual members of a group
charged with the same crime.

Would make computer tampering a felony.

Would make the possession or manufacture of counterfeit credit cards a felony.

Would require local authorities to report to the state police the loss or theft
of firearms.

Would make the state pay for prosecuting inmates accused of committing crimes
while in prison.

Would require the state to reimburse counties for expenses arising from the
escape of inmates from state prisons.

Would provide for study of the calendar system in New York City courts.

Would make auto stripping a felony.

Would allow state law enforcement agencies to eavesdrop in cases involving the
criminal sale or possession of marijuana.

Would provide penalties for the malicious removal of newspapers left in building
lobbies.

Would allow judges to order the return of some stolen property to its owner
before it is used as evidence in a trial.

Would require a court to consider restitution or reparation as a condition of
probation or conditional discharge.

Would define incest to include deviant sexual intercourse.

Would permit the use of videotape testimony of children in grand jury
proceedings.

Would require psychological testing of candidates for prison guard jobs.

Would increase fines against food merchants who repeatedly violate kosher food
laws.

Would make it illegal to remove a dog's license tag without the owner's
permission.

Would require manufacturers shipping pistols into, out of or within New York
City to obtain the permission of the Police Commissioner.  Legislation Vetoed

Would have restored the death penalty for murder in certain instances.


Banking and Insurance Legislation Signed

Authorizes the Banking Board to draft rules covering the chartering of savings
banks and savings and loan associations as stockholder-owned companies.

Requires insurance companies to offer discounts to drivers with air bags or
other passive restraints in their cars.  Legislation Passed

Would grant state-chartered banks new investment powers, including the right to
acquire stock and real estate.

Would permit banks to charge variable rates on credit card loans.

Would require insurance coverage of treatment by psychiatric social workers when
treatment by psychiatrists or psychologists is covered.

Would require not-for-profit organizations receiving donated farm salvage and
field gleanings to carry liability insurance.

Would allow pregnant women to sue for damages under the no-fault law if they
miscarry as a result of motor vehicle accidents.


Consumer Affairs Legislation Signed

Allows consumers to sue in small claims court for false advertising or other
deceptive practices.

Bars retailers fom imposing a surcharge on credit-card purchases, but permits
discounts for cash.  Legislation Passed

Would require used-car dealers to provide warranties on used cars.

Would require that delivery dates be included on purchase contracts for
household furniture and appliances.

Would prohibit mandatory arbitration clauses in consumer contracts.

Would allow triple damages of up to $750 for bad checks knowingly written.

Would require coin-operated laundromats to post signs explaining how to obtain
refunds.

Would require kerosene heaters that do not meet standards to be so labeled.

Would require that merchandise sold by telephone within the state be delivered
within 30 days.  Legislation Vetoed

Would have required the Governor's Consumer Protection Board to meet four times
a year.


Energy and Utilities Legislation Signed

Bars New York Telephone from charging long-distance rates inside New York City
between a new 718 area code and the 212 area code.  Legislation Passed

Would simplify regulations for developers of small hydropower projects on the
New York State Barge Canal.

Would permit the sale of inexpensive hydropower to three companies downstate:
Shearson Lehman/American Express, Grumman Corporation and General Motors.

Would require the Public Service Commission to keep transcripts of its public
meetings.

Would allow the New York Power Authority to build a power transmission line
under Long Island Sound.  Legislation Killed

Would have redistributed some of the state's inexpensive hydroelectric power
from upstate residential customers to downstate business and residential users.

Would have created a statewide Citizens Utility Board, designed to represent
customers in rate cases.

Would have let utilities charge customers for the cost of nuclear plants only if
they are ''used and useful.''

Would have set a cap on the construction costs of the Nine Mile Point 2 nuclear
power plant.

Would have restructured the Public Service Commission.  Legislation Vetoed

Would have required the State Energy Office to provide copies of working papers
and computer runs to the Legislature.


Housing Legislation Signed

Provides $930,000 in aid for residents of Buffalo whose homes were destroyed by
propane explosion on Dec. 27, 1983.

Prohibits owners of trailer-home parks from discriminating against renters with
children.

Protects elderly, disabled and very long-term tenants in rent-controlled
buildings when a landlord seeks an apartment for his own use.

Refunds $10 million on a tax on large real-estate sales in New York City that
was later repealed.

Requires landlords to provide a written receipt for rents paid in cash.

Extends until May 15, 1985 rent protection for 421-a tenants.  Legislation
Passed

Would require the New York City Housing Authority to maintain a separate police
department.

Would give the Department of Housing Preservation and Development the authority
to draft regulations implementing rent-stabilization laws.

Would remove Roosevelt Island from control of the Urban Development Corporation.

Would make new owners of residential buildings in New York City liable for
security deposits paid to the previous owner.

Would set guidelines and lease restrictions to protect mobile-home tenants.
Legislation Killed

Would have increased the borrowing capacity of the Housing Finance Authority.


Health and Environment Legislation Signed

Permits hospitals under Health Department jurisdiction to purchase equipment
jointly, a measure designed to reduce equipment costs.

Establishes a central registry of methadone clinic patients to prevent patients
from receiving medication at more than one clinic.

Sets forth certain rights for the mentally retarded and developmentally disabled
in community residences, such as rights to privacy, to practice religion and to
vote.

Requires a 30 percent reduction in sulfur dioxide air pollution in the state by
the 1990's.

Increases state share of municipal sewage treatment costs to make up for cuts in
Federal aid.  Increases state aid to private dental schools.

Renames the New York State Health and Hypertension Institute the Mary Lasker
Heart and Hypertension Institute.

Limits liability for landowners when their property is used for sledding or
tobogganing.

Permits skin divers to take lobsters at night.  Legislation Passed

Would regulate the incineration of hazardous waste in industrial or commercial
kilns.

Would raise Medicaid fees to doctors, emergency rooms and dentists and create
several demonstration comprehensive health programs for Medicaid recipients.

Would require that disciplinary proceedings against doctors begin within five
years after misconduct was discovered.

Would provide state aid for flood-control projects.

Would create a law enforcement division within the Department of Environmental
Conservation.

Would prohibit improper dumping of dead fish in state waters or land.

Would have a regulation prohibiting the burying of hazardous waste issued by the
Commissioner of Environmental Conservation.

Would require the Health Department to maintain supplies of rabies vaccine and
reimburse counties for rabies treatments.

Would prohibit the sale of metal beverage containers with nonbiodegradable or
nonphotodegradable parts.

Would amend the dog cleanup law to include people walking dogs belonging to
others.

Would protect the confidentiality of medical records even if some details are
disclosed to health insurers.

Would require the state to set up search and rescue programs in wild and remote
and forested areas.

Would restrict the use of lead solder in new plumbing fixtures.

Would protect anyone providing emergency medical care from lawsuits except for
gross negligence.

Would permit the State Medical Care Facilities Finance Agency to finance
equipment purchases.

Would provide up to $1.2 million to the City of Niagara Falls for borrowing
costs for the cleanup of the Love Canal toxic dump.

Would ban the sale of live wild birds unless born and raised in captivity.

Would allow towns in Nassau and Suffolk Counties to restrict the discharge of
waste water from houseboats.

Would raise by $10 the fee to license doctors to finance a referral service for
treatment programs for physicians suffering from alcoholism, drug abuse or
mental illness.

Would permit the Board of Regents to seal the record on penalties imposed for
professional misconduct while ability is impaired by alcohol, drugs or mental
illness.  Legislation Killed

Would have created a superfund to clean up the state's toxic-waste dumps.

Would have allowed lawsuits by victims of exposure to toxic drugs and chemicals
who contract diseases from that contact years later.  Legislation Vetoed

Would have required local governments to pay compensation when they requre the
removal of billboards.


Welfare and the Family Legislation Signed

Allows 14-year-old boys who have permission of their parents and of a Family
Court judge to marry, a right held by 14-year-old girls.

Allows legally separated people to adopt foster children.  Legislation Passed

Would establish a social-worker case management program to assist pregnant
teen-agers.

Would establish a statewide register for missing children.

Would allow the use of advanced blood tests in determining paternity.

Would exempt mothers who breastfeed infants from a state law barring nude sun
bathing.

Would require that reasonable efforts be made to keep a child at home before
placing the child in foster care,


Government Legislation Signed

Requires state agencies to pay their bills within 45 days until 1988 and within
30 days after that.

Abolishes the Human Rights Appeals Board.

Requires annual reports to the Comptroller on claims and settlements paid by the
state.

Allows the Superintendent of Banks to send a surrogate to meetings of the New
York State Mortgage Agency.

Bars public officials from collecting pensions when they retire from office and
are re-elected to the same office.

Extends the State Commission of Investigation until April 30, 1986.

Permits political contributions of more than $100 to be made by credit card.

Sets the third Monday in January as an official state holiday in honor of Dr.
Martin Luther King.  Legislation Passed

Would permit the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to develop the
waterfront in Hunters Point, Queens, and Hoboken, N.J.

Would permit New York City to set up a Water Finance Authority to borrow
billions of dollars to construct water and sewer systems.

Would permit local governments, state universities and public authorities to
offer early retirement incentives to employees older than 55.

Would require elevators to be installed in some renovated New York City subway
stations, require wheelchair lifts on most buses and establish a paratransit
system for the disabled.

Would require the inspector general of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority
to file copies of his reports with the Legislature.

Would require the M.T.A. to report regularly to the inspector general and the
Legislature on how it is responding to the inspector general's reports.

Would give the disabled the right to receive ballots in village elections
automatically.

Would authorize the Urban Development Corporation to assist in the development
of high technology industrial space at colleges and universities.

Would exempt computer access codes from Freedom of Information Act requests.

Would require local governments to return deposits to people who borrow
architectural or engineering plans for public works.

Would prohibit public authorities from spending to influence elections.  Would
expand bonding capacity of the State Job Development Authority to $600 million.

Would increase pensions for widows of police officers and firefighters killed in
the line of duty.

Would allow children of volunteer firefighters killed in the line of duty to
receive special Regents educational awards.

Would require the display of the flag at public institutions on Veterans Day.

Would require that municipal clerks and community boards be notified when bar
licenses are up for renewal.

Would set up a State Tourism Council.

Would require the State Comptroller to provide the Legislature with an annual
list of audits.

Would requre the State Power Authority to provide legislative leaders with
copies of contracts and public hearing records.

Would allow the Committee on Open Government to meet less often.

Would expand the open meetings law to apply to boards of small libraries.

Would require the Board of Elections to take out large advertisements in New
York City newspapers with information on voting procedures.

Constitutional amendment would allow the Court of Appeals to answer questions of
state law submitted by out- of-state appellate courts.

Would change the date on which the Commission on Judicial Nomination must
recommend candidates for the Court of Appeals to Dec. 1 from Dec. 15 in election
years and to Oct. 15 from Nov. 1 in non-election years.

Would remove Roosevelt Island from the control of the Urban Development
Corporation.

Would set up a temporary commmission to study new voting machines.  Legislation
Killed

Would have changed the name of the State Department of Audit and Control to the
Office of the State Comptroller.

Would have given the Governor more control of the Office of Vocational
Rehabilitation.

Would have established a statewide Water Finance Authority to issue bonds to
help localities pay for buildling and reconstructing water and sewer systems.


Business and Labor Legislation Signed

Bars compulsory maternity leave.

Increases the civil penalties up to $500 that a state can seek from employers
who illegally hire minors.

Requires annual report by Commerce Department on complaints from business
groups.

Empowers the Department of Agriculture and Markets to promote the marketing of
New York State wines.

Requires milk cooperatives to provide annual reports to members.

Simplifies procedures for withholding income taxes for small businesses.
Legislation Passed

Would prohibit employers from retaliating against an employee who reports
actions by the employer that could threaten public health or safety.

Would permit New York City to provide automatic tax breaks to businesses and
industries in certain parts of the city.

Would require amusement park operators to post a $5 million bond for personal
injury claims for rides.

Would lower the age requirement for obtaining a real estate brokers license to
18.  Would extend Workers' Compensation Law coverage to people sentenced to
perform public service with nonprofit or volunteer organizations.

Would require commodities or options dealers or investment advisers to register
with the state.

Would exclude real estate brokers or salesmen from coverage under the Workers
Compensation Law.

Would give the state authority to require natural-gas companies to transport
lower-priced gas owned by customers or producers.

Would provide breaks in corporate, income and sales taxes for up to 40 companies
using innovative techniques or producing goods not currently made in New York.

Would allow the Job Development Authority to help develop agricultural projects
and businesses in rural areas by providing loans to banks that would in turn
lend to businesses.

Would require employers or insurance companies to notify injured workers of
their rights under the Workers' Compensation Law.

Would provide matching grants for small businesses that qualify for Federal
awards for reserch into high technology and innovative fields.

Would allow wine tastings of New York State wines in liquor stores.

Would allow liquor stores to sell corkscrews.

Would establish the New York State Wine Retailers Award.

Would allow future victims of diseases that develop slowly to collect Workers'
Compensation benefits.


Transportation Legislation Signed

Requires drivers who have held their licenses less than six months, those under
18 and those holding learners permits to wear seat belts.

Allows distinctive license plates for former prisoners of war.

Applies rules of the road to parking lots.  Legislation Passed

Would require drivers, front-seat passengers and all children under 10 to wear
seat belts.

Would require accident reports to be filed when damage exceeds $600 rather than
the current $400.

Would require driving schools to provide instruction on the dangers of drunken
driving.

Would require gasoline stations with at least four gas pumps to have an air pump
for customer use.

Would require filing of reports on bicycle accidents that cause injury or
damage.

Would require that small children riding in vans or trucks be in child restraint
seats or wear seat belts, a rule already applied to cars.

Would require psychological testing for applicants to be Triborough Bridge and
Tunnel Authority officers.

Would require drivers to exercise due care to avoid colliding with bicyclists,
pedestrians and domestic animals.

Would allow owners of antique vehicles to use period license plates.

Would allow the City of Long Beach to reduce speed limits on several streets to
15 miles per hour.

Would speed issuance of photo licenses to drivers under age 21.  Legislation
Killed

Would have made it a crime to operate a boat while intoxicated.  Legislation
Vetoed

Would have limited authority to spend state funds for the Westway project

Would have required the Department of Transportation to maintain regional
offices.


Education Legislation Signed

Provides tuition grants to New York State Vietnam-era veterans of $500 a
semester or the cost of tuition, whichever is less.

Provides tuition awards of up to $2,000 a year for part-time students for the
first time.

Authorizes the Dormitory Authority to sell bonds to finance low-interest loans
to students.

Increases awards under tuition assistance program to low-income college
students.

Requires disclosure of gifts of more than $100,000 by foreign governments to
colleges and universities.  Legislation Passed

Would create a board of visitors for the New York State School for the Blind in
Rome.

Would permit school districts to require two-way radios in school buses and
provides for state aid to finance half the cost.

Would allow people 60 or older to take courses at state colleges and
universities without paying tuition.

Would appropriate $157,000 to Cornell University to continue a statewide survey
of historical records.

Would allow school districts to use school facilities for day-care centers.

Would allow military officials access to student directory information at public
and private colleges and universities.

Would provide $50,000 for economics training of teachers.

Would create a New York State Writers Institute in the State University to
encourage the development of writing skills.

Would allow veterinary medicine students to practice under the supervision of a
veterinarian.


The Elderly Legislation Signed

Prohibits the forced retirement of most public employees because of age.
Legislation Passed

Would allow elderly people to borrow money from banks on their houses in
installments, so-called reverse mortgages.

Would increase pension benefits to widows and children of New York City police
officers and firefighters killed in the line of duty.

Would increase pensions for some retired employees of state and local
governments.


Sports Legislation Signed

Permits bets on the Kentucky Derby, the Preakness and other annual races at
state's thoroughbred tracks.

Continues experimental live televising of harness races at four Offtrack Betting
parlors on Staten Island and in Suffolk County.

Transfers management of the state- owned Gore Mountain ski resort to the Olympic
Regional Development Authority.

Eliminates the one day between the archery and gun seasons when deer hunting is
prohibited.  Legislation Passed

Would allow disabled deer hunters to shoot does as well as bucks.

Would allow betting on the order of finish of seven horses in a single race.

Would allow the live televising of races at Offtrack Betting parlors, theaters
and tracks.

Would allow ringside physicians to stop a boxing match.  Legislation Killed

Would have allowed a form of sports lottery betting on professional sports to
aid education.

Would have turned the state-owned Belleayre ski center over to private
operators.


Miscellaneous Legislation Signed

Designates Eurypterus remipes as the official state fossil.

Makes the last Friday in April Arbor Day.

Sets Oct. 5 as Raoul Wallenberg Day.

Provides $9.5 million loan to Yonkers and sets up a financial control board to
oversee the city's financial affairs.

Requires kosher food establishments to file the names of supervising rabbis with
the state.

Changes references in state law from ''fireman'' to ''firefighter.''

Requires curb cuts for the disabled whenever sidewalks are built or
reconstructed.  Legislation Passed

Would bar local governments from prohibiting wheelchairs on sidewalks and
streets.

Would require that hotel guests be informed of fire safety procedures.

Would allow Brookhaven, L.I., to reduce taxes on properties damaged by the
Grucci fireworks explosion Nov. 26, 1983.

Would permit extra bars and counters at legitimate theaters and concert halls.

Would provide for design and construction of a state veterans home on Long
Island.

Would allow licensed day-care centers to get information about child- abuse
records of employees or potential employees.

Would name 80 Centre Street the Louis J. Lefkowitz State Office Building.

Would allow New York City to lease part of Bryant Park to build a restaurant.

Would make the Marble Hill section of Manhattan part of New York County.
Legislation Killed

Would have begun the process of placing a state equal rights amendment before
the voters in 1985.

Would have permitted the sale of New York State wine in grocery stores.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mario Cuomo and others

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE PARALLEL BETWEEN TWO U.S. AOD CUTOFFS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 332 words


To the Editor:


In the second half of August 1974, Congress drastically slashed military
assistance to South Vietnam after the Senate, by a two-vote margin, had defeated
a move to eliminate such aid entirely.

As charge d'affaires at the American Embassy in Saigon, I had sent a message to
Washington on Aug. 13 warning that a drastic cut in aid, in addition to military
consequences, would be interpreted as intent by the U.S. to disengage completely
and would very likely precipitate a decision by the North Vietnamese to resume
massive military operations, with a view to a military breakthrough in the
spring of 1975.

Subsequent statements by the North Vietnamese (such as Gen. Van Tien Dung,
Hanoi's military commander) confirmed that their appraisal of Congressional
sentiment and of the Watergate-induced impotence of the American Presidency led
to the decision in September of 1974 to initiate an all-out military attack
against the South in early 1975.  The legacy of what is now history consists of
Soviet military installations along the South China Sea, an endless stream of
refugees, creeping Vietnamese annexation of Cambodia and more to come.  This
June, with House Speaker O'Neill in the vanguard, Congress ended U.S. support
for the Nicaraguan ''contras.'' Capitol Hill has signaled to the Communist junta
in Managua, to Havana and to Moscow that, short of direct U.S. military
intervention (an agonizing step for any administration), the United States is
disinclined to prevent consolidation of a Cuban- model, Communist totalitarian
regime in Nicaragua. It has also undercut the already slim chances that
negotiations might produce results compatible with U.S. national interests.  In
the decade from 1974 to 1984, Congress has learned absolutely nothing.

WOLF LEHMANN Rockville, Md., June 29, 1984

The writer, now retired, also served as deputy chief of mission at the U.S.
Embassy in Saigon and as consul general in the Mekong Delta.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ADMINISTRATION AND JACKSON'S TRIP:LIMITS OF CITIZEN DIPLOMACY TESTED

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1836 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 6


The Rev. Jesse Jackson's recent mission to the Caribbean is only the latest
episode in a history of citizen diplomacy during decades of turmoil and
hostility with countries such as the Soviet Union, China, Vietnam, Iran and
Syria.  Some of these missions have been warmly embraced by the Administrations
in power, as was Mr. Jackson's mission to Syria in January when he obtained the
release of Lieut. Robert O. Goodman Jr. of the Navy, and some of these missions
have been roundly denounced by the White House, as was Mr. Jackson's latest
venture.

As a Presidential candidate, Mr. Jackson has not only attracted much more
publicity than most people who engage in citizen diplomacy but he has also
generated sharper reactions, either acclaim that he is a moral force for peace
or charges that he is improperly usurping Presidential authority.

In years past, other private citizens have got in touch with foreign
governments, sometimes unfriendly ones, offering humanitarian relief, seeking
the release of prisoners, making private business deals or conducting high-level
talks, usually with an eye to influencing American policy.

Individual's Standing Cited

The official reaction has often depended on whether the President felt the
effort could work to his advantage or against him and whether the public
standing of the individuals involved required deference.

For example, W. Averell Harriman, former Ambassador to the Soviet Union, met
with Yuri V. Andropov a year ago and emerged saying the Soviet leader was
''ready and interested to seek joint initiatives'' with Washington, thus putting
pressure on President Reagan to be responsive. The White House, though put in an
awkward position, responded seriously.

Armand Hammer, Chairman of Occidental Petroleum Corporation, was in Peking
concluding a private business deal in May with Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese
leader, during President Reagan's trip. In 1972 Mr. Hammer was also in Moscow
making another deal with the Soviet Union during President Nixon's trip.

Like other industrialists, he was nudging American policy along the lines of
more open commerce, and the Nixon and Reagan Administrations welcomed his
efforts.

In 1969 the Texas billionaire H. Ross Perot went to Hanoi seeking to deliver
Christmas dinners, medicine, letters and other supplies to American prisoners in
North Vietnam. That raised recollections of the ''peace ship'' that Henry Ford
took to Europe during World War I to try to bring an end to that conflict. In
both cases the Administration in power kept a distance.

Similarly, the Reagan Administration turned a blind eye last February when Mayor
Koch tried to persuade Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany to refuse to sell
arms to Saudi Arabia. The Administration had declined to take that policy line
for fear of alienating West Germany and Arab states.

Logan Act Unenforced

Citizen diplomacy dates back to the nation's early history, when an effort in
1798 by George Logan, a friend of Thomas Jefferson, to mediate internal
frictions in France led to the passage of what became known as the Logan Act.
The law bars American citizens from interfering in the foreign policy of the
United States, but its terms are so vague that constitutional lawyers say it has
not been enforced for at least a century.

Privately, Administration officials acknowledge that they cannot make a good
legal case against Mr. Jackson for how he handled his visits to Cuba and
Nicaragua, but they contend he has gone beyond the normally accepted bounds of
citizen diplomacy. They are more upset by what he said than by what he did.

As a result, President Reagan and other high Administration officials draw a
sharp distinction between Mr. Jackson and people such as Mr. Hammer or Mr.
Harriman. Rather, they draw parallels between Mr. Jackson and opponents of
American involvement in the Vietnam War who went to Hanoi seeking the release of
American prisoners and used that platform to attack American policy and increase
pressures for American political concessions.

Privately, one senior official conceded Mr. Jackson's point that President
Reagan, in questioning the legality of his personal diplomacy, ''was taking a
political whack'' at the Democratic Presidential contender and was trying to put
Mr. Jackson and the Democratic leadership on the defensive.

Putting Pressure on Mondale

President Reagan, one senior Reagan political strategist acknowledged, sensed an
opportune moment to put pressure on Walter F. Mondale, the Democratic
frontrunner, by trying to force him take a stand on Mr. Jackson's diplomatic
ventures. ''Either way Mondale loses,'' this Republican figure said privately.
''If he supports Jackson, it offends a lot of mainstream Democrats. If he
disavows him, it upsets Jackson Democrats.''

Republican strategists added that the President's advisers had seen Mr. Jackson
in a politically vulnerable position because of his links to Louis Farrakhan,
leader of a Black Muslim sect, and the demands that led him to repudiate Mr.
Farrakhan's denunciations of Israel and Judaism.

Against that backdrop, ''Jackson's trip to Cuba put the Democrats in a very
critical position,'' commented John U. Sepulveda, a political science instructor
at Hunter College. ''He's increased the political liability to them by going
against the grain and appearing to usurp Presidential authority. As a result of
his association with Farrakhan, he's isolated himself as someone to be
scrutinized.''

In his defense, Mr. Jackson has accused the President of engaging in
''innuendos, hints and suggestions'' to divert public attention from his own
policy failures.

''This, we believe, is a political ploy by the White House to divert attention
from its no-talk policy, a policy which has led to foreign policy failures and
the tragic loss of lives in Grenada, Lebanon and Central America,'' Mr. Jackson
said.

Complicates Diplomacy

In rebuttal, senior Administration officials contend that Mr. Jackson's warm
embrace of President Fidel Castro of Cuba and his endorsement of Nicaraguan
policy and criticism of United States policy while in Managua have unnecessarily
complicated American diplomacy while officials negotiations with Nicaragua are
under way.

''I don't think you'd find any Government lawyer who would want to stand up in
court and try to make a case that Jackson has violated the law,'' an
Administration official said privately. ''But there is a great deal of annoyance
and anger at the way he conducted himself. There is a sense that this is a guy
who doesn't know much about the issues who's mucking around over his head. He's
playing in a league he's not prepared to play in.

''A man like Hammer is making important business deals, but he's not operating
at the political level, trying to change our policy,'' the official added.
''Harriman's background differentiates him. He's an important personage. In
Jackson's case, this isn't a long- term expert drawing on his experience making
wise comments on policy.''

2 Visits Contrasted

Other officials suggested that the President's different treatment of Mr.
Jackson's trip to Central America and his visit to Syria in January reflected
not only the political calculation that Mr. Jackson and the Democrats were now
politically vulnerable but also that the diplomatic impact of his two missions
was radically different. In January he had helped the Administration out of a
predicament, but more recently he compounded its problems.

''It complicates our life when people like Castro use Jackson to try to put
pressure on the Administration to ease up on Cuba,'' a longtime diplomat said.

Legally speaking, the State Department dealt with the Jackson mission last week.
On June 26 John Hughes, the department spokesman, expressed satisfaction that
Mr. Jackson had sought an official briefing from Michael H. Armacost, Under
Secretary for Political Affairs, before leaving for the Caribbean and that he
had kept in touch with American diplomats in the region.

''There doesn't seem to be any contravention of legislation,'' Mr. Hughes said
when asked whether Mr. Jackson had violated the Logan Act.

Two days later reporters reopened the issue, asking whether Mr. Jackson might
have exceeded the law or propriety by trying to negotiate with the Nicaraguan or
Cuban Governments.

Mr. Hughes replied: ''He has made it plain that he did not consider himself to
be in a negotiating posture, and it is certainly our position and the position
of the U.S. Government that he was not in any way authorized to negotiate on
behalf of our Government.''

His Comments Faulted

Subsequent criticism of Mr. Jackson by Mr. Hughes, then by Secretary of State
George P. Shultz and finally by the President indicated that the real cause for
displeasure, as so often during the Vietnam War, was the political comments that
Mr. Jackson made during his trip.

After meeting with Sandinista officials in Managua, Mr. Jackson took sharp issue
with Administration policy by saying the Salvadoran guerrilla movement ''has
standing in many parts of the world community as a legitimate political force.''
He then added ''that is not true of the contras,'' the Nicaraguan insurgents
financed by the Reagan Administration.

He also said the United States Government ''has to respect the sovereignty of
other nations of the world and respect their territorial integrity and has no
right to mine their harbors or to try to overthrow their Government.''

Such criticism of Administration policy has been made by prominent Congressional
Democrats and some Republicans in public debates.

Took Dispute Abroad

What so irked President Reagan, Mr. Shultz and other policy-makers, Mr. Hughes
indicated, was that Mr. Jackson had gone to a politically hostile country and
attacked American policy from that platform, an action that he contended was in
violation of long- standing American tradition of keeping policy disputes at
home.

Nonetheless, both the President and the State Department indicated Thursday that
the Administration would not block Mr. Jackson's plans to travel to the Moscow,
where he has said he would seek the release of Andrei D. Sakharov, the Soviet
physicist and dissident.

President Reagan warned on Wednesday that this would interfere with private
diplomatic efforts. On Thursday Mr. Hughes said, ''The State Department
certainly would not stand in the way of a private citizen traveling to the
Soviet Union.'' The President himself said he hoped Mr. Jackson was ''calling on
the State Department'' before going to Moscow.

Privately, officials said they were skeptical that Soviet leaders would allow
Mr. Jackson to deal with the Sakharov case. But they acknowledged that if
somehow he arranged for the physicist's safe emigration, it would be such a
diplomatic and political coup that the Administration would probably have to
swallow its discomfort.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jesse Jackson

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Cambodia Rebels Vow To Press Hanoi Harder

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 166 words

DATELINE: PEKING, July 6


The three leaders of Cambodia's resistance coalition ended three days of talks
here today and said they had resolved to increase diplomatic and military
offensives against Vietnamese occupation.

A statement said the coalition president, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the vice
president, Khieu Samphan, and the prime minister, Son Sann, conducted their
talks at the Prince's Peking home.

''The three resistance leaders decided to take new measures together to advance
the just struggle of Kampuchea,'' the statement said, using the Cambodians' name
for their country.

It gave no details of the new measures. An aide to Prine Sihanouk said only that
the coalition would increase its diplomatic and military efforts against Hanoi,
whose forces invaded Cambodia in December 1978 and installed the Heng Samrin
regime in January 1979.

The coalition is recognized by the United Nations as Cambodia's government,
although it holds only limited areas of the country, mainly along the Thai
border.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
 Lawyer to Advise Judge on Fund



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 139 words


A New York lawyer was appointed yesterday to serve as investment adviser for the
$180 million trust fund that is to compensate victims of Agent Orange, the
Vietnam War defoliant.

Richard J. Davis, 38 years old, was named special master to assist Federal
District Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Brooklyn in managing the fund.

The fund was created in an out-of- court settlement May 7 between lawyers for
Vietnam veterans and the seven chemical companies that produced Agent Orange
during the war. Judge Weinstein still must approve the settlement, and he is to
hold hearings on it next month.

Mr. Davis, a partner in the Manhattan law firm of Weil, Gotshal & Manges, serves
as counsel to the Argentine central bank in its efforts to refinance that
nation's international debt. From 1977 to 1981 he was an Assistant Treasury
Secretary.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY ;
;
 Law to Help City Take Buildings

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 385 words


The city will be able to take over more rapidly buildings whose owners owe a
year or more of taxes under a bill Mayor Koch signed into law yesterday. The law
allows such buildings to be taken over individually.

Under the old law, the city could take over buildings only after compiling a
list of them in each borough and then moving against them all at one time - a
process city officials said can take up to two years.

The new law, which applies to buildings with three or more units, is ''an
important weapon to stop deteriorating housing,'' according to its sponsor,
Councilman Stanley E. Michels of Manhattan.


Lawyer to Advise Judge on Fund

By The Associated Press

A New York lawyer was appointed yesterday to serve as investment adviser for the
$180 million trust fund that is to compensate victims of Agent Orange, the
Vietnam War defoliant.  Richard J. Davis, 38 years old, was named special master
to assist Federal District Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Brooklyn in managing the
fund.

The fund was created in an out-of- court settlement May 7 between lawyers for
Vietnam veterans and the seven chemical companies that produced Agent Orange
during the war. Judge Weinstein still must approve the settlement, and he is to
hold hearings on it next month.

Mr. Davis, a partner in the Manhattan law firm of Weil, Gotshal & Manges, serves
as counsel to the Argentine central bank in its efforts to refinance that
nation's international debt. From 1977 to 1981 he was an Assistant Treasury
Secretary.


New York Fugitive Held in Chicago

One of New York State's 12 most wanted fugitives was arrested in Illinois
yesterday, nearly nine months after he escaped through a window of the
Queensboro State Correctional Facility in Long Island City, the New York City
Police said.

The fugitive, 25-year-old John Frank Maier of Yonkers, was wanted on homicide
charges for the shooting death of a patron in a Bronx bar during an attempted
holdup on Sept. 15, 1983. He was arrested in the Chicago suburb of Elburn at
noon yesterday by Illinois state police officers and Chicago police officers.

In May, New York State included Mr. Maier in a new list of ''12 most wanted''
fugitives. He is the fourth person on the list to be arrested and is awaiting
extradition, the police said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FRANCIS HEISLER

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 114 words

DATELINE: CARMEL, Calif., July 6


Francis Heisler, a decorated veteran of World War I who became a lawyer and
defended hundreds of conscientious objectors in three wars, died Thursday. He
was 88 years old.

Richard Criley, a longtime friend who is vice chairman of the Northern
California chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union, said Mr.. Heisler had
defended more than 2,000 conscientious objectors in World War II, the Korean War
and the Vietnam War.

Mr. Heisler was born in Hungary and served as a lieutenant in World War I, and
was decorated for bravery under fire. He came to the United States after the war
and became a lawyer. He is survived by his wife, Friedy, and two grandchildren.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AIR FORCES'S ALASKA PILOTS AWAIT CALL TO INTERCEPT SOVIET CRAFT GALENA AIR FORCE
STATION, Alaska (AP) - When Capt. Billy Bob Wimberly's F-15 jet fighter shrieks
off the runway at this tiny air base near the Yukon River, he knows that within
minutes he may be eye to eye with a Soviet military pilot.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 34, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 731 words


Captain Wimberly, a taciturn 30- year-old from Muleshoe, Tex., has intercepted
Soviet aircraft heading toward Alaska three times in 13 months in international
airspace over Arctic waters.

''It's exciting,'' he said. ''It's a culmination of all our training.''

Another flier, Capt. J. J. Jackson, has not yet crossed paths with a Soviet
aircraft in several months in Alaska. ''You sit and wait for something to
happen,'' he said. ''You get real keyed up just waiting.''

The two Air Force captains are among two dozen F-15 pilots who rotate in pairs
between this ramshackle facility in interior Alaska and Elmendorf Air Force Base
in Anchorage. They draw seven-day stints in tiny quarters 100 yards from the
Galena runway.

Waiting for the Alarm


They watch television, read, study, eat and sleep. They wait for the claxon to
sound an alert that radar has picked up aircraft heading east toward Alaska from
the direction of the Soviet Union mainland, 450 miles from Galena.

When the horn blares, the men scramble into their flight suits, slide down a
pole and sprint for their slate- gray airplanes, housed next door in hangars.

The Air Force will not say how long it takes the pilots to intercept Soviet
planes. But the F-15's can fly at more than 1,800 miles an hour, so it is a
matter of minutes until the planes reach their targets, officials say.

''We are the top cover for America,'' says Col. Wilford Abbott, commander of the
21st Tactical Fighter Wing, to which Captain Wimberly and his colleagues belong.
Colonel Abbott commands the forward base at Galena, about 275 miles west of
Fairbanks, and another forward base at King Salmon, on the Alaska Peninsula
about 300 miles southwest of Anchorage.

The Air Force relies on pilots at these bases to check out unidentified aircraft
over international waters from the Arctic Ocean to the north and the Pacific
Ocean to the west.

Some Wave, Some Don't


When the pilots, working in pairs, intercept Soviet planes, one stays back to
provide cover while the other moves to within 500 feet of the Soviet craft.

''Some of the pilots wave,'' Captain Wimberley said. ''I don't.''

The pilots take pictures with hand- held cameras, talk into tape recorders to
describe the Soviet aircraft and look for any sort of detail of military
interest, says Capt. Jay DeFrank, of the Elmendorf public affairs office.

Presumably, Captain DeFrank says, the Russians are also checking out their
United States counterparts.

''We are not going to defeat a Soviet invasion with these four airplanes, but we
are going to provide warning,'' Colonel Abbott says from his office at
Elmendorf. On his coffee table is a book titled ''Soviet Aerospace Handbook.''

'Hours of Boredom'


The colonel, who spent six and a half years as a prisoner of war after he was
shot down over North Vietnam in 1966, says his pilots at the two forward
facilities suffer ''hours and hours of boredom punctuated with an hour or two of
adrenalin.''

The Air Force says it has intercepted Soviet aircraft over international air
space 78 times from 1976 through mid- May of this year. The aircraft are usually
bombers and reconnaissance planes, said Col. Charles D. Bozzuto, deputy
commander for the 21st Wing's flying operations.

The Air Force says Soviet aircraft have breached United States airspace, which
begins three miles off the Alaska coast, six or seven times since 1961.

Although it never knows for certain why Soviet planes are heading for Alaska,
the Air Force says one obvious reason is to test American responses. Sometimes
the Russians are simply checking ice conditions in the Bering and Chukchi seas
for the Soviet Navy, Colonel Buzzuto said.

Ups and Downs of Activity


There is no pattern to Soviet flights toward Alaska, he said. ''We can go for
months with no activity and then have a lot of it over a short period of time,''
he added.

According to the Air Force, there were 43 intercepts from 1976 through 1979, but
only 35 from 1980 through mid- May of this year. There were five in 1983 and two
so far this year.

After the Russians downed a South Korean airliner last September after it
strayed into Soviet airspace, ''there was no activity for a long time, three or
four months,'' Colonel Bozzuto said. ''We don't know why. Maybe they were
nervous about what we might do.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2805 words


Twenty years ago, the Off Off Broadway movement was beginning to come into its
own; and such young writers as Lanford Wilson, Sam Shepard, John Guare, Megan
Terry, Paul Foster, Maria Irene Fornes and Jean-Claude van Itallie all shared an
exciting new world - a world in which improvisation was as much a way of life as
it was a theatrical technique. Although some of these writers would later emerge
as America's preeminent playwrights, they worked, in those days, as hotel clerks
and waiters and short-order cooks to support their aspirations. They were young
then and passionate about the theater, and they not only saw everything their
friends did at the Caffe Cino and La Mama, but also shared with one another all
their discoveries and plans.

''I can't believe the energy we had then,'' recalls Lanford Wilson. ''I remember
running around shouting, 'theater should be a circus.' It was all very intense
and exciting. There was a kind of independent collective Off Off Broadway: if
one of us discovered something, it belonged to everyone. We were all ripping
each other off, but it didn't matter in the least because we were all so
strongly what we were. I felt like we were what the Impressionists must have
been.'' Out of that hectic, fertile atmosphere came Mr. Wilson's first
full-length play, ''Balm in Gilead'' - a critically-acclaimed revival of the
1965 work is currently running at the Circle Rep - and the show remains, as he
notes, ''a homage to what we were all doing back then.''

Set in one of the all-night cafes where Mr. Wilson and his colleagues used to
congregate, ''Balm'' is a young man's play, a play full of the exuberance Mr.
Wilson then felt about the technical possibilities of the medium, and the
exhilaration a boy from the Middle West felt on discovering that the streets of
New York were themselves a wonderful ''museum.''

The play's 30-odd characters - drug addicts, hustlers, pimps, prostitutes, ''the
bums, the petty thieves, the scum, the lost, the desperate, the dispossesed, the
cool'' - were inspired by people Mr. Wilson used to spend time with on the Upper
West Side. And while the play is a shapely work of art that bears all the
thematic seeds of his later work, it is also a kind of journalistic document, a
carefully orchestrated montage of conversations overheard.



''A lot of the play is dictation,'' Mr. Wilson says. ''I was just trying to take
things I'd heard and adapt them to a flow. Fick's monologue at the end of Act
One was said to me verbatim. I remember it was like four in the morning and
raining, and I got off the subway, and this guy was walking along next to me,
like Ratzo Rizzo (in ''Midnight Cowboy''). He didn't want money - he wanted a
buddy or something. I went home and took a hot bath and sat down at the
typewriter and wrote down everything he said. It was an exercise in getting down
exactly what he said, exactly the way he said it.''

This ear for conversation, Mr. Wilson discovered, at the age of 20, was a kind
of natural gift. ''I didn't realize it until I started writing plays,'' he
recalls. ''I said, 'Not only do I hear the way people talk - and the specific
rhythms of their speech - but I have a talent for reproducing that in an
organized and exciting way.' That is a talent - everything else is work.''

In some 40 full-length and one-act plays, Mr. Wilson has used this talent to
create a remarkable gallery of ordinary people - people who together make up a
portrait of America as the playwright sees it today. Sally, the reclusive
spinster in ''Talley's Folly,'' Kenny, the crippled Vietnam veteran in ''Fifth
of July,'' the shabby residents of ''The Hot L Baltimore,'' the aging female
impersonator in ''The Madness of Lady Bright,'' the disaffected archeologist in
''The Mound Builders '' and the sophisticated suburban couples in ''Sernading
Louie'' - what these disparate characters all share is a peculiarly American
sense of dislocation, a sense of having lost connection with their pasts.
Haunted by memories of how things used to be, these characters spend their days
searching after their misplaced dreams, and they talk nostalgically of the time
when ''everything was an event,'' when ''we were very young, we were very
merry.''

In using memory to romanticize the past, however, Mr. Wilson's characters
perpetuate their illusions - the same way they so skillfully use verbal
pyrotechnics to conceal their vulnerabilities and to shut out the very
individuals who might make them feel less alone. Matt Friedman in ''Talley's
Folly'' has developed a nimble way with jokes and shaggy dog tales to avoid
confronting painful truths; Jackie in ''The Hot L'' talks a tough game to
present a self to the world that hides her real na"ivete; and the two estranged
couples in ''Louie'' use language not to communicate with one another, but to
insure their mutual isolation.



For Mr. Wilson, speech patterns form the basis of a character; and characters
form the basis of a play. It is an approach that tends to result in discursive
works, often more musical in structure than conventionally plotted. In some
cases, a play springs from a single line of overheard dialogue; in others, from
one or more individuals whom the playwright knew in real life. D. K. Eriksen,
the lapsed novelist recovering from alcoholism in ''The Mound Builders,'' Mr.
Wilson observes, was ''one-third Tennessee Williams, one-third Jane Bowles, and
one-third me.'' And the incestuous brother and sister in ''Home Free'' were
composites of two pairs of friends, ''I sort of schmoozed together.''

Having laid the groundwork for a character, Mr. Wilson then shapes the role
further with a particular actor in mind - drawing upon their idiosyncratic
gifts, as well as his own perceptions. ''What it is,'' he says, ''is observation
of the outside, filtered through things you've experienced yourself. It's the
same thing as acting - you make these substitutions. You know intuitively what
it's like having something stolen or stealing something or being a member of a
minority race, because there are specific instances in your life where you were
that person in a certain situation. Actors remember that moment, while they're
playing a particular scene, and that's how they get this incredible truth. It's
the same thing for me.''

In Mr. Wilson's case, this process has yielded characters of extraordinary
humanity and depth. He has a difficult time, he says almost wistfully, creating
out-and-out villains; and he attributes his gift for empathy to a tendency to
automatically pick up moods and emotions from people around him. ''I'm a
sponge,'' he says. ''Someone comes into the room and has a headache, and within
a moment I have a headache, too. Just listening to people, I become them. I go
away from parties so depressed, because someone's told me a depressing story.
It's like I had to write it or something - I've had to go through all the
corresponding feelings. Fortunately, if I'm around someone really happy, I can
pick that up, too.''



When he first began to write, Mr. Wilson was still spellbound by the incredible
diversity of people he was meeting and their varied use of language: he recalls
that as a young man of 19, even ''sarcasm was a major revelation - to someone
from Ozark (Missouri), it was astonishing that people could say, 'Right' and
mean 'no way.' '' This Dickensian delight in personality was reflected in his
early plays, which featured large, sprawling casts of characters, sketched-in
quickly with a couple of lines or speeches. ''Balm'' conjured up an entire
lowlife world in Manhattan; ''The Rimers of Eldritch'' suggested a tiny Midwest
town, population 70, and ''Hot L'' evoked the teeming life of a residential
hotel. In addition to honing Mr. Wilson's ability to draw thumbnail sketches,
such collage- form plays also gave him a chance to experiment with overlapping
dialogue techniques, the musical repetition of scenes, and movement back and
forth through time.

By the late 60's, however, Mr. Wilson had started to worry that he'd been
''using theatrical gimmicks to avoid examining character at sufficient depth.''
He tried to limit the number of characters in his plays - and write those
characters in greater detail - he slowly moved towards a more linear narrative
structure, as well. Although later works like ''Talley's Folly'' and ''A Tale
Told'' would retain certain expressionistic touches, the well-made play became a
model of what he wanted to achieve.

At the same time, a new optimism had crept into his work. Given his strongly
religious upbringing, Mr. Wilson has always been inclined to regard his plays as
''Baptist sermons'' that raise the question ''why are we behaving this way?,''
and his early plays both purveyed a tragic view of life, and featured abrupt,
violent endings that emphasized the dark consequences of human actions. In
''Balm,'' a young man is stabbed to death in a scene that is repeated three
times; in ''Rimers,'' the hypocritical citizens of a small town murder the local
eccentric; and in ''Serenading Louie'' a man murders his wife, then commits
suicide.

As Mr. Wilson recalls, the 1970 opening of ''Louie'' in Washington D.C. was
''devastating. There was a line of people with tranquilizers in their hand at
the water fountain, and I said, 'that wasn't my intention to ruin someone's
evening.' At that moment, I decided I wanted to find something you could examine
and be absolutely truthful about, and still find something positive to say. It
was a very conscious decision.''



Quite possibly, he adds, there was a more personal reason for this philosophic
shift as well. It wasn't so much that he had suddenly achieved a newly
affirmative view of life; it was more, he suspects, that ''a huge event'' in his
life had left him vulnerable and in need of ''self-protection.'' In 1967, while
Mr. Wilson was working on ''Louie,'' his friend and mentor Joe Cino - the
founder of the Caffe Cino - committed suicide; and his death, says the
playwright, ''showed me things that I didn't want to know, that I didn't want to
think about.'' ''One is kind of in danger of becoming unglued all the time,'' he
explains, ''and so I'm hoping that it's really not just self-preservation that
is responsible for the plays trying to be a little lighter. Still, there's a
possibility that I said, 'what positive things can I dwell on?' because the
negative things were doing me in.''

Whatever the underlying reasons, Mr. Wilson took a decidedly more upbeat
approach in his next play, ''The Hot L Baltimore.'' Though the play is an aching
lament for the loss of the past - as represented by a once grand hotel, turned
seedy and now awaiting the wrecker's ball - it is also a tribute to the
romanticism and plucky courage of the hotel's inhabitants, these ''losers who
refuse to lose.'' The play ends with an image of the hotel's residents, drinking
champagne and turning slow circles on the dance floor.

''Fifth of July,'' the first of the Talley plays to be written, possesses a
similar Chekhovian air of regret, combined with humor and an insistent sense of
redemption. Its characters - a group of disaffected exiles from the 60's, whose
idealism has since turned sour - must come to terms with the not-so-pretty facts
of their radical past and accept some unpleasant truths about themselves; and
yet in doing so, they achieve at least a glimpse of a brighter future. Kenneth
Talley, who lost both legs in Vietnam, resolves to continue his teaching career,
and decides not to sell the family homestead as he had originally planned; his
lover makes plans to work on its gardens; and his Aunt Sally spreads her
husband's ashes on the land, thereby validating the continuity of time past and
time present. If the play implies that the day of independence is bound to be
followed by a spiritual hangover, that the price of the freedom conferred by
America is rootlessness and anomie, then it also promises the possibility of
celebrating what remains good and true in the country and its people.

As far as Mr. Wilson is concerned, recording contemporary history - ''where we
are today'' - has always been an animating concern; and he says he wants his
work to ''be responsible to the times.'' ''If I can get it down accurately,'' he
says, ''it's going to reflect something larger than the microcosm we're dealing
with. Someone like Tennessee (Williams) - he wrote himself that day, the way he
was perceived by the world. To me, that's so egotistical. I write the world as I
see it around me.''



Wary of being didactic, Mr. Wilson usually grounds his examination of social
issues in intensely personal situations - a checker game, for instance, sums up
the generational conflict in ''Hot L,'' just as a series of dissonant
conversations between former lovers conveys the aftermath of the 60's in ''Fifth
of July.'' At the same time, though, his plays do delineate a vision of America
as a country - in Mr. Wilson's words - that ''is trying to reverse the myth of
Jupiter; instead of the old man eating his children, the children are eating
their grandparents.'' Whether embodied by a condemned hotel (''The Hot L
Baltimore''), a family home for sale (''Fifth of July'') or a parcel of historic
land (''The Mound Builders''), remnants of a more gracious past stand threatened
by change and flux in Mr. Wilson's plays; and his characters mourn the loss of
the old certainties on which they were raised - their beliefs about the family,
about America, about the way things would turn out.

Though endowed with mythic resonance in the plays, that sense of loss and
rootlessness stems from events in Mr. Wilson's own life. Born in Lebanon, Mo.,
Mr. Wilson was 5 when his parents got divorced, and he recalls that the thing he
''wanted most as a kid, was a father.'' He and his mother moved from Lebanon to
Springfield, Mo., to Ozark, Mo., - all before he was 12; and in 1955, he went
west to California in search of his father, whom he had not seen in 13 years.
Their reunion was a disappointment, and after a year, Mr. Wilson headed back
East - to Chicago and then New York.

The sucession of rented houses that Mr. Wilson lived in as a child would give
him a lasting sense of impermanence; and he has returned again and again in his
plays to the theme of ''why it isn't all right to live in a trailer and move
from one place to another - why we need that feeling of land.'' To this day, the
one place he thinks of as home is his grandmother's house - until it burned down
in the mid-50's, it was the oldest house in Lebanon, Mo. - and Lebanon, he says,
remains the place where he dreams.

He has commemorated the town, of course, in the Talley plays, but when he later
returned for a visit, he found that Lebanon was not nearly as beautiful, as
idyllic, as he had remembered it. Classmates had succumbed to alcoholism and
divorce; and the open, hilly land was now spotted with neat little houses and
landscaped yards. Like so many of his characters, Mr. Wilson realized that ''it
wasn't at all like what I thought it was'' - memory and reality no longer
coincided.



In addition to contemplating two more Talley plays - one set during the Civil
War, another set during World War I - he says he would also like to concentrate
on writing a play with ''immediate, obvious overt action'' and at least one
character who may ''not be a villain necessarily, but someone who's powerful,
who really does not care what happens to other people as long as he gets his
way.'' ''I think I've been avoiding that,'' he explains, ''and I want to try
these things I haven't done before.''

Like Zappy, the tennis player in ''Angels Fall,'' who realized the instant he
hit a ball that ''this is what I do,'' Mr. Wilson knew that he had found his
vocation the moment he started writing. He was 20 or so at the time, and one
day, during his lunch hour - he was working in an advertising agency in Chicago
- he began writing down what he thought was a short story. ''By page two,'' he
recalls, ''Everything just fell into place, and I realized I was writing a play.
If someone had asked me what I did, 20 minutes after that experience, I would
have said, 'I write plays.' I didn't know what a playwright was then, or what a
play was, but I realized that it would always challenge me, that it was
something you could spend your entire life doing and never totally learn.''

''It's more difficult than when we were starting out,'' he goes on, ''because
we're now a little more critical of ourselves. You don't have the energy you had
back then, and you probably discard things you'd have leaped at 20 years ago.
You're never really happy with any of it, but you think, 'if I keep at it, I'm
eventually bound to write something decent.' ''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Gary Sinise, Laurie Metcalf and Danton Stone in performance

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE;
WARSPEAK

BYLINE: By Charles Mohr

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1065 words


''We are doing to the English language what the European tribes did to Latin,''
says Ned Conger, a retired Navy captain. ''Most of us can still speak classical
English, but in our working lives we are creating new languages - speaking
jargon and acronymese.''

Although medical professionals, computer specialists, accountants, stockbrokers
and many other castes also do this, perhaps none of the other new-romance
languages are so fully constructed or, at times, so incomprehensible as that
developed by the military establishment.

This establishment has, so far, failed to ''prioritize'' a reduction in the use
of jargon, acronyms, abbreviations, artificial words and other amendments to
standard English. But, perhaps, it can be excused. To borrow some of its
language, to make that reduction might be ''counterintuitive'' (now a rough
synonym for ''crazy'').

While military jargon and abbreviations can be confusing to outsiders, they are
sometimes more precise for those who deal in the morbid science of war, and at
least permit some euphemism in discussion of a grim subject.

Various attempts to ''soften'' the language of war can be found in the 1979
edition of the Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated
Terms, published by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

''Accidental war - Not to be used (see accidental attack),'' goes one entry. The
dictionary then defines ''accidental attack'' as one occurring ''without
deliberate national design as a direct result of a random event'' such as
''simple human error.''

Although I am reasonably familiar with the vocabulary of nuclear war, the
dictionary has items new to me. An example is ''dwarf dud - A nuclear weapon,
which when launched at or emplaced on a target, fails to provide a yield within
a reasonable range of that which could be anticipated with normal operation of
the weapon. This constitutes a dud only in the relative sense.''

Well, you can see their point. Even a dwarf nuke of 1 kt. (one kiloton) could be
pretty nasty.

Those who deride military jargon may not know that there was once perfect
justification for it. Flag hoists, or visual signals sent ship-to- ship by
signal flags, can seldom accommodate more than 32 flags even on tall-masted
vessels. Brevity is vital and abbreviation a necessity. (Lord Nelson did not
spell out ''Enemy in Sight'' at Trafalgar; he used a standard naval flag code.)

As recently as the 1950's and early 60's, operators of encryption machines had
to enter paper tapes of incoming coded messages one letter at a time while the
machines used the current code to decipher the coded letters. Again,
abbreviation and jargon were sensible. Why spell out ''aircraft'' when ''ACFT''
will do?

In a custom still prevalent in recent decades, Navy captains, when passing at
sea, would use flag hoists to signal book, chapter and verse of biblical
citations as a way of communicating friendly greetings to passing skippers. Thus
an officer passed over for promotion might be signaled Matthew 5:5 (''Blessed
are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted'').

However, with the rise of ''computer assisted'' communications and encryption,
there is now much less justification for the wild proliferation of military
jargon. And wild is not too strong an adjective. A 497-page dictionary titled
''Acronyms, Abbreviations and Initialisms'' has been published by McDonnell
Douglas Corporation (itself widely known as ''MacAir''). The dictionary contains
more than 32,000 entries - more than the vocabulary of some world languages.

Such uncontrolled improvisations do not always add to clarity. The two-letter
abbreviation ''CC'' is given 34 different meanings, from ''combustion chamber''
to ''command and control.'' The acronym ''FAST'' has a dozen meanings, from
''freight accounting system tracing'' to ''flexible algebraic scientific
translator.''

Things have gotten so bad that some abbreviations now have their own
abbreviations and abbreviation grandchildren.  Thus, the official title
''CHCOMNAVAIRSYS'' - for ''chief, command naval air systems,'' the head of naval
aviation - is now usually rendered as ''NAVAIR.''

The glossary for the strategy of nuclear war is more macabre than unclear. This
includes ''launch under warning'' and ''launch under attack'' (known to
intellectually unpretentious nuclear planners as ''use 'em or lose 'em''). The
way they are used by nuclear-warfare thinkers, the terms are virtually identical
in meaning. This is so because ''warning'' is defined as ''tactical warning''
that Soviet missiles have already been fired and are on the way.

If hawks in the Administration and Congress get their way by building
operationally capable fleets of antisatellite weapons (called ASAT's), and the
Soviet Union does the same, the United States might find itself without space
sensors (satellites that can detect missile launches in the Soviet Union) on the
eve of the holocaust. However, strategic thinkers say this would constitute
''warning through loss of warning.''

To those in the military know, ''NBC'' is not the peacock network, but stands
for a ''nuclear, biological and chemical'' warfare environment in which troops
might have to fight (''environment,'' used in unusual ways, is one of the
Pentagon's favorite words).

To string a necklace of such language together, if a conventional war began in
Europe and our side had trouble on the FEBA (forward edge of the battle area),
officials in CONUS (Continental United States) would have to decide whether to
go nuclear. To control the battle, they must have C3I (C cubed, I - standing for
''command, control, communications and intelligence''). If a nuclear ''event''
took place, users of the Pentagon dictionary would be instructed about ''all-out
war - Do not use, see general war.''

There would be a good deal of ''acute radiation dose - total ionizing radiation
dose received at one time and over a period so short that recovery cannot
occur.'' There might also follow what the scientist Carl Sagan has called
''nuclear winter,'' but others sometimes call ''the burning-cities syndrome,''
in which the extraordinarily dirty smoke from the attack on cities would lower
temperatures in much of the world to Arctic levels and produce mass starvation.
As the ordinary grunts in Vietnam used to say, it would then be ''Sorry about
that - over and out.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sketch

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL

BYLINE: By Fay S. Joyce

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3361 words


As tenpins tumbled and clattered, Walter F. Mondale emerged from a press
conference in the bar of the Whitestone Lanes in Queens one evening during the
New York primary to bowl a frame for the cameras. While he threaded his way to a
lane, the crowd sent up a loud cheer. It wasn't inspired by Mondale, but by the
words that came dryly over the public address system: ''The lounge has now
re-opened.''

Paying no mind, the former Vice President peeled off his jacket, put on a pair
of bowling shoes, turned up his sleeves and promptly dispatched a ball into the
gutter.

''What'd you roll?'' asked Frank Bianco, a regular in the Whitestone Mixers who
had given up his lane to politics and couldn't see around the photographers.

''A strike,'' Mondale impishly replied.  It has been that kind of year. At the
end of a long and bumpy primary season, the blue-eyed Minnesotan could tally up
enough points to call himself the winner and prepare to claim the Presidential
nomination from the Democrats who will convene in San Francisco a week from
tomorrow. But that was no strike he scored. By June 6, he had captured just over
50 percent of the delegates with only 38.2 percent of the popular vote in the
primaries, and he lost whole sections of the country, including New England and
the West - with the exception of Texas - to Gary Hart. The Colorado Senator came
close, winning 35.6 percent of the popular vote. The Rev. Jesse Jackson, the
first black candidate in American history to make a sustained bid for the
Presidency, finished with an impressive 18.6 percent of the vote.

Mondale's superior organization and ties to Democratic leaders around the
country enabled him to profit from a delegate selection system he and other
Democratic insiders devised. That system, and Mondale's appeal to the
traditional elements of the Democratic coalition, succeeded in propelling him to
the top. Whether he can go on to defeat an incumbent Republican President in a
year when Democrats are robbed of key pocketbook issues is another question.

Whatever lies ahead, a glance in the rear-view mirror by a correspondent who
covered all three major Democratic contenders as well as two preceding
Presidential campaigns reveals some interesting themes, curious scenes and
ragged potholes in the road just traveled.

After the last two election years, this past primary season was a bit of a
letdown. ''There's no passion this year,'' remarked one campaign adviser, a
veteran of earlier campaigns.

Nonetheless, there was passion. It gathered itself around the charismatic figure
of Jackson, a political outsider who crusaded to bring those who were ''locked
out'' of the system into the city of power. Mondale and Hart, both insiders,
drew their share of enthusiasts, but they didn't stir feelings the way an
outsider hurling himself at the walls of Washington can.  When soft-spoken Jimmy
Carter promised ''a Government as good as its people,'' he seduced voters with
his vow to simplify the machinery of the Federal bureaucracy. When Ronald Reagan
stormed through the primaries of 1980 promising to get Government off the backs
of the people, he drew cheers from the humble and the wealthy and those in
between. Americans by tradition don't like Government, and they love an
underdog. There is no underdog like a folksy, independent-minded David out to
slay the Washington Goliath.

After its comparatively exciting start, when Hart unexpectedly won the New
Hampshire primary, the campaign year grew tedious, like a boxing match that
promises a quick knockout but ends up going 10 rounds to a split decision. It
was not a season of meaningful debate over the great issues of our time.
Sometimes Hart and Mondale sparred over important questions, such as the proper
use of American power abroad and the best way to keep Americans working. But
just as often the contest between the two fairly compatible Democrats turned
into spats over campaign advertising and tactics. The press sometimes abetted
the process by focusing on matters of strategy. The winter survival gear of
boots and long underwear in Iowa and New Hampshire gave way to sandals and sun
screen in Texas and California, and still the most memorable words voiced by
either major candidate - Mondale's ''Where's the beef?'' - were borrowed from a
television commercial for a national hamburger chain.

''I think this campaign broke on old- fashioned notions of who was closer to the
voter and on press crises,'' observed Michael J. Robinson, director of the Media
Analysis Project at George Washington University. ''By that I mean, the crises
that became running stories on television and in the newspapers. The crises
broke against Hart, who came off as immature. Mondale is a more careful
campaigner.''

Where independents were allowed to vote, Hart usually won. Where the contest was
limited to Democrats, Mondale generally succeeded. ''The map looks like it
divided on issue terms,'' Robinson said. ''A generic Democrat won a larger share
of the generic Democratic Party.''



 THE CHEERING CROWDS CAME to Mondale, as to Hart, only in spurts. Union
audiences loved Mondale. He had no trouble moving them with his cracking voice
and pleas for the working man and woman. Few other voters showed such warm
emotion, and his supporters worried aloud that voters in the general election
would find him boring.

''Walter Mondale is not a candidate who excites,'' observes Thomas E. Mann,
executive director of the American Political Science Association. ''He attracts
loyalties. He's judged as experienced and decent, but he does not excite.''

For rousing audiences to their feet in cheering, chilling excitement, making
women squeal and men shout, Jackson was tops. His thunderous speeches were so
good that some reporters, depressed and exhausted by endless campaign travel
with little time out for sleep or food, would play back tapes of them on shabby
press buses to revive their spirits. One reporter even took tape recordings home
to Illinois and played them to impress female friends.

''Weeping may endure for a night,'' Jackson would cry out through big- city
ghettos and backwoods hamlets, ''but joy is coming in the morning!''

If the words struck many white ears as vague oratory, most blacks knew just what
Jackson was talking about: power. They were caught up in this season's political
process as comparatively few whites were. Perhaps Jackson connected so well with
his audiences because he presented much of his campaign directly to them. He not
only preached the heady message of empowerment - ''Our time has come'' - but he
also campaigned the old-fashioned way, by giving speeches in churches, city
halls, high-school auditoriums and on the steps of county courthouses to live
human beings.

Mondale and especially Hart staged more events for the cool eye of the cameras.
For Hart, there were whole days in which he spoke to no sizable audiences but
visited locations that made good visuals, such as a job- training center for
black women in San Francisco and the waves of the blue Pacific rolling in
majestically below the cliffs at Big Sur.

Some observers, like Mann, believe this year's campaigns, to a greater extent
than others, were more oriented to the 6 o'clock news in a given city and state
and to local newspaper deadlines and less to drawing out congregations of
voters. ''It's a trend that's been in motion for a long time, but it increases
as campaign managers try to make the most efficient use of their resources,''
Mann says. ''This year, a higher proportion of campaign events was staged for
the media solely and not for getting people to the town square.''



 TO CLIMB ABOARD A CAMPAIGN plane with Mondale, Hart or Jackson was to take a
ride into one of three different Americas. With Mondale, one visited the sweaty
industrial cities and the aging faces of the ethnic mosaic that this nation is:
the steel mills of Pennsylvania and the factory gates of Alabama; the dejected
laid- off welder and his family in Ohio unable to pay their utility bills; the
grateful Chrysler inspector in Illinois whose job had been saved by Federal loan
guarantees under the Carter Administration in 1979. There were coffee and
doughnuts and a ponderous, thumping band for the hearty men gathered at the
Polish-American Club in Hamtramck, Mich., on a Saturday morning; children
performing Gaelic dances for their parents and grandparents on the eve of St.
Patrick's Day at Glendora House outside Chicago; the yarmulkes on the heads of
Jewish supporters nodding solemnly in New York, and old black men and women
sitting quietly on folding chairs at a housing project for the elderly in
Chicago as the one-time protege of Hubert Humphrey softly articulated the
politics of compassion.

At a Chrysler plant in Belvidere, Ill., Mondale drove the one-millionth Omni off
the assembly line, grinning happily at cameramen and photographers who scuffled
for a shot. A white- haired Charles Radosevic, who works in quality control,
watched the commotion safely from the sidelines. According to Radosevic, Mondale
had earned the right to the publicity - and to his vote. ''After all, he's one
of the people responsible for that,'' he smiled, tapping the paycheck jutting
out of his breast pocket.

Tagging along with Hart, one found the descendants of all those immigrants and
first-generation Americans Mondale appealed to, only they had grown up, married
and moved to Connecticut. Or California. Or Florida. They were making more money
than their parents, driving Volvos and acknowledging they had liked John B.
Anderson, the Republican Congressman who ran as an independent candidate in the
1980 Presidential elections.

At a Camden, N.J., commuter station where Hart greeted riders, croissants,
rather than doughnuts, were laid out, and instead of a ponderous Polish band, a
five-piece string ensemble played ''On a Clear Day.'' By tapping so strongly
into a whole generation and class of young professionals, Hart demonstrated that
the big ''baby boom'' generation, some of whose members protested against the
Vietnam War, nuclear armament and environmental hazards in the 1960's and
1970's, could be mobilized again into a political force for the 1980's.

Hart went to Ohio's steel towns, too. He said the old Democratic approaches had
failed and campaigned on his ''Let's try something new'' theme.  He won the
primary.

But particularly in the last two months of his campaign, after the contest had
moved almost entirely out of the frost-belt states, Hart traveled to the upbeat
and on-the-mend sections of the country, as if to point and say, ''See, new
ideas do work.''

Strolling behind a perky drummer, he led an impromptu parade through the streets
of New Brunswick, N.J., where business and government had teamed up 10 years ago
to revitalize the downtown area. Looking for a restaurant, 43- year-old Joan
McIntosh of Piscataway ran into the crowd trailing the smiling candidate. She,
too, liked Hart, and for an often-heard reason.

''My main goal is to beat Reagan,'' she said. ''We've got an actor in the White
House. Mondale's looking better and better. But the Democrats are tied to a lot
of old-guard thinking, and we need somebody who's not part of the
establishment.'' To her and many others who were searching for it, Hart offered
at least the possibility of fresh political thinking.

As in the debates, when he repeatedly tried to bring the discussion home to the
nation's poor and the hungry and the so- called ''misery index,'' Jackson used
his candidacy to shine a light on the boarded-up storefronts of Baltimore, the
ramshackle houses practically leaning against one another in Selma, Ala., and
the hapless families jammed into decrepit apartment buildings in the ghettos of
New York.

Jackson rarely admits mistakes. The night he confessed to having used the
derogatory terms ''Hymie'' and ''Hymietown'' to refer to Jews and to New York
City was not an easy one.

Jackson made his admission in a synagogue in Manchester, N.H., that was jammed
with buzzing congregants and reporters. Jackson arrived late, as usual. When he
took the platform, he stood tall and his voice held firm. ''I categorically deny
I am anti-Semitic,'' he declared, admitting as true charges he had ducked and
denied for nearly two weeks.

By the time he was done speaking and fielding questions, he had won the
enthusiastic applause of many in the audience. But when he went into the
synagogue office close to midnight and telephoned his wife, Jacqueline, to tell
her the news, all the life seemed drained out of him. He spoke only a few words;
mostly he listened. ''Yeah,'' he replied dejectedly. ''Yeah,'' he replied again,
the word almost a sigh. ''Are the kids O.K.?''

Jackson resumed campaigning the next morning in the bright snow of Berlin, N.H.
But for many, the aura of his candidacy had been dimmed, and eventually it was
darkened further by Jackson's unwavering association with the Muslim leader
Louis Farrakhan, who has repeatedly made anti-Semitic remarks and threatened the
black newsman who first reported the ''Hymie'' remark.

In the end, Jackson drew about 600,000 white votes along with more than two and
a quarter million black votes and a small number from Hispanics. Most Hispanics
cast their ballots for Mondale, who had labored as a Senator on behalf of
migrant workers. Jackson also energized other groups, including many
Arab-Americans.

On a campaign trip into various sides of America, a reporter not only looked out
the airplane window to see the thriving and decaying sections of the country,
but also to the front cabin to watch the differing styles and personalities of
each candidate as he moved on and off the public stage.

Hart shot the rapids in a raft in Oregon, puttered around San Diego Harbor on a
diesel-powered catamaran and rode horseback to deliver a speech in the town
square of Las Cruces, N.M. Those much-photographed scenes were designed to make
Hart look young and vigorous, in contrast to the older and more staid Mondale.
Yet, they also gave Hart breathing room outdoors - a chance to break away from
the constant demand to think and talk politics.

''I couldn't do what Mondale does,'' Hart confessed one day on his chartered
plane, his booted foot propped up against the seat in front of him. ''I couldn't
go into a hotel room at night and call delegates.''

Instead, he would occasionally dine with reporters, sometimes steering the
conversation to Indian ceremonies and new books about the West. That range of
interest might have made him an engaging dinner companion, but Mondale got more
delegates.

Some who saw Hart up close sensed a lack of empathy, as if the problems he
proposed solutions for, like unemployment, were abstractions to him. Others said
he simply came from a newer, cooler school of politician.

Throughout the campaign, Hart remained something of a cipher. One friend called
him a loner, and it was easy to see where the ''cold and aloof'' image came
from. At times, he seemed detached, as if he were perched on a nearby telephone
pole looking down and watching himself perform. Hart, the son of a poor family
in Ottawa, Kan., and an intellectual who holds graduate degrees in divinity and
law from Yale, simply described himself as shy.

Yet Hart could be amazingly loose in the company of the press, the same sort of
people Mondale warily called ''animals'' one day (he later apologized with
candy). While flying from California to Colorado one night, with ''Thriller''
and ''Beat It'' playing on his chartered airplane's loudspeaker, Hart pulled on
a military-style jacket, hat, punk sunglasses and one white glove and began
imitating the singer Michael Jackson, holding up one finger in the air. Then he
wrapped a reporter's scarf around his head and danced with her in the aisle.

Such a playful spirit never seized Mondale, who is nonetheless quite witty and
warm in private. The former Vice President has a knack for quick one-liners, but
prefers to do his relaxing in a lower key, chewing on an unlit cigar. His taste
runs to the plain things, and at the end of a day Mondale would sit around his
hotel room talking politics with local politicians and munching a cheeseburger.
''The thing about Mondale that people don't realize is that this guy loves
politics,'' said one of his aides. ''He loves the game.''

The former Vice President is fond of saying of himself, ''What you see is what
you get.'' But the kind of campaign he waged belied that simplicity. What the
public saw often enough during the television debates was Mondale's tired face
with pronounced bags under the eyes. What the public got was a marathon runner
who could summon up unsuspected reserves of psychological and physical stamina
to push on after serious losses. The man who dropped out of the same race late
in 1974 complaining, ''I don't want to spend my life in Holiday Inns,''
evidently conditioned himself to persevere. Anyone who wondered 10 years ago if
Mondale had enough fire in his belly must have smelled the smoke this time
around.

But the Minnesotan's campaign revealed a less praiseworthy side as well. The
public also saw a man who sincerely trumpeted the politics of decency, but
occasionally got a man who practiced the politics of distortion. As Mondale
struggled to keep Hart on the defensive in the late primaries, he repeatedly
questioned his opponent's commitment to civil rights, women's issues, the
environment and arms control. Yet the National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People, the National Organization for Women, the League of
Conservation Voters and arms-control activists all have watched Hart's efforts
in the Senate and given him high marks.

No matter that Hart complained he was being accused unfairly, the charges slid
off the amiable and smiling Mondale the way criticisms roll off President
Reagan. If Ronald Reagan is Teflon coated, as Democratic Representative Patricia
Schroeder of Colorado once observed, so is the politically shrewd Walter
Mondale.

Although Jackson could be funny, loose and profane off stage, unself-consciously
using four-letter words, he drove himself and his dispirited staff quite hard.
At one point, a correspondent new to the Jackson campaign confronted the
minister and all but accused him of hypocrisy. He lectured Jackson, who grew up
in the small, segregated world of Greenville, S.C., saying that he demanded
dignity on the stump while treating the people around him, including the press,
as if they deserved none. The only thing that changed, the correspondent said
later, was that Jackson began avoiding him.

But there were consolations. The hardships of the road bred great camaraderie
among the reporters and made allies of the press and Secret Service agents
assigned to Jackson. One afternoon at Washington's National Airport, a Secret
Service agent spotted a reporter nibbling a blueberry muffin. He looked at it so
longingly that the reporter offered him a bite. ''No, thank you,'' the agent
answered wryly, squaring his shoulders. ''I had a sandwich yesterday.''

The lasting image from the 1984 primary trail is not of one man, but of many
faces, turned up in hope, and of many hands clapping in thunderous applause. In
an air- conditioned auditorium in New Orleans or at the edge of a sweltering
airport runway in Fresno, Calif., or in the icy slush of Keene, N.H., young
students and middle-aged townspeople and beefy union workers and rural blacks
and urban whites all vibrated to a single note: a plea for peace.

Each candidate sounded it in a different way. Mondale decried ''those godawful
weapons.'' Hart demanded an end to an Administration that would ''send our sons
to die in Lebanon without cause or to serve as bodyguards for dicators in
Central America.'' And Jackson exclaimed, ''Arguing about overkill is arguing
about who can hit a tombstone the most times.''

However stated, that dovish sentiment would hang in the air after everything
else had faded. The rest, one was sometimes tempted to say, was merely noise.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photographs

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS July 8, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1352 words


Fiction1

44

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932.  2

37

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.  3

1

18

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  4

6

3

LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency.  5

2

7

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.  6

5

13

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  7

7

6

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.  8

8

6

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Three witches wreak
havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town.  9

12

17

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  10

11

6

THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch.  (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The legends
of an old manor haunt four generations of an English family.  11

9

14

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  12

13

4

HIM WITH HIS FOOT IN HIS MOUTH AND

OTHER STORIES, by Saul Bellow. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) A novella and four short
stories by the Nobel laureate.  13

15

4

POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A
woman discovers the truth about her husband after he disappears.  14



8

DESCENT FROM XANADU, by Harold Robbins.  (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A man who
has everything - power, money, women - seeks to obtain immortality.  15

14

10

WARDAY, by Whitley Strieber and James W.  Kunetka. (Holt, $15.95.) What follows
the first nuclear war in 1988.











































  Nonfiction1

14

WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The troubled life of the
late entertainer John Belushi.  2

132

THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and David Horowitz. (Summit,
$20.95.) The dark as well as the glamorous sides of four generations of a
prominent family. 3

2

5

THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent.  4

4

8

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  5



1

IN GOD'S NAME, by David A. Yallop. (Bantam, $16.95.) A British journalist argues
that Pope John Paul I's death in 1978 was a case of murder. 6

9

9

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  7

4

17

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  8

7

18

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard, $10.) The novelist recalls
her childhood in Mississippi.  9

10

42

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  9

11

11

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' television series.  11

3

10

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.  (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  12

6

21

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch.  (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world.  1315

4

POWERPLAY, by Mary Cunningham with Fran Schumer. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster,
$16.95.) The rise and fall of a woman executive at the Bendix Corporation.  148

10

CAVEAT, by Alexander M. Haig Jr. (Macmillan, $17.95.) President Reagan's first
Secretary of State gives his views on foreign policy.  1413

3

GOOD MORNING, MERRY SUNSHINE, by Bob Greene. (Atheneum, $14.95.) The syndicated
columnist's journal of his child's first year.

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

CONCRETE, by Thomas Bernhard. (Knopf, $12.95.) A novella by the

53-year-old Austrian writer, whose models include Kafka, Beckett

and Kleist, presenting a tortured author's ruminations on his

hatred of life and mankind, his sister and his country.

DIANE ARBUS, by Patricia Bosworth. (Knopf, $17.95.) Although

much has been written about Arbus's startling photographs of

freaks and misfits, this biography is the first extended treatment

of art and artist, who was a suicide at 48 in 1971.

EXILE: The Unquiet Oblivion of Richard M. Nixon, by Robert Sam

Anson. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A conscientious report on the

activities of the 37th President since his l974 retirement, revealing

his strenuous efforts to remain influential.

INTIMATE MEMOIRS: Including Marie-Jo's Book, by Georges

Simenon. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,

$22.95.) The long story of his long life - full of women, success and

sadness - by the creator of Maigret and scores of other novels.

MACHINE DREAMS, by Jayne Anne Phillips. (Seymour

Lawrence/ E. P. Dutton, $16.95.) A first novel, by the author of the

well-received stories, ''Black Tickets,'' about small, ordinary

moments in a family's life that burst into sudden, unexpected

meanings.

THE MIRROR MAKERS: A History of American Advertising and

Its Creators, by Stephen Fox (Morrow, $17.95.) A fascinating and

detailed account, by a scholar, of what may well be this country's

most characteristic institution.

OVERLORD: D-Day and the Battle for Normandy, by Max

Hastings. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) History's greatest

amphibious operation, the Allied invasion of France, re-created by

a young military historian with almost eyewitness vividness.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

115

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

4

BOOK WITHOUT A NAME, by Kit Williams.  (Knopf, $10.95.) New picture story by the
author of ''Masquerade,'' offering a prize for the finder of the book's true
title. 3

215

WEBSTER'S NINTH COLLEGIATE

DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard work updated in 1983.  4

4

80

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  5

3

6

RANDOM HOUSE COLLEGE DICTIONARY.

 (Random House, $14.95.) New revised edition.























 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE LIVELY ARTS;
WOOING A THEATER AUDIENCE

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 15, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 889 words


UNDER the auspices of its producing director, Robert Alpaugh, the American
Theater Festival at Stony Brook has chosen a repertory for its first season,
which begins on Tuesday, chiefly for its commercial values. It consists of one
musical, ''Side by Side by Sondheim,'' and two plays, ''Gingerbread Lady'' by
Neil Simon, and ''Fifth of July'' by Lanford Wilson, about the Vietnam war.

If the audience's appetite is thus whetted, Mr. Alpaugh says, there will be more
heavyweight fare come autumn. Then, as the director said, ''high artistic
values, translations, classics and new plays,'' under the heading of Highlight
Theater, will be presented - among them, a Moli ere work, a new script and an
adaptation of a German play.

Mr. Alpaugh's summer choices have a touch of class and veer into the offbeat.
For openers, the choice of the revue ''Side by Side by Sondheim'' is an irony of
sorts, for Mr. Sondheim is a composer of theater, as opposed to popular,
instantly hummable, music. Out of eight scores, only one ''hit'' song - ''Send
In the Clowns'' from ''A Little Night Music'' - has emerged. Still, ''Side by
Side by Sondheim'' is a safe sampler, a sort of crash course of the composer's
work until he wrote ''Sweeney Todd,'' and it contains his lyrics from two ever-
popular shows for which he did not compose the music: ''West Side Story'' and
''Gypsy.''

As director of the revue, Mr. Alpaugh was tempted to tamper with the material.
He was allowed to cut a couple of songs in order to sharpen the show's pace and
to dispense with about half of the narration, much of which is filler, and fey
besides.

Whatever portions of the narration are needed for continuity and context will be
shared among the show's five singers. Mr. Alpaugh has cast Joy Franz, who has
appeared on Broadway in two Sondheim musicals, ''Company'' and ''A Little Night
Music''; Rita Gardner; John Wesley Shipp; Sally Woodson, one of three singers in
the last show at the PAF Playhouse before it closed in Huntington - ''Starting
Here, Starting Now'' - and Lynn Stafford, who once played Hero in a touring
production of ''A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum,'' which had Mr.
Sondheim's first complete theater score.

For all her considerable theatrical credentials, Miss Gardner, forever more,
will be known as the original ingenue in the American theater's longest-running
musical, ''The Fantastiks.'' She recently recalled the show's early struggling
days, confirming that it took a brief breather at the John Drew Theater in East
Hampton, where it caught on, and returned to New York a hit. That was over 24
years ago. Miss Gardner's last local appearance was at the same theater in a new
musical, ''Rogues to Riches,'' in 1982.

Mr. Shipp reminisced about his fling at stardom in a soap opera. For almost four
years, he was ''the good guy,'' Kelly Nelson, in ''The Guiding Light.''

''I got to go to bed with every girl in Springfield, U.S.A., and it was always
the girl's fault,'' he said. Once an aspiring opera singer, Mr. Shipp is now
''legitimately using, not abusing'' his voice, he declared.

Midseason, ''Fifth of July'' by Lanford Wilson, who has a house in Sag Harbor,
will be performed by members of the State University's student conservatory. The
play concerns the effects of the Vietnam war on a largely lost generation of the
1960's and 70's. To make it all the more immediate - and commercial - the
theater's subscription brochure blurb refers to it as ''the theater's answer to
Hollywood's 'The Big Chill.' '' The brochure also contains the reminder that the
''recent Broadway hit starred Christopher Reeve of 'Superman' fame.''

For the summer's final play, Neil Simon's ''Gingerbread Lady'' will be done
under the direction of Sue Lawless, who is the artistic director of the Queens
Theater in the Park. Conceding the clout of the playwright's name, Mr. Alpaugh,
nevertheless, had more serious reasons for choosing this play, as opposed to Mr.
Simon's more obviously successful works.

In fact, ''Gingerbread Lady'' was Mr. Simon's first attempt to show his serious
side, and Mr. Alpaugh's research revealed that most of the reviews were negative
when the play opened in 1971. Dealing with the effects of alcoholism on the life
of a singer, the play is said to have been inspired by the late Judy Garland.
(In the film version, which was retitled ''Only When I Laugh,'' the main
character, who was played by Marsha Mason, the former Mrs. Simon, was an
actress, not a singer.)

Miss Gardner, who has appeared in Mr. Simon's ''Last of the Red Hot Lovers'' and
''Prisoner of Second Avenue,'' will play the lead. Miss Franz and Mr. Shipp will
also be in the cast.

The company at Stony Brook has come together by virtue of a professional
nepotism of sorts, since the 36- year-old Mr. Alpaugh, formerly a performer who
toured in the musicals ''Can Can'' (with Leslie Caron) and ''Ballroom'' (with
Dorothy Collins), knew Miss Gardner and together they had worked with many
members of the cast.

The schedule for the American Theater Festival at Stony Brook follows: ''Side by
Side by Sondheim,'' Tuesday through next Sunday; ''Fifth of July,'' July 24
through 29; ''Gingerbread Lady,'' July 31 through Aug. 5.

Performances take place at the Fine Arts Center. The box-office number is
246-5678.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of scene from 'Side By Side by Sondheim'

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DID THE 1960'S DAMAGE FICTION?

BYLINE: By Benjamin DeMott

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3979 words


BEFORE the 1960's, pundits say, the economy and foreign policy made sense;
afterward, chaos. Before the 60's, education was looking up; afterward, schools
collapsed. Before the 60's, family was a value; afterward, the family became a
time-study problem. So it went with everything American in the aftermath of the
killer decade, according to consensus - finished, ruined, to hell in a
handbasket.

Query: Was writing also wrecked? For nearly half a century, following World War
I, books fully alive for us today were produced regularly, decade after decade,
by successive generations of new writers possessing major gifts - work by Ernest
Hemingway and F. Scott Fitzgerald in the 20's, by William Faulkner and John Dos
Passos and John Steinbeck in the 30's, by Norman Mailer and James Jones and Mary
McCarthy in the 40's, by John Updike, Saul Bellow, Truman Capote and Bernard
Malamud in the 50's, by James Baldwin and Philip Roth in the 60's. Will the work
of the generation of the 70's hold up as well? If it doesn't hold up, should
blame for its weakness be laid at the door of the awful decade of the 60's? One
further, related question: How did the elders fare in the aftermath of the 60's,
the writers who were established before the decade began? Was the period
disastrous for them, or were they lucky enough to escape the cataclysm?


In my opinion, future readers will be less enthusiastic about the work of the
major new talents of the 70's than about that of the new talents who appeared in
each of the five preceding decades. And I'd blame this partly on the 60's. The
connections between a particular body of writing and a particular set of public
events are, to be sure, never easy to sort out. It is mistaken to hold, for
instance, that since the new talents of the 70's grew up during a dislocating

Benjamin DeMott teaches English at Amherst College and is the chairman of the
board of trustees of the National Humanities Faculty.  war, the war itself must
have molded them; the war exerted powerful influence but so too did a variety of
other factors that need to be freshly imagined and reckoned with, and not the
least important factor is the abrupt down-scaling of the cultural significance
of the profession of letters. But the presence of complications doesn't alter
the fact that the characteristic tone of the writers of the 70's is related to
the events of the period in which they served their apprenticeship, and that
relationship can be defined.

Before defining it, let me glance briefly at the situation of the elders.
Criticism at present is severe on much (not all) of the post-60's work produced
by the best- known novelists now in late middle age or older. If future
historians accept current judgments, they may well propose that the 60's were
responsible for the fallings-off. Arguably the reason Norman Mailer as novelist
turned away from his own place and time to ancient Egypt was that, having
himself summoned many of the demons of the 60's, Mailer knew better than to try,
in the 70's, to cope with the disorder they left in their wake. Arguably the
killer decade was responsible for the increase in self-distending, class- and
culture-bound dyspepsia that's noticeable when Saul Bellow's ''The Dean's
December'' (1981), ''Humboldt's Gift'' (1975) and ''Mr. Sammler's Planet''
(1970) are compared with ''Herzog'' (1964) or ''Henderson the Rain King''
(1959). The ferocity of the Tory-radical disputes of the 60's sharply
exacerbated friction between Bellow and the intellectual left; the novelist came
to conceive of his books as counter-demonstrations on behalf of Intelligence and
Literacy; a growing addiction to essayistic recreations (setting fools straight)
led to bad habits of underplotting, underdramatizing, undersympathizing.

Similar approaches - long-view etiology - can also be taken to two other careers
- John Updike's and Philip Roth's. Why do Updike's longer works of fiction, from
the late 60's until ''Rabbit Is Rich,'' seem unsatisfying? Because the political
turmoil of the 60's created special strain for writers more comfortable with
their esthetic or sexual-athletic selves than with their political selves. When
Updike evaded the furies of the Age (''Couples,'' 1967; ''Bech: A Book,'' 1970),
he sounded frivolous. When he tried facing them directly (''Rabbit Redux''), he
sounded weightless. Only when the 60's could be estheticized as a safely distant
past, remembered as Harry Angstrom remembers the period in ''Rabbit Is Rich''
(Harry remembers copulating on the couch with his wife while the television news
reported the Chicago riots), could the writer's ease return. As for Roth: Why
did he give himself not once but three times, in the Zuckerman books, to
repetitive, quasi-autobiographical exploration of the psyche of a writer
''guilty'' of a work resembling ''Portnoy's Complaint'' (1969)? Because for a
time, owing both to ''Portnoy'' and the media exploitation of ''sexual
revolution,'' Roth became the voice of the culture, experiencing a sense of
personal centrality that nobody thus blessed or damned with can ever forget - or
fight free from thereafter.



Critical overviews of this sort necessarily have failings. Bellow and the rest
have not lost touch with the qualities that earned them their original place.
Roth's stylistic exactitude, Bellow's humor, flash and idiomatic vivacity -
these remain intact. So does Mailer's capacity to evoke and honor American
sensibilities remote from the mainstream - see ''The Executioner's Song'' (1979)
- and so does Updike's humanely affectionate tolerance of wayward creatures,
male and female (see his newest book, ''The Witches of Eastwick''). Moreover,
the voices of our senior writers have maintained timbre (nobody confuses a
sentence of Bellow's with a sentence of Updike's). Their widely divergent recent
preoccupations don't suggest domination either by each other or by a Great
Programmer in the Sky; individual responsiveness survives.

It has fared less well, however, among writers nearing or into their 40's. The
most interesting of these writers sometimes seem actually to be secret
collaborators bent on telling one and only one story, the changeless theme of
which is human unresponsiveness. Characters' names differ from piece to piece,
situations vary, class levels shift. We're in Boston - or Beverly Hills - or
Manhattan's West Side. We follow a drifter in Oaxaca, or a Bible Belt motel
keeper, or a Bennington dropout traveling with an unnamed baby and a carefully
named dog.

But place, region, social landscape are immaterial and the same holds for
personal psychology and the specifics of any single narrative's spin. The
writers' aims have little in common with the aims of earlier novelists and
storytellers. Critics fumbling for descriptive labels lean hard on familiar
terms - alienation, discontinuity and so on. But in the work itself phrases leap
off the page that tell more piercingly what the authors are about, where their
attention is directed, how their material appears to them. In his second novel,
''The Ultimate Good Luck'' (1981), Richard Ford has such a phrase - ''People
watched each other with the expectation of diseased response.'' The unifying
project of the group of writers I have in mind is just this: to show us -
ceaselessly, unrelentingly - people watching each other with expectations of
diseased response.

Reread, for openers, any of the hundreds of short paragraphs that make up Renata
Adler's ''Speedboat'' (1977); most focus on uncaringness. A father lowers his
two-year- old son over the side of a rowboat into deep water, asserting that
''all babies are natural swimmers''; the child sinks and a friend dives to his
rescue; a moment later the father chides the rescuer: ''He would have come up in
a minute . . . You have to give nature a chance.'' Without comment the writer
moves on to her next case. Reread Don DeLillo's ''Players'' (1977), which opens
with an extended dramatization of luxury-class obliviousness to an episode of
murderous terrorism, or Mr. DeLillo's ''Great Jones Street'' (1973), wherein the
hero, a minute after discovering his girlfriend has died, sardonically mocks his
desire to behave as though the death mattered. (''I insisted on (talking to) a
nun (at the hospital). I wanted a nun, a short round woman, perhaps of German
descent, someone who believed in the sacredness of dying and the veneration of
the dead. No nun, no deal. This is what I told them.'') What do you feel? the
reader asks, bewildered. Answer: nothing. What do you feel? asks a character in
Leonard Michaels's ''The Men's Club'' (1981) upon hearing a man claim that his
wife's affairs don't disturb him. ''I don't feel anything,'' he answers.

Often the writers of this period address interpersonal blankness directly and at
length, as in ''Octascope,'' a tale by the exceptionally productive - and often
highly entertaining - Ann Beattie (''Secrets and Surprises,'' 1978). The story
recounts an episode of unresponsiveness on the part of a marionette-maker named
Carlos who's living with the narrator, an unnamed young woman with an
illegitimate daughter. The young woman tries unsuccessfully to elicit from her
lover a gesture of concern for herself as a person, as people once said. She
types lists of autobiographical facts and hands them to him, hoping desperately
that one or another item will trigger curiosity. (''I fell in love with a
musician. We skied cross country. . . . He taught me to drive a car. I learned
to like Mexican food. I learned to make cheese.'') Will not the lover ask
whether the musician was the father of his bedmate's baby? No, he will not. The
woman tells herself, unbelievingly, that ''Tonight, or tomorrow, or the next day
or night we have to talk'' - but they do not talk, and the story ends on a
one-sentence downer: ''This is the dead of winter.''

Another tale about ties is ''Theory of Sets,'' in Bette Pesetsky's ''Stories Up
to a Point'' (1981). Here the unresponsive person isn't a listener but is
herself a life-storyteller. In five short pages the woman narrator runs her
autobiography through from childhood to the death of one parent and the
remarriage of the other, from college to first sexual experience, from marriage
to divorce, speaking throughout in a flat voice that registers the series of
events as a mere succession of sets of names. ''I became part of the group (at
parochial school) made up of Kay Preddy, Priscilla Weeks, Louise Urslane,
Margaret Chase.'' ''I fell in with the journalism crowd and ate with Ellen
Brenwick, Nora Venn, Elsie Kale - and two boys, Bill Robbins and Isaac
Tilberg.'' ''I began dating Melvin Abrahams, Ronald Skinner, Myron Brewster and
Joel Thomas.'' Friends, relatives, neighbors appear, vanish, reappear, propose,
marry, betray - and no act by any of them rouses the slightest tremor of
feeling. ''Later we gave some parties,'' the story ends. ''Toni Meadows came,
and Bill and Susie Flynn, Dominic Rutkin, Basil Humboldt, Winston Xavier, Dora
Lace and Laurence Totter. Then we gave some more parties. Different people
came.''

There is a bit of amusement: all the characters in this story - all the
characters in so many stories by so many authors - marching about absorbed in
their uniqueness when they're entirely interchangeable. ''We skied cross
country.'' ''I dated Mel Abrahams.'' ''I wanted a nun.'' ''Different people
came.'' ''I don't feel anything.'' A chuckle here somewhere. But elsewhere in
''Stories Up to a Point'' there's less to smile at. Pain is the dominant note,
winter of the heart once more; in ''Theory of Sets'' human beings are integers,
and the notion of human attachment is mocked from first word to last.

It can't be overstressed that the unremittingness of the theme of diseased
response tends to obliterate the reader's alertness to tonal difference. When
the affectless narrator of Story A is met not only in Story B but in a dozen
stories thereafter by the same writer and then emerges again in a dozen stories
or a novel by a different writer, the sense of uniformity deepens, and
appreciation of design or charm grows troubled. The thematic space is broad
enough, undeniably, to encompass several modes of impassivity. There are
half-comic failures of interest in others - and, as in Don DeLillo, there are
instances of blank obliviousness to cruelty - and, in Raymond Carver, there are
absolutes of bleakness.


IN Mr. Carver's classic story ''Popular Mechanics,''

a separating mother and father quarrel angrily

about who gets to keep their baby, then attempt to

yank the ''redfaced and screaming'' child from each other's grip. Within seconds
we understand that the physical struggle is pulling the baby apart, tearing legs
and arms from their sockets:

''She felt her fingers being forced open. She felt the baby going from her.

'' 'No!' she screamed just as her hands came loose.

''She would have it, this baby. She grabbed for the baby's other arm. She caught
the baby around the wrist and leaned back.

''But he would not let go.''

The story ends a sentence later, with these words, ''In this manner, the issue
was decided.'' Fury is not appropriate, says the narrator's chill. Such things
occur. Show restraint. ''Give nature a chance.'' ''I don't feel anything.''
''Different people came.'' Obsessive impassivity, dutiful anesthetization of
feeling - these are Mr. Carver's hallmarks. On the first day of a three-day
outing, a party of fishermen happens upon the body of a murdered woman adrift in
a stream. The fishermen tie the body to a tree, fish, drink, eat, wash dishes in
the neighborhood of the corpse for the whole of their weekend and only on the
way home call in the news of their find to the police. A small child is run over
on his birthday; doctors, nurses and hospital technicians caring for the
mortally hurt child speak to the grieving parents in voices uniformly stony. The
author's manner shifts slightly from tale to tale. Now we're caught up in a
stretch of narrative that seems to deny the very possibility of feeling. Now
comes a stretch that lifts itself, through intricate irony, into a kind of
taunting of readers who might be disposed to make heavy weather out of a patch
of momentary cruelty, or out of a failure of persons theoretically bound close
to recognize each other's being, or out of an assertion by an individual
betokening suspicion that any one event in a single life can claim larger
significance than any other event.

But such slight differences don't count much. The theme and project hold steady;
the theme is the death of fellow-feeling.

It is, no question, the theme of a generation. The under-45 generation includes
hundreds of writers besides those I've cited. Many modes of pleasure are offered
- splendidly crude hilarity in Barry Hannah's ''Ray'' and ''The Tennis
Handsome,'' poised, brilliantly arranged narrative in Ron Loewinsohn's
''Magnetic Field(s).'' There's considerable social range - John Sayles' Boston,
for example, is another country from Henry Bromell's Back Bay. War novelists
abound. But the evocation of feelinglessness - inner deadness - is the unifying
priority. It's possible to be erudite, in the traditional manner of literary
history, about the bookish sources of this unity. Under several rubrics -
existential, semiotic, Althusserian, Derridean - culture analysts and
philosophical thinkers have been promoting for decades the thesis that humanness
is a blip, that fussing about details of individual feeling is a meaningless
game sponsored by the beamish middle class. The 70's School of Impassives could
have been touched by this body of intellection. The school may also reflect the
influence of the grandmasters of uninflectedness, Hemingway and Camus, and
especially the mesmeric grip of Joan Didion's ''Play It as It Lays'' (1970).

It wouldn't be astonishing to learn that members of the fortyish generation know
by heart the husband-and-wife exchanges in that novel's famous Chapter 77:

'' 'Tell me what you want.'

'' 'Nothing.'

'' 'I want to help you. Tell me what you feel.'

''She looked at the hand he held out to her. 'Nothing,' she said.

'' 'You say that again and I swear to Christ - '

''She shrugged. He left the motel.''

But the most obvious roots of the tone and attitudes of this fiction lie in
life-experience - in the shock, guilt, hatred, repugnance for country and at
length plain emotional exhaustion that ruled the thoughtful young in the late
60's and early 70's. Time moves; we forget those heart- battering years. Here
are the Chicago police rioting in 1968 at the Democratic Convention, hundreds of
peace demonstrators beaten and maced, blood pouring down the foreheads of people
perceived on television as helpless, unarmed children. Live into the year a
little. April sees the murder of Martin Luther King Jr., and more than 40 other
blacks die in the upheavals that follow. Summer shows us the shooting of Robert
Kennedy. We watch a young black beaten to death by Hell's Angels while Mick
Jagger stands by aghast - a rock concert at Altamont, Calif. We read a story
about Linda Fitzpatrick, 18 and pregnant, and Groovy Hutchinson, 21, murdered
while tripping on LSD, found in an East Village boiler room (the pregnant Miss
Fitzpatrick has also been raped). After Chicago's Mayor Daley and the bloody
foreheads come pictures of the dreadful murder of a pregnant actress and four of
her friends in a Bel Air dwelling by a fiend named Charles Manson. A soldier
explains on television how he and his companions, led by Lt. William L. Calley
Jr., massacred hundreds of civilians - women, children, old men - in a
Vietnamese hamlet called My Lai. The year 1969 promises to be quieter, but up
the road at Kent State. . . .

Let it go. We are speaking of writers-to-be who grew up in an age when their
homeland was known as a brutal, barbarous bully raging to burn the entire
helpless population of Southeast Asia, an age when dawning awareness of the
homeland as a sly, self-deceiving oppressor was followed almost instantly by
assassinations, riots and separatist movements that made it impossible to
translate the awareness into practical political correctives, an age when
middle- class youth was instructed by its elders to hide out from the draft on
university campuses while working-class children were blown apart pro patria.
The heroic accomplishments of the struggle for black equality - still, for many
of us, the best proof in our lives of the possibilities of human solidarity -
swiftly disappeared from consciousness, and now the writers themselves remember
other things. They tell us repeatedly that they are the children of their time.


THE people whom Richard Ford describes as watching with the expectation of
diseased response were first encountered in Vietnam, and in Mr. Ford's ''The
Ultimate Good Luck'' they're remembered by a Vietnam veteran. One of the more
powerful passages of writing Ann Beattie has yet produced occurs in is a story
called ''Shifting''; it details the intermittent probing by a young woman of her
complex attitude toward a friend of her husband's whom she begged not to go to
Vietnam (the friend loses a leg and the use of his arms in combat). We cannot be
bewildered that such a generation, when it found its own narrative voice, spoke
in a manner betraying self-contempt, doubt that cruelty is ever effectively
protested, disbelief that the current of human sympathy has ever run broad and
strong.

We need of course, to remind ourselves, in fairness, that the new writers in
each of the five decades preceding the 70's had their own experience of chaos
and disaster and did not allow it to deaden them. Hemingway retained his
responsiveness to natural process, to man in nature; Faulkner remained
enraptured by the thought that he could explain the South to itself; Fitzgerald
cared deeply about the American past, the lost promise; Mailer appointed himself
President, believing that he alone could put his fellow citizens in touch with
the essence of the sensibility in control of the military-industrial complex;
Baldwin was moved to heroic utterance by the plight of his race.

But for two reasons the situation of these writers profoundly differed from that
of the generation of the 70's. The first reason is that the earlier generations
were not yet tyrannized by the notion, spawned by the sexual revolution, that
the claims of public reality and long-term human connection were less
significant than those of private ego and merely personal will. And the second
reason is that writers of the earlier generations began work when letters hadn't
yet been completely marginalized, when the task of communicating the realities
of war or mass joblessness or profound moral disruption still fell most
immediately to the writer. The 60's brought the realization that the old,
primary, literary role of witness had been stolen - thousands were shot,
torched, self-torched on camera, no words on the page required, at most a bland
voice-over. With power often comes the sense of responsibility to wholeness -
belief that one must engage with the whole life of society. With feelings of
marginality and powerlessness comes the sense that personal despair can't be
transcended.



But although the impassivity of the writers of the 70's may rouse mixed
feelings, I do not myself believe it can be understood, finally, as a mere
gesture of resentment at the theft of literary role and function. As intelligent
men and women, these writers surely grasp that genuine influence doesn't depend
upon instant command of a mass audience. The sound of heartlessness in their
fiction is best interpreted as an attempt at fidelity to the morality of
remembering - an acknowledgment that, after a period in which lives beyond
numbering were dealt with as waste matter, a quick return to human nuance would
itself be a murder of conscience.

But this fidelity is dehumanizing, crippling to the highest literary and moral
value - responsiveness to life. Truthfully, one does not know how to speak to
it. From William Dean Howells's time to the present, American writers have been
visited periodically by merchants of the upbeat, counseling them to concentrate
on the smiling aspects of experience. And such counsel has always missed the
point. It's never optimism that needs endorsement in this country; always it's
the values of variousness, imaginative growth, individual responsiveness.
Without responsiveness, moral penetration is utterly inconceivable. One catches
hints that writers themselves are conscious of this - aware that too automatic
and habitual a reliance upon material that deadens will diminish individuality,
weaken the capacity to register the worth and interest of life, end the chance
of bodying forth new models of human possibility. ''I'm afraid if I keep using
(the Vietnam War),'' the influential novelist Robert Stone has said, ''I'll
vulgarize my feelings about it.'' There are signs, too - I'm thinking of Raymond
Carver's most recent book, ''Cathedral'' - that a richer moral tone is
gestating.

But the understanding, among the Impassives, that writers (like the rest of us)
have to feel forward - live forward a little, risk more in the name of full
human connection - to become what they can become and to renew life for others,
remains undernourished. One truth about the 60's, obscured at this moment but
assuredly not forever, is that for a while the period showed us, unambiguously,
amid its horrors, some growing points for democratic culture. Another truth,
visible everywhere in American writing, is that the 60's did indeed injure us
all. B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 9, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SEAFARERS' TRAINING SCHOOL RUNS AT QUARTER-SPEED

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1083 words

DATELINE: PINEY POINT, Md.


The campus is 90 waterfront acres, shaded by pines and patrolled by peacocks. It
houses a new $26 million resort hotel and workshops full of technological
amenities that would evoke envy at many universities. The fleet of training
vessels moored in the Potomac River includes President Kennedy's favorite yacht.

Here at the Harry Lundeberg School of Seamanship, only students are in short
supply. The list of applicants is long, but because the school accepts only
students it can promise jobs, the student body has withered even as the campus
itself has blossomed.

The Lundeberg School, paid for by American shipping lines and run by the
Seafarers International Union, is a brass-plated barometer of an industry in
foul weather.

It is the only union training school that takes newcomers and teaches them to be
deckhands, engine room workers or stewards on American cargo ships. But it has
160 maritime trainees in a facility generously equipped for four times as many.

Just Enough for Replacements


''The maritime industry has been on the decline for the last 20 years,'' said
John Mason, dean of vocations. ''We're just training for replacement.'' In the
Vietnam War, when the country last employed a large fleet of cargo ships, the
Lundeberg school sometimes had as many as 600 students earning their first
seafaring credentials.

In peacetime, cheaper foreign flagships and automated supertankers have taken
over work that once busied American seafarers.

Today the Lundeberg School, named for the union's first president, has only 61
new seafarers, roughly the number the union says is needed to replace veterans
who will die or retire.

The other 100 students are experienced men and women learning new skills to
secure their footholds in this slippery job market. Typically, union seafarers
between tours of duty will return to the school several times as they make their
way from dishwasher to chief steward, or from engine ''wiper'' to engineer.

Accommodations for Visitors


The school also opens its rooms to parties of vacationing seafarers and
occasional union conventions, at subsidized rates.

Union visitors are billed $42.25 a day for a modern motel-style room, use of the
swimming pool and three meals, perhaps trout amandine or steak from the school's
own cattle herd. The union has a modern farm that raises cattle, hogs and
vegetables to feed the school.

The meals are delivered by uniformed ship stewards-in-training. In the 292-room
hotel, opened in January, future stewards can practice swabbing cocktail glasses
at the Anchor Bar, while mechanical trainees tinker with diesels and
refrigeration units in the well-appointed shops.

'Finest Training School'

''This is now the finest training school anywhere in the world,'' the Seafarers
president, Frank Drozak, recently boasted.

The Seafarers school started in Brooklyn and moved here in 1967, to the wooden
barracks of a former Navy torpedo testing center on the Western Shore of
Maryland.

In recent years, the union has embarked on an impressive schedule of new
construction.

Operating the facility costs more than $8 million a year, not counting the
recent modernization, according to Frank Mongelli, the union vice president who
directs the school. Shipowners underwrite all costs of the school as part of the
fringe benefits contract negotiated with the union.

Girders have already been planted for construction of a $3 million computerized
mockup of a ship control room. When it is completed, a student will be able to
stand at the helm before a bank of projectors and guide a simulated supertanker
into any port in the world.

''It's going to be a super arcade game,'' said Mr. Mason, the dean.

To acquaint students with the real thing, the school maintains a brace of
tugboats, a fishing vessel and a pair of yachts, including Kennedy's yacht, the
Manitou.

Training for Life at Sea


It is a matter of pride in the union that the school has taken many young people
whose lives appeared to have reached a dead end and introduced them to a life of
decent pay, discipline and adventure. The school offers high school equivalency
training and college credit courses.

The experienced students live in the hotel, and new trainees in an adjacent
dormitory. The tuition and the living quarters are free for the students.

Gary Truvia, a 20-year-old steward trainee from New Orleans, waited two years to
get in. Explaining his desire to come, he said: ''I had a brother who sailed,
and he was bringing back souvenirs from all over the world. I'd like to go to
Brazil, Jamaica, exotic places.''

Completion of a four-month course leads to a job with base pay of about $1,000 a
month, plus bunk, board and other benefits. The pay can be twice that much for a
beginner on a modern liquid natural gas tanker.

However, the graduates may end up scrambling to stay in work. The union is now
advocating six-month tours of duty, so that each seagoing job can be shared by
two workers. Mr. Drozak said most seafarers now supplemented their income with
shoreside jobs.

Cycles in the Industry


Martin Seham, a lawyer for the American Maritime Association, the largest
association of vessel operators, said the recent splurge of improvements was
planned before the industry saw how steeply the demand for workers would
decline.

And Mr. Drozak conceded: ''It may seem half empty now, but training goes up and
down with cycles in the industry. We built it for the future.''

That promising future is still beyond the horizon. According to the Maritime
Administration, a dozen American flag ships are under construction, but they are
big, automated ships that use half the crew of older vessels. Each will
eventually replace three or four conventional cargo ships now sailing under
American flag.

Maritime unions and vessel operators have long agreed on what they see as a
solution: a Federal law to force American traders to ship more of their cargo on
American flagships. They argue that such legislation is necessary to counter
foreign subsidies and maintain a fleet for American defense.

So far, Congress has resisted such a law, despite persistent lobbying and large
campaign donations from the maritime unions.

''If there's no trainees,'' Mr. Drozak said, ''well, the school will be here for
vacations and retirees.''

''But I'm convinced the industry has reached bottom,'' he added. ''It won't go
lower.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Latin Arms Shipments By C.I.A. Are Reported

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 246 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 9


The Central Intelligence Agency is using small private airlines to fly guns and
other military supplies to United States-backed forces in Central America, and
false flight plans are sometimes filed to cover up the shipments, CBS News
reported Sunday night.

A C.I.A. spokesman, Dale Peterson, said, ''It's not our policy to comment on
such allegations.''

The network said the C.I.A. is using air freight companies in Florida, Arizona
and Delaware to make the secret arms shipments.

It said an April 9, 1983, flight by Southern Air Transport of Miami carried 22
tons of small arms to a Honduran military base on a propeller-driven Hercules
plane with a special crew.

CBS said the flight plan filed with federal civil aviation authorities listed
the destination as the Honduran capital, Tegucigalpa, but the plane went to an
army base at Palmerola.

During the Vietnam War, Southern Air Transport was owned by the C.I.A. CBS
quoted the company's president, William Langton, as saying the C.I.A. connection
had been severed, but the company would not divulge its list of customers, the
network said. The company denied any wrongdoing.

Summit Aviation of Delaware and Evergreen Air of Tuscon, Ariz., were also listed
in the report. A worker at the Delaware company said no officials were available
for comment. Donna Nelson, the vice president of Evergreen International
Aviation, the parent company of Evergreen Air, said the CBS report was ''totally
an untruth.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA, AFTER TALKS IN SOVIET, SAYS HALCYON DAYS ARE GONE

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 349 words

DATELINE: PEKING, July 9


The official Beijing Review charged today that the Soviet Union still wanted to
control China and warned that it was ''unrealistic and impossible'' to return to
the relationship of the 1950's.

The article in the weekly magazine, which is distributed abroad in five
languages, appeared less than a week after China's chief negotiator with the
Soviet Union, Qian Qichen, returned from Moscow to report there had been no
progress in improving relations, which turned chilly 25 years ago.

It appeared to come in response to recent criticism of China by Konstantin U.
Chernenko, the Soviet leader, and the official Soviet press, which was prompted
by China's hostility toward Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia.

Beijing Review said the reason for the poor relations between Moscow and Peking
went deeper than this.

''The real problem lies in the fact that while the Soviets attempt to control
us, we are opposed to being controlled,'' Beijing Review said. ''Or, in the
Kremlin's logic, you are good and revolutionary if you tow its line, and you
become a bad counterrevolutionary or a narrow-minded nationalist if you don't.
In that case, you should be opposed and pressured. This is exactly what the
Soviet Union has done to China.''

Chinese-Soviet relations turned sour in the late 1950's, not only because of
ideological differences but also because of border disputes.

In late 1982, China agreed to open talks with the Soviet Union on improving
their relations. But Peking says it is impossible to normalize ties until Moscow
takes three essential measures: the unconditional withdrawal of Soviet forces
from Afghanistan, an end to the Kremlin's support for the Vietnamese military
occupation of Cambodia and a sharp reduction of the Soviet missiles and troops
deployed along China's northern border. Moscow has not moved to meet any of
these conditions.

The Beijing Review article asserted that while China did not want either
strained ties or war with the Soviet Union, ''it is unrealistic and impossible
for Sino-Soviet relations to return to what they once were in history.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 11, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. BLAMES HANOI FOR ICY RELATIONS

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 928 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, July 10


Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that all efforts by the United
States to hold ''reasonable negotiations'' with Vietnam on establishing
diplomatic relations have ''run into a stone wall'' that he said had been put up
by Hanoi.

As to relations with the Soviet Union, he said Moscow seems unable to ''take yes
for an answer'' on starting talks in September on space weapons.

Mr. Shultz conceded that Washington and Moscow had different ideas on what to
talk about in those talks. He also ruled out a moratorium on testing of an
American antisatellite weapon on the ground that Moscow had already held such
tests. He said verification problems made it difficult to envisage a moratorium
on deployment of such weapons.

U.S.-Vietnam Tensions

In his remarks on Vietnam he said two obstacles have virtually ruled out any
prospect for an improvement in relations.

The first, he asserted, was Hanoi's unwillingness to provide information on the
2,500 Americans unaccounted for from the Vietnam War. Mr. Shultz stressed that
there was no evidence that any American prisoners of war were alive. But he said
that when so many people were unaccounted for, ''There is always the possibility
that someone is still alive.''

The other problem, Mr. Shultz said, was ''continued Vietnamese aggression'' in
Cambodia, where about 160,000 Vietnamese troops are stationed.

Mr. Shultz made his remarks at a press conference here after talks with Prime
Minister Lee Kuan Yew.

In his longest statement on Vietnam in some time, Mr. Shultz said there had been
''some progress'' in the last year on returning the remains of bodies. But he
said, ''I'm afraid that the prospect of normalization is so far away it is
really fruitless to speculate about it.''

'Normalization Is Miles Away'

''So far as I can see,'' he said, ''efforts to bring about any kind of
reasonable negotiations on the subject have run into a stone wall from Vietnam
and so I think that any thought of normalization with the United States is just
miles away.''

Mr. Shultz is to go to Jakarta, Indonesia, on Wednesday to take part in the
annual meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, where the topic of
Chinese-American relations is likely to be discussed. On Monday Mr. Shultz heard
expressions of concern in Kuala Lumpur from Malaysian officials who fear that
China may some day try to dominate the area. He is likely to hear the same
concern from Indonesians.

The American secretary was clearly irked at news conferences here, and earlier
in the day in Kuala Lumpur, when China was discussed.

''I don't know how to allay fears people have,'' he said. ''People had fears in
the past that we didn't have a constructive relationship with China and now they
fear that we do.''

''But I think that the basic point is that China is an important country in Asia
and in the world generally,'' he said. ''We think that a constructive
relationship between the United States and China lends stability to the region
and not the other way around.''

A Question of Stability

''I think you have to start with the proposition that China is there,'' Mr.
Shultz said. ''It is an important country. It has been for a long time. It will
continue to be, and I don't have any doubts in my mind at all that as an
economic proposition, China will develop and it seems to me that's to be
expected.''

''The question is whether that development, from the standpoint of stability in
this region, is best done with other countries cooperating and being a part of
it,'' he said, ''and we believe that it is important for our own interests as a
potential trading partner and in the interests of security and strategic
considerations to have a good working relationship with China.''

Mr. Shultz also indicated that the United States would tell the Asean nations
that it was not interested in a Pacific basin economic community, which is being
discussed by some nations as a balance to the European Economic Community. He
said he could see merit in some loose grouping for sharing information but saw
no need for an ''operational'' organization like the Common Market, given the
growing prosperity of countries like Singapore and Malaysia.

In his talks with Prime Minister Lee, Mr. Shultz raised the American concern
about the ''pirating'' of American computer software, movie and audio tapes, and
other copyrighted material. Talks have been going on for some time on this
issue, he said.

No Arms for Cambodia Rebels

Despite his condemnation of the Vietnamese, Mr. Shultz gave no indication of any
change in the American refusal to provide military assistance to the
anti-Vietnamese forces in Cambodia. The two non-Communist members of the three
in the anti-Vietnam coalition have been pressing for American military equipment
or money to buy arms. But American help for Prince Norodom Sihanouk and former
Prime Minister Son Sann has been limited to aid for refugees from Cambodia and
political backing around the world, including support for the Cambodian
resistance delegation at the United Nations. This has prevented the pro-Vietnam
Government of Cambodia from taking a seat in the organization. The United States
says that it gives no support to the Pol Pot forces because of their record of
killing their own people while in power in Cambodia.

Prime Minister Lee has been aiding the Vietnam resistance forces with light
weapons and is reported to have been holding talks with Egypt on receiving
Soviet-made weapons for use in Cambodia.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 12, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ EXPRESSES CONCERN ON RIGHTS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 754 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, July 11


Secretary of State George P. Shultz expressed concern to Indonesia's Foreign
Minister today about reports of continuing human rights abuses being carried out
by Indonesian forces in East Timor, an American official said.

By bringing up the issue soon after his arrival here from Singapore this
morning, Mr. Shultz in effect complied with an unusual request conveyed to him
last week by 123 members of Congress in a letter that was drafted by
Representative Tony P. Hall, Democrat of Ohio.

In the letter, made public by Mr. Hall's office, the Congressmen said, ''We
believe that it is of critical importance that the plight of the people of East
Timor be accorded serious attention in the meetings that you will conduct with
the Indonesian leadership on the occasion of your visit to Indonesia, the first
by an American Secretary of State since the 1975 invasion.''

According to an American official, the Indonesian Foreign Minister, Mochtar
Kusumaatmadja, defended his Government's actions in East Timor, a former
Portuguese colony that was incorporated to Indonesia by force in 1975. Fighting
has resumed since last August when insurgents killed and mutilated some
Indonesian engineers.

Concerns Discussed Quietly

A senior aide to Mr. Shultz denied that the matter had been raised solely
because of the Congressional letter. He said the Administration has discussed
human rights concerns quietly with the Indonesians on a regular basis and has
been pressing for more American and Australian access to East Timor.

Mr. Shultz arrived here for consultations with Foreign Ministers from the six
countries that form the Association of Southeast Asian Nations - Brunei,
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand - and with others
here to consult, Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand and the European
community.

In addition to conferring with Mr. Mochtar, Mr. Shultz also met with Foreign
Minister Siddhi Savetsila of Thailand this morning. Then Mr. Shultz and his
party flew on an Indonesian Air Force Boeing 728 to Jogjakarta to visit
Borobudur, one of the world's leading Buddhist monuments, 25 miles northwest of
that city. On what was clearly an afternoon of relaxation, the Shultz party
stopped at a store on the way back to the Jogjakarta airport to purchase batik
garments, made of the colorful cloth for which Indonesia is known.

The Southeast Asian Association concluded its formal meeting on Tuesday with a
communique calling for national reconciliation among all Cambodian factions,
including the Vietnamese-backed Heng Samrin Government, as part of a formula
involving the withdrawal of the 160,000 Vietnamese forces in Cambodia.

Pressing for U.S. Role

Mr. Shultz stressed, his aides said, in his two meetings this morning, that the
United States was ready to support any initiative from the association on
Cambodia. The six member states have been pressing the United States to aid the
anti-Communist Cambodian factions led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and former
Prime Minister Son Sann. Washington continues to oppose direct American military
aid, but is willing to consider raising its aid for refugee relief from the
current $10 million total, an aide said.

The human rights situation in East Timor is a major cloud in relations with
Indonesia, in part because of the concern created in Congress. The letter to Mr.
Shultz said 100,000 people have been killed in East Timor, a largely Catholic
region, since the 1975 Indonesian takeover.

Overall relations between the United States and Indonesia are good, American
officials said, although Indonesia is unhappy with the sharp improvement in
American ties to China, which it, like Malaysia, sees as a long-term threat to
Southeast Asia. The Indonesians would like additional military help from the
United States, but so long as controversy exists over East Timor, the
Administration is reluctant to seek advanced military equipment from Congress,
officials said.

The Thai Foreign Minister told Mr. Shultz that his Government had still not
decided whether to ask to buy the F-16-A fighter from the United States, or to
buy the F-20, which carries less armaments and is designed like its predecessor,
the F-5, to be sold only for export.

Most American officials have said they expect Thailand to ask for the F-16-A
later in the year. Some members of Congress oppose the sale of the F-16 to this
region for fear it will lead to an arms race, with Moscow upgrading Vietnam's
MIG-21's to MIG-23's.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Indonesia

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 12, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

A FORMER SALVADORAN REBEL CHIEF TELLS OF ARMS FROM NICARAGUA

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 945 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 11


A former Salvadoran guerrilla commander who was captured in Honduras said today
that virtually all the arms received by the guerrilla units he led came from
Nicaragua.

The former guerrilla, Arquimedes Canadas, known in the rebel movement as
Comandante Alejandro Montenegro, also bolstered the Reagan Administration's
disputed assertions that Salvadoran guerrillas have their headquarters in
Nicaragua by saying that he went there secretly in 1981 and met with his top
commander, the Nicaraguan Army Chief of Staff and four Cuban advisers.

Mr. Canadas said in an interview that in 1981 and 1982 guerrilla units under his
command in San Salvador and north of the city received ''99.9 percent of our
arms'' from Nicaragua.

This contradicts what several guerrilla commanders, including Mr. Canadas, said
in interviews at their mountain base near Guazapa volcano in February 1982.

Armed with American-made M-16 rifles, the Salvadoran guerrilla commanders said
their weapons were either captured from Government forces, bought on the black
market or purchased directly from Salvadoran Government officers. Only one
admitted having gone to Nicaragua and none said they had been to Cuba.  But
today Mr. Montenegro said through an interpreter that he had been under orders
from his guerrilla commander in chief to give false information in 1982 by
saying that the arms were captured or purchased when in fact they had come from
Managua by truck aross Honduras into El Salvador.

In a three-hour interview Tuesday night, Mr. Canadas, who was captured in August
1982 by Honduran Army units in Tegucigalpa while he was en route to Nicaragua,
said he had gone to Cuba once and to Managua twice to meet with Joaquin
Villalobos, commander in chief of the People's Revolutionary Army.

The P.R.A. is the largest of five guerrilla forces linked together under the
Farabundo Marti Liberation Front.



Accepted Government Amnesty

Mr. Canadas, who has been under death sentence by Salvadoran guerrilla forces
since accepting a Salvadoran Government amnesty, was under a round-the-clock
security escort arranged by the State Department's office of public diplomacy
and appeared today at a White House briefing on Central America for Reagan
supporters.

Refusing to say where he was now living for his own safety's sake, the 29-
year-old Salvadoran gave a long account of his personal falling out with Mr.
Villalobos over what he said he saw as the increasing Cuban domination of the
Salvadoran guerrilla movement starting in mid-1980.

Last year, Administration officials who had been embarrassed when a Nicaraguan
publicly recanted statements given to the State Department and Central
Intellience Agency, said they had checked out information provided by Mr.
Canadas and were satisfied it was reliable. At present, his availability to news
organizations, arranged indirectly by the State Department, is an apparent
effort to buttress the Administration's charges that the Salvadoran guerrilla
movements get aid and direction from Nicaragua.

In the interview, Mr. Canadas said that in 1981 and 1982 urban commandos and 200
guerrillas under his command in Guazapa received monthly arms shipments from
Nicaragua that were trucked across Honduras, hidden in false panels and floors.
He said the trucks moved through the normal customs checkpoint of Las Manos at
the Nicaraguan border with Honduras and the checkpoint of Amantillo at the
Honduran border with El Salvador.

Each truck, he said, carried roughly 25 to 30 rifles and about 7,000 cartridges
of ammunition. The rifles, he said, were American-made M-16's captured in
Vietnam and FAL rifles formerly used by the Nicaraguan Army under Somoza.

Sometimes the trucks arrived without rifles and carried just ammunition and in
that case, he said, a typical load would include up to 15,000 cartridges,
Soviet-made grenades, and explosives like TNT for sabotage attacks against
Government installations.

Since the time of his capture, American officials have said that Honduran
authorities put on major efforts to halt the relatively open flow of arms
traffic on Honduran highways. American military officials have now contended
that the outside arms flow comes from Nicaragua on nighttime air drops or in
canoes or power boats operating in the Pacific coastal waters between Nicaragua
and El Salvador.

Mr. Canadas said his one visit to the Salvadoran guerrilla command post in
Nicaragua came in October 1981, when he was summoned by Mr. Villalobos, regarded
by Salvadoran Army officers as the shrewdest and most important guerrilla
commander.

'Taken There Blindfolded'

''I don't know exactly where it was because I was taken there blindfolded,'' he
said. ''We went perhaps 15 minutes on the highway south of Managua where we
changed vehicles. Then we went another 10 or 15 minutes. We came to a very large
private home with a very large garden with metal benches.''

''To the right of the main entrances was an office where Villalobos worked,'' he
went on. ''Further in the house was a large room where the commanders of the
other guerrilla groups met and where the Cubans and Sandinistas came. There were
four Cubans there.''

He added: ''We had one meeting about two hours long one night with the
Sandinista Army Chief of Staff Joaquin Cuadra.''

''Cuadra spoke almost entirely about the Nicaraguan situation. And they were
interested to know what kind of rebellion was taking place in El Salvador, a
peasant rebellion or all elements of the population. In Nicaragua, they said, it
had been all elements. But the meeting was not to discuss aid. By that time, aid
had reached its peak.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GAINS FOR REBELS SEEN IN CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 631 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, July 12


An anti-Vietnamese coalition in Cambodia is beginning to cause military problems
for Hanoi, Southeast Asian nations were said to have told the United States,
Japan and other countries today.

The coalition members led by former Prince Norodom Sihanouk were reported to be
''working very well on the ground'' and coordinating their moves, instead of
clashing with each other as in the past.

The report was made at the opening of the annual two-day meeting between the six
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and their Pacific
''dialogue'' partners - the United States, Japan, Australia and New Zealand.

Participants in the closed meeting said the Southeast Asians reported there had
been some Vietnamese military defections and that shortages of arms were showing
up among Vietnamese forces. The Vietnamese are fighting against a three-sided
coalition of Prince Sihanouk, Son Sann, a pro- Western former Prime Minister,
and the Pol Pot Communist forces, which brutally ruled Cambodia for three years
until forced into the hills by the Vietnamese in 1978.

Political Front Still Gloomy

An American official said the report on military action contrasted with the
gloomy report on the political front. There, he explained, ''a stonewall''
existed on finding a formula for Vietnamese withdrawal and formation of a new
Cambodian Government.

Foreign Minister Mochtar Kusumaatmadja of Indonesia made the point, the American
official said, that it was important to exercise patience and wait for a
breakthrough. The American official said that the military progress noted was
not of a scale to suggest that the Sihanouk coalition could defeat the 160,000
Vietnamese forces. The main fighting arm of the coalition consists of the Pol
Pot insurgents, numbering about 30,000. They and the 20,000 forces attached to
the other factions receive arms primarily from China.

In another development, Mr. Mochtar outlined the Asean decision to proceed with
the first step in a new Pacific basin economic development plan.

The American official who briefed reporters said that the concept had not been
worked out in detail, but the general idea was for countries to offer training
in such fields as computers, food processing and agriculture to nations and
islands in the Pacific that were less well off.

Most of the first morning of talks was devoted to the Cambodian situation. Of
the six states in the organization, Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore are much
more involved in trying to force a solution than are Indonesia, the Philippines,
and the newest member, Brunei.

Foreign Minister Shintaro Abe of Japan said in his speech that ''cooperative
relations among the three factions are making steady progress.''

Backing for Peace Force Offered

He said that Japan was ready to help pay for the cost of any peacekeeping forces
in Cambodia once Vietnam agreed to a phased withdrawal. Once all Vietnamese
forces have left, he said, Japan would be willing to send personnel to Cambodia
to help supervise elections and to provide non-military aid.

And when peace has been restored to Cambodia, Japan will ''render as much
economic and technical cooperation as possible for reconstruction in the
Indochinese countries,'' Mr. Abe said.

As to the Indochinese refugees, Japan will continue to provide half the budget
for the United Nations program for those refugees and to increase the amount of
aid for the Cambodian and other refugees along the border with Thailand.

Asean was created in 1967 but did not evolve into an important association until
the fall of South Vietnam and Cambodia and the withdrawal of American forces
from the region in 1975. A meeting in Bali, Indonesia, in 1976 set the stage for
the current system of collaboration.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George P. Shultz

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY ;
 FRIDAY, JULY 13, 1984 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 848 words


The Soviet-American hot line for emergency communication between the two
governments is to be modernized under an agreement expected to be initialed in
the next few days. Administration officials and foreign diplomats say the accord
is part of an expanding agenda of nonpolitical discussions. (Page A1, Column 2.)


Britian expelled two Nigerian diplomats and informed Nigeria's chief envoy, who
was recalled to Lagos, that he was not welcome to return. Sir Geoffrey Howe, the
Foreign Secretary, told the House of Commons that the action came after Nigeria
turned down a request from authorities that they be allowed to question several
members of Nigeria's diplomatic staff about the July 5 kidnapping of a wealthy
Nigerian exile, Umaru Dikko. (A1:1.)

Pitched battles in northern Lebanon raged for the second day between pro- Syrian
factions, and Damascus rushed a special envoy to the region to try to end the
conflict. Police said 12 people were killed and 15 wounded in the artillery,
rocket and machine- gun exchanges between followers of former President Suleiman
Franjieh and militiamen of the National Syrian Social Party. (A3:1-4.)

An anti-Vietnamese coalition in Cambodia is causing military problems for Hanoi,
Southeast Asian nations at a two-day meeting in Jakarta were said to have
reported. Six Southeast Asian nations in the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations met with the United States, Japan, Australia and New Zealand. (A4:3.)

Charges of three killings of Guatemalan refugees by the Mexican Army last week
were contained in a document by a Roman Catholic diocese in southern Mexico. A
high-level official in the Interior Ministry denied the charges. (A4:4-6.)

The United States would deny Government family planning money to international
organizations supporting abortion under a policy statement the White House
approved, Administration officials said. (A3:4-6.) National

Geraldine A. Ferraro was named by Walter F. Mondale as his Vice Presidential
running-mate, becoming the first woman selected to run for the office on a major
national party ticket. Mr. Mondale, who expects to be nominated by the
Democratic convention next week, introduced Mrs. Ferraro, a Queens
Representative, to an ebullient crowd at the Minnesota State Capitol in St.
Paul. Mr. Mondale said the 48-year-old former school teacher and assistant
prosecutor was ''the best Vice President.'' (A1:6.)

Democrats praised the choice of Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro for the
Democratic Vice Presidential nomination, and feminist leaders called it a
historic breakthrough. Republican spokesmen, apparently presaging their line of
attack in the campaign this fall, challenged what they called Mrs. Ferraro's
limited experience, especially in foreign affairs. (A8:1-2.)

Senator Gary Hart called Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro ''a good choice''
as Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee but vowed to continue his own bid for
the Democratic Presidential nomination. (A11:3-5.)

To alleviate air traffic delays, 40 Government and aviation industry officials,
asked by the Federal Aviation Administration to recommend a solution, is said to
be considering, among other steps, a modest increase in the circling of
airliners near their destinations and a decrease in the amount of time planes
are held on the ground before takeoff. (A1:1-3.)

Two flights of the space shuttle Discovery, whose first flight was scrubbed June
25, will be combined into one mission in order to keep the shuttle schedule on
track, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration announced. (A13:4.)

One count against John Z. DeLorean was dismissed by a Federal judge in response
to a defense motion to dismiss all charges in a nine-count indictment charging
him with cocaine trafficking. (A6:1-5.)

A probe into fraudulent degrees sold to residents of New York and a dozen other
states led to the arrest in New York of six people, three of them working as
doctors, on criminal charges of possessing fraudulent degrees. The authorities
said about 100 other people would face similar charges in the near future. The
inquiry, which began at the Federal level, involves several thousand fraudulent
degrees from the the Dominican Republic. (A7:1-4.) Metropolitan

Seat belts must be worn by automobile drivers and their front-seat passengers in
New York State under legislation Gaovernor Cuomo signed into law. The law, which
is the first in the nation and will take effect Jan. 1, also requires all
passengers under the age of 10 to wear a seat belt or sit in a special seat.
(B4:1-2.)

Governor Cuomo's voter registration drive, in which he planned to use state
employees, was blocked by State Supreme Court Justice Edward S. Conway of
Albany. (B1:1-6.)

A Federal mediator planned to meet separately with representatives of the Long
Island Lighting Company and two striking unions today, as Lilco's nonunion
personnel worked 12- hour shifts to complete the tasks of the regular staff.
(B3:1-2.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 14, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CHINESE REPORT THEY BEAT BACK VIETNAM ATTACK

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1048 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Saturday, July 14


China announced Friday that its frontier guards repulsed a large-scale attack by
Vietnam Thursday across their tense border after 10 hours of heavy combat.

A dispatch by the official New China News Agency from what it said was the front
line in Yunnan Province, where another battle was reported a month ago, said
that after the fighting, ''the invaders fled in utter confusion.''

It said Chinese troops, working in the rain, had fortified their positions in
preparation for a new attack.



First Reported by Vietnam

The border hostilities were confirmed by the Vietnamese News Agency. It accused
China of shelling Ha Tuyen Province, which abuts Yunnan, with artillery and
rockets since early July, killing civilians and seriously damaging property.

Vietnam has accused China of creating border incidents to tie down Vietnamese
troops and take pressure off guerrillas in Cambodia who are fighting Vietnamese
occupation forces there. China supports the Cambodian guerrillas, while the
Vietnamese, who invaded Cambodia at the end of 1978 and installed the regime of
Heng Samrin, are allies of the Soviet Union.

Chinese newspapers and radio carried the first domestic reports of the fighting
Friday morning. The armed forces newspaper, Liberation Army accused Vietnam of
taking ''a new ferocious step on its wrong road against China.''

The initial dispatch of the New China News Agency Thursday night said a
Vietnamese division with artillery support mounted an incursion into Malipo
County in Yunnan at 5 A.M. Thursday local time. But it said the Vietnamese ran
into stiff resistance from Chinese frontier guards, who stood their ground and
inflicted heavy casualties.



Battle Reported Over

''Fierce fighting was still going on at sunset,'' the Chinese press agency said
Thursday night. Its report Friday implied that the battle was over, at least for
the time being.

A broadcast by the Voice of Vietnam, monitored in Bangkok today, repeated the
Vietnam News Agency report that Chinese gunners had fired 5,000 artillery shells
into two districts of Ha Tuyen Province this month. But it made no mention of
the battle that China said took place Thursday.

The Vietnamese radio also said more than 200,000 artillery shells had been fired
into Vietnam's six northernmost provinces from China in the last two months,
wounding hundreds of civilians and destroying homes and property.

There was no way to confirm the accuracy of either version, since independent
observers have not been allowed into the remote area. Similar recriminations
have been traded off and on over the last three months. Foreign diplomats in
Hanoi and Peking believe that reports on both sides tend to be exaggerated for
greater propaganda effect.

The reports of border clashes have been circulated since early April, which is
far longer than the duration reported in previous years. The tensions in the
past coincided with Vietnam's spring offensive against Chinese-backed guerrillas
in Cambodia and tapered off as the fighting there wound down.

Members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations reportedly told the United
States and other ''partner'' nations at a meeting in Indonesia Thursday that the
anti-Vietnamese coalition in Cambodia was ''working very well'' and causing
serious military problems for Hanoi.

Frontier Guards Exhorted

Liberation Army Daily, which is read in the Chinese armed forces, contended
today that hostilities with Vietnam were continuing. If the Vietnamese provoked
border incidents, the newspaper said, ''we can do nothing but hit them back in
self-defense and fight to the finish.''

It urged China's frontier guards, who operate as light infantrymen with
artillery support, to defend every inch of Chinese territory and hit back hard
at Vietnamese attackers. Liberation Army Daily is not permitted reading for
foreigners, but the New China News Agency took the unusual step of circulating
extracts of the article to give it greater authority.

Liberation Army Daily charged that Vietnam was committing fresh troops to its
continuing border conflicts because it regarded China as the biggest obstacle to
its aggressive ambitions of controlling Southeast Asia.

New Strains With Soviet

The latest reports of fighting come at a time when Moscow's support of Hanoi has
caused new strains in Chinese-Soviet relations. On June 25, Liberation Army
Daily accused the Soviet Union of inciting the Vietnamese to engage in ''armed
provocations'' along the border. Otherwise, it said, ''the Vietnamese
authorities could not have been so brazen in their outrages.''

Last week the weekly magazine Outlook called Vietnam's ''strategic alliance''
with the Soviet Union the root of tension and turbulence in Southeast Asia.
Peking has charged that Moscow is using Vietnam as a forward base for its
hegemonistic strategy in Asia and the Pacific.

Vietnam has leveled similar charges at China. On Thursday, Vietnam's Foreign
Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, said China had launched an ''absolutely unprovoked
attack'' at several points along their border. Mr. Thach, who was flying to
Mongolia, another Soviet ally, for a visit, contended that Asia should guard
against China's ''new expansionist designs.''

Terrain Is Rugged

The clashes along the Chinese-Vietnamese border are confined to a rugged terrain
of densely vegetated mountains, limestone cliffs and narrow valleys and streams,
which would normally restrict the scope of military operations. The reported
fighting seems to be over the high ground that can dominate both sides of the
border.

Friday's Chinese press accounts observed that Vietnam mounted a regimental-sized
attack in the same area of Malipo County earlier on June 11. Chinese frontier
guards said then that they repulsed six Vietnamese assaults that day, inflicting
heavy casualties.

By contrast, the Vietnamese claimed to have retaken three Chinese positions dug
a half mile inside Ha Tuyen province, capturing ''many'' Chinese prisoners and
seizing 12 artillery pieces and 6 mortars.

The New China News Agency quoted Chinese military sources as saying the
Vietnamese spent a month preparing for Thursday's attack, a period that would
have given Chinese troops time to reinforce their positions.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of china (page 3)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 14, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING-HANOI INTERESTS SPLIT AFTER VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 700 words


''As close as lips and teeth'' was the way Communists in China and Vietnam
described their relationship during Vietnam's wars against France and the United
States.

But the national interests of the two Communist Governments have radically
diverged since then, and their hostility has resulted in a border war and
numerous lesser clashes since early 1979.

The quarrel stems in large part from the perception on each side that the other
seeks to control Southeast Asia. In China's view, Vietnam's ambition became
clear when Vietnamese troops invaded Cambodia five and a half years ago and
overthrew its Communist Government. In Vietnam's view, the military ''lesson''
that China then tried to teach Vietnam was proof of Peking's desire for regional
dominance.

The conflict has also reflected the larger ideological and strategic tensions
between China and the Soviet Union. Moscow became Vietnam's main backer during
the Vietnam War and now presumably views Vietnam as a strategic, if expensive,
ally in Asia. Peking says it believes Moscow's alliance with Hanoi means China
is threatened from the south as well as the north.

An Old Antagonism

Since the border war of February 1979, China and Vietnam have also pointed out
that their hostility dates back for thousands of years.

Thus, in Vietnam these days, the nation's history is portrayed as one long
struggle for political and cultural independence from China. Between 311 B.C.
and A.D. 939, a string of Chinese dynasties ruled what is now northern Vietnam,
and several wars were fought. After a Chinese invasion in 1407, the Vietnamese
finally expelled their neighbors.

Recent Chinese teachings about Vietnamese history have tended to emphasize
Vietnam's reported desire to create a Vietnamese-dominated federation consisting
of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos. Each side in the conflict has also combed the
files of Communist Party history and found much evidence for the other's plots.

From the 1940's through the early 1970's, however, Chinese Communist support for
the Vietnamese revolution was crucial, and the railroad link through Friendship
Pass on their common border became a funnel for Chinese arms and other supplies
for Ho Chi Minh and his followers.

The Vietnamese now say China turned against them even during the Vietnam War.
Chinese leaders, they say, secretly agreed with President Nixon not to aid
Vietnam if American forces bombed North Vietnam.

Soviet Provided the Aid

After Hanoi's victory over Saigon's forces in 1975, the question of aid to the
shattered country was paramount, and the Soviet Union was Vietnam's
indispensable provider, economically as well as militarily. Relations continued
to cool between Hanoi and Peking during the late 1970's, as Peking's relations
with Washington improved.

Relations soured further as the Communist regime of Pol Pot in Cambodia, which
owned much to Maoist theory and Chinese aid, began to speak out bitterly against
its former Vietnamese allies. According to Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia,
the Pol Pot regime also coveted territory in southern Vietnam that Cambodian
monarchs had controlled centuries before.

Vietnam's attitude, meanwhile, toward its own Chinese minority grew hostile in
1977-78 and caused an exodus of tens of thousands of ethnic Chinese ''boat
people'' to China and other havens.

On Christmas Day in 1978, Vietnam invaded Cambodia and, within a few weeks,
occupied most of the country. China threw its support to Pol Pot's guerrillas,
who have resisted the Vietnamese ever since. On Feb. 17, 1979, Chinese troops
poured into far northern Vietnam, where they sat for a month before departing.

China has since threatened to teach Vietnam a ''second lesson'' if it goes too
far in Cambodia. Observers of the ebb and flow of Chinese-Vietnamese border
shellings and other ''provocations'' note that trouble there tends to increase
each dry season, as Vietnamese troops step up their attacks against Pol Pot's
guerrillas. One theory of why Vietnam has failed to crush those guerrillas is
that China, in the north, poses too great a threat for Vietnam to risk the
troops it needs to win in Cambodia, to the west.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 14, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW SUMMARY;
 SATURDAY, JULY 14, 1984 International

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


China said frontier guards repulsed a major attack by Vietnam Thursday after 10
hours of heavy fighting in Yunnan Province. The new border fighting was first
reported by the Vietnam News Agency, which accused China of shelling Ha Tuyen
Province, which abuts Yunnan Province, with artillery and rockets since early
July. (Page 1, Column 2.)

Advisers to Solidarity went on trial in Warsaw, and Lech Walesa, leader of the
banned union, was not permitted to enter the courthouse. Four defendants are
accused of preparing to topple the Government by force. (2:1.)

No major progress in Cuban relations is expected from the talks between the
United States and Cuba that began in New York Thursday, Reagan Administration
officials said. The talks, limited to immigration issues, are the first
substantive negotiations on specific issues between Washington and Havana since
President Reagan took office. (4:6.)

The loss of $11 million in U.S. aid confronts the International Planned
Parenthood Federation, which was said to be the likely first target of a new
Reagan Administration policy that would deny money to groups supporting abortion
overseas. (4:4.) National

Geraldine A. Ferraro challenged Vice President Bush to two debates and defended
her positions on a range of issues, including abortion. In her first day of
campaigning as the Democratic Vice-Presidential candidate, the Congresswoman
accompanied Walter F. Mondale to his hometown of Elmore, Minn., where she
emphasized the values of hard work and family life that she said her
constituents in Queens shared with the crowd squeezed in the backyard of Mr.
Mondale's boyhood home. (1:6.)

When Republican women advance in politics, President Reagan said they were
''doing it by merit.'' He said there was no ''tokenism or cynical symbolism''
involved. At a lunch with Republican women politicians at the White House, Mr.
Reagan said that the selection of Representative Ferraro as the Democratic vice
presidential nominee would be ''historic,'' but he said the idea that this meant
women were better served by the Democrats was ''foolishness.'' (1:5.)

Reaction to Representative Ferraro as a Vice-Presidenial candidate is mixed,
with a wide range of minuses accompanying the pluses, according to a New York
Times/CBS Poll. There were clearly negative reactions among the elderly, older
and married men, and Southerners, but younger Americans, especially women, and
undecided potential voters were positively affected by Walter F. Mondale's
choice of a running mate. (1:5.)

A major index of prices held steady in June for the third consecutive month. The
Labor Department reported that its Producer Price Index for finished goods - the
prices industry charges retailers - showed no change and has increased only 2.2
percent over the last year. In other reports on two major indicators of the
economy's overall strength, the Government said industrial production rose five-
tenths of 1 percent, and retail sales increased eight-tenths of 1 percent,
exceeding their gains in May. (1:2.)

A man convicted of three murders was executed in the electric chair in the state
prison at Starke, Fla. The execution of David L. Washington, 34 years old, had
been stayed twice. Florida has the largest number of death-row inmates, and the
authorities said that because the appeals process for those inmates was near
exhaustion, the pace of executions was expected to rise substantially. (24:1.)

Distress signals intercepted in space by an international rescue team's
satellites recently saved a woman on solitary dog-team trek in Alaska, who
became severely ill, a man alone in a 19-foot yacht that was becalmed off the
Azores, and a sailing ship battered by the winds off the California coast. There
are three satellites in the rescue system, two operated by the Soviet Union, and
one by the United States. The American satellite has recently been tumbling out
of control, and will be replaced Oct. 24, by the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration. (46:2.) Metropolitan

A walkout at most private hospitals in New York City followed the rejection by
union negotiators of a two-year 8 percent wage increase. The leader of the union
representing 46,000 workers said the offer was ''insulting.'' The hospitals said
their offer was ''barely affordable.'' Bargaining was scheduled to resume today.
(1:1.)

Queens politicians are competing for the House seat that is expected to be
vacated by Represenative Ferraro if she gets the Democratic nomination for Vice
President at the party's convention next week. ''I've heard from everybody,''
said Borough President Donald R. Manes. (26:6.)

A prompt cutoff of city investments in some companies doing business with South
Africa was recommended in a report to Mayor Koch from his aides. Pension funds
are the source of the investments. (27:3.)

Compliance with a seat belt law requiring such restraints for children up to 6
years old has been limited in New York State more than two years after the law
was passed. New Jersey and Connecticut, which have laws similar to New York's,
also say compliance is spotty. (27:1.) Page 35

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 14, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK-BRIEFING

BYLINE: By William E. Farrell and Marjorie Hunter

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 648 words


Test Crash for Air Safety

In September the Federal Aviation

Administration and the National

Aeronautics and Space Administration plan to crash a Boeing 720. The purpose of
the $10 million project is, in part, to test a new fuel additive that aviation
officials say they hope will reduce the potential of fuel explosions in plane
accidents.

Dennis Feldman, an F.A.A. spokesman, says it will be the first time an aircraft
has been deliberately crashed under the agencies' supervision to test safety
standards.

He says most airplane fuel tank explosions occur when planes crash on takeoffs
and landings and passengers often survive the initial impact, then die in the
flames. In the past, Mr. Feldman says, the F.A.A. ran planes into telephone
poles, but advanced remote-control techniques now permit an actual crash. The
Boeing 720, which the F.A.A. bought in 1960 for $4.2 million, will be crashed
from 2,000 feet at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.

Who Goes There (Again)?

Just before the hurlyburly of the

Democratic National Convention

begins in San Francisco Monday,

a Washington-based conservative group will announce its intentions to monitor
the peccadilloes, foibles, contradictions and semantic writhings of the
Democrats.

The Fund for a Conservative Majority is a political action committee that,
according to Lisa Brewer, its director of publications and research, will spend
$3 million on the re-election of President Reagan and others of conservative
mind. Committee members will be peeking under the Democratic big top in San
Francisco looking for inconsistencies, gyrations on issues and just about any
grist for the campaigns. The effort's theme: ''Democratic Distortions - There
They Go Again.''

There's Still a War On

The Vietnam Veterans of America has been seeking a Federal

charter from Congress as a bona fide veterans' organization. The Veterans of
Foreign Wars is circulating letters to legislators on Capitol Hill saying the
V.V.A. ''does not deserve such recognition by the Congress.''

The V.F.W.'s national commander in chief, Clifford G. Olson Jr., says his
organization opposes the Vietnam veterans' ''shameful relationship with the
Communist governments of Vietnam and Kampuchnea (Cambodia).'' Efforts by the
Vietnam veterans' group to locate missing American soldiers in Southeast Asia
has impeded official efforts, the V.F.W. says, adding, ''These activities should
be condemned, not condoned, by the Congress.''

Last month the Democratic-controlled House of Representatives voted to accredit
the Vietnam Veterans of America. The charter legislation is now before the
Republican- controlled Senate.  You Could Fry a Pyramid

It's the heat and the humidity. The

torpid capital is lolling away the

hot summer days while members of Congress are at the seashore or the Democratic
National Convention. Congressional aides take leisurely outdoor lunches on
emerald lawns and watch the tour buses go by.

In the 19th century, Washington was a place devoutly to be avoided in summer. It
was gluey, oppressive and, sometimes, a malarial hazard. Mosquitoes thrived in
the swampy recesses. Air-conditioning changed a lot of that, but Washington
summers still elicit comments, including one dating to a visit in August 1981 by
President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt. In a collection of pieces called ''Those I
Have Known,'' to be published soon by The Crossroad Publishing Company of New
York, he says:

''Because of the oppressive heat and humidity of Washington in the summer, I
found myself longing for the cool breezes of our own Alexandria. This may sound
strange coming from an Egyptian, used to heat, but the climate in Washington
during August is really unbearable. Some people who saw me on television may
have noticed that I had to change my suit before I left the White House because
I was sweating so profusely.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SWIFT BOATS STEAL CHEERS FROM TIGERS

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, July 14


Greg Maiga, who has listened to the near-deafening roar of huge hydroplanes here
for the last 15 summers, stood on the edge of the Detroit River Friday and heard
something odd: a mechanical cacophony from a 28-foot craft that had just
thundered by.

''He sounded a little sick,'' Mr. Maiga said.

Less than 30 seconds later the engine conked out and the craft had to be hauled
back to the dock for repairs.

''It's just like a car,'' Mr. Maiga said. ''When everything's in tune, you can
really hear it.''

Detroit is a city that reveres the internal-combustion engine and cheers its
division-leading baseball team. But in mid-July those loyalties seem to take
second place to the fastest craft afloat and the men who race them.

Spectators Face 90-Degree Heat


That is why, despite 90-degree heat, Mr. Maiga and thousands of other spectators
have crowded into the city's riverfront parks and pathways since Thursday for
the qualifying rounds of the Thunderfest regatta, which is sponsored by the
Stroh's Brewing Company. From bleachers and sea walls, they enjoyed unobstructed
views of craft with streamlined bodies that become almost airborne as they reach
speeds of more than 130 miles an hour.

The finals on the two-and-a-half mile course between the Detroit Boat Club and
the Belle Isle Bridge are scheduled for Sunday, with a $50,000 prize awaiting
the winner.

Since the late 1940's, when yachtsmen souped up boats with surplus airplane
engines made in World War II, Detroit has been a center of hydroplane racing.
While tradition is a strong element in the regatta, not all the craft are direct
descendants of the old-time racing boats.

Helicopter Engines Adapted


The reason is that turbine engines like those used in helicopters in the Vietnam
War have been adapted to hydroplanes. Racing officials say the turbines, which
can develop 3,000 horsepower, are pushing speeds beyond what the piston-driven
aircraft engines could muster.

But if racing technology is changing, the last-minute problems that worry the
racers are not. In the hours before the starting gun, fine-tuning the boats
becomes a race in itself.  For the TexMo Moth, a hydroplane from Missouri, the
problem was a turning fin.

''Different courses require different fins,'' said a crew member, Greg
Schoenberg, of St. Louis, as mechanics began dismantling one fin and installing
another. ''We're only getting around to this now because we had engine trouble
on Thursday and had to wait for an engine to be flown in.''

A few yards away, Steve Woomer, of Seattle, said he had had more than engine
trouble this year. The boat he entered here, the Miss Tosti Asti, which recorded
a qualifying speed of almost 134 miles an hour on Friday, was not the one he had
planned to race.

Safety Is a Concern


''We tore the hull out of the other one in Evansville,'' he said.

With the shift to lighter and faster boats, hydroplane builders have borrowed
ideas from the aerospace industry to make the craft safer. But hydroplane racing
remains a high-risk sport. The racing world was stunned in the early 1980's when
two premier racers, Dean Chenoweth and Bill Muncey, who had achieved seven
national titles and 62 victories in his career, were killed in accidents.

''Everyone thinks you have to be brave or macho or ignorant to do this,'' said
the current national champion, Chip Hanauer, a 30-year-old schoolteacher whose
craft is owned by Mr. Muncey's widow, ''but by now I'm used to it and the idea
of this kind of speed.''

After finishing one trial round with a speed of 128.9 miles an hour, Mr. Hanauer
sounded frustrated that he had not posted a faster speed. ''I was fighting the
boat,'' he said. ''It happened to be pretty rough.''

But from Jeffrey Farrington's lawn chair downriver, it looked smooth.

''The boats are faster and the drivers are better,'' he said, ''and that's nice.
Last year, one of them came by so close we thought we'd be eating wood.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of boat; photo of Chip Hanauer

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET TARGET:AFGHAN AREAS AIDING REBELS

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 869 words


Soviet forces in Afghanistan, now in their fifth year of fighting, have greatly
disrupted the rural communities that have been supporting the Afghan rebels,
military analysts say.

United States and North Atlantic alliance intelligence officials say many
villages that have provided food, water and shelter to the Islamic rebels have
been systematically destroyed by air strikes and armored forays. They say food
distribution has been disrupted, livestock slaughtered and irrigation projects
destroyed from the air.

The result, the analysts say, is that many village populations have left to seek
refuge away from combat areas, leaving the insurgents without the supplies they
need.

Afghanistan had a population of about 15.5 million when Soviet troops invaded in
the last week of 1979. The Western analysts now estimate that three million
people have migrated to Pakistan and a half million more to Iran and that at
least another half million have been killed, wounded or driven from their homes.


Soviet Success Doubted

But the analysts stress that even with such destruction of the insurgents' rural
support, they doubt that Soviet troops at their present force levels can secure
conditions that would enable them to withdraw. One analyst notes that the Soviet
troops lack the 10-to-1 numerical advantage that Western strategists generally
believe is necessary to defeat an insurgency and says the Russians would need
''massive reinforcement'' of their 105,000 troops.

At the same time, the analysts do not believe that the insurgents have the
military capacity to drive out the Soviet Army and Air Force, which is
supporting the Kabul Government of Babrak Karmal.

Moreover, the Russians, in the view of one NATO expert, are not in a political
position that would allow withdrawal, and they will not leave until they have
established a secure and friendly Afghanistan that will be politically
independent but militarily and economically dependent on the Soviet Union.

The Soviet forces appear to be following what one Western analyst calls ''an
enclave strategy.'' Intelligence officials said the troops had established
strong positions in cities and towns along a major highway that runs south from
Nizhni Pyandzh on the Amu Darya river boundary between the two countries. The
town is also one of the main supply points for the Soviet Army and Air Force.

The highway runs south through Baghlan and Charikar to Kabul. Both these towns
and the capital are garrisoned by strong Soviet forces. From Kabul the highway
swings southwest through Ghanzi to Khandhar and then westward to Herat, ending
on the Soviet border at Towaragondhi.

Garrisons Strung Out

Soviet garrisons are strung along the highway like beads on a string, an analyst
said. But there, he pointed out, the enclave strategy departs from that
attempted by the United States forces in Vietnam. Unlike the American forces,
the Russians have made no attempts to venture out to build fortified outposts
outside the garrisons. Punitive actions against the insurgents, the analysts
said, are mounted from the garrison towns in the spring and fall and from the 12
major air bases in Afghanistan built or expanded by the Russians.

The Soviet forces are still on what one analyst described as ''a learning
curve.''

They have learned, he said, that they cannot depend on the Afghan Army for
effective antiguerrilla operations. Until recently the Afghans were used for
infantry with the Russians supplying air, artillery and armored support.

These tactics were not successful. As a result, the Russians have been forced to
use their mechanized infantry and their version of American rangers and British
commandos in attacks on insurgents.

Another consequence of earlier failures has apparently been the adulteration of
the Soviet doctrine of centralized command under which even minor operations had
to be approved by a higher headquarters. In recent operations, such as those
this year in the Panjshir Valley, small-unit commanders were given wider
latitude in planning and carrying out minor attacks.

Copters Flying Higher

At the same time, pilots of Soviet helicopters, which now number about 340, have
been instructed to fly higher to escape heavy machine-gun fire from the
insurgents and to call for high-altitude bombing by fixed-wing planes for the
elimination of hostile strong points.

The insurgents' weaponry has improved only marginally over the last six months.
Their representatives in Peshawar and Islamabad in Pakistan continue to clamor
for heavy weapons.

Western analysts feel that the introduction of such weapons would rob the
insurgents of mobility, their greatest advantage. Heavy weapons would force them
to use roads, where they would be targets for Soviet air attack, rather than the
hill paths over which they now move.

The desired solution, analysts said, is the wholesale supply of hand-held
antiaircraft and antitank missiles. Until such weapons are acquired in
significant numbers, these sources fear that the Afghan insurgents will be
virtually helpless against Soviet air and tank forces and the Russian grip on
the country will tighten inexorably.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOCAL TV WILL ELBOW THE NETWORKS AT THE CONVENTIONS

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1977 words


If there is any credo for those who

consider the years between televised political conventions to be a

Siberian winter bereft of spectacle, it's the one H. L. Mencken came up with 60
years ago yesterday: ''For there is something about a political convention,'' he
wrote after the 103-ballot Democratic Convention in New York in 1924, ''that is
as fascinating as a revival or a hanging. It is vulgar, it is ugly, it is
stupid, it is tedious, it is hard upon both the higher cerebral centers and the
gluteus maximus, and yet it is somehow charming. One sits through long sessions
wishing heartily that all the delegates and alternates were dead and in hell -
and then suddenly there comes a show so gaudy and hilarious, so melodramatic and
obscene, so unimaginabaly exhilarating and preposterous that one lives a
gorgeous year in an hour.''

Television has spent a lot of time and a lot of money in the past 32 years
searching for those gorgeous hours. Sometimes it has found them, and this year,
putting out its divining-rod antennae, it will continue to seek them. The three
networks will be as apparent as ever, sending their massive, if slightly reduced
armies to find news at the Democratic Convention beginning tomorrow in San
Francisco: ABC, CBS and NBC will have 2,100 accredited representatives among
them. All told, of the 14,000 members of the press in San Francisco, almost 57
percent will come from newspapers and magazines. Print coverage may bring a
quality of information, description and penetrating analysis that can't be
matched by television. Yet only television has the immediacy and impact of the
electronic images that convey a convention to millions instantly, and it was
partly on that strength that the medium first developed its news reputation.

Despite the fact that they are going to be devoting less time than they ever
have to broadcasting the convention process, the networks will be committing
their usual huge resources. ABC News is laying down 40 miles of cable, sending
44 cameras and building 10,000 feet of work space. ''My job,'' said the ABC
anchor Peter Jennings, ''is to be the traffic cop.'' CBS is laying down 45 miles
of cable, putting in 400 telephones and setting up its anchor Dan Rather in a
prefabricated booth designed to adhere to San Francisco's earthquake-resistant
building codes. NBC had its anchor booth built by the same Pennsylvania company
that built the CBS structure, and it will seat its anchor, Tom Brokaw, on one of
its three floors, and its commentator, John Chancellor, on the floor below.

Mr. Chancellor has worked each convention since 1952 for NBC. He began as a
radio reporter, and in 1956, he was one of the very junior reporters who went
out with ''beer-mug'' microphones, fat 8-inch-high instruments, and interviewed
on a convention floor on which the parties allowed no cameras. They were days of
adventure for network teams as they created television. ''It was important to
prove you could do it,'' said Mr.  Chancellor. ''It was a business in search of
a large event. It could have happened in space, but it happened first at the
conventions. We wanted a finite amount of time where we had a certainty
something would happen.''

But as the convention process became less a news event and more a matter of
political formality, the romance began to fade. This year, for the the first
time since 1952, no broadcast network will start its coverage when the
convention opens its business; each will wait until 9 P.M. for the four nights.
''Gavel-to-gavel,'' said Mr. Chancellor, in what seems to be this year's network
consensus, ''meant we spent the first hour interviewing ourselves. It produced a
lot of verbiage and no news.''

Nevertheless, the conventions' place as television's test-tube spot lives on; in
fact, thrives. Newer organizations are ready to show their stuff: Ted Turner's
Cable News Network will be making the effort of its life creating an operation
founded on a $10 million budget for the two conventions, and 400 news people,
technicians and administrators. It will have three anchors, six floor
correspondents, former Governor John B. Connally of Texas and former CBS
correspondent Daniel Schorr giving commentary. C-SPAN, the cable public- affairs
network will, on a $150,000 budget, watch the events on the convention podium as
long as they go on and make its gavel-to-gavel coverage available to the 18
million homes that can receive it. (In the New York area, C-SPAN will be
available not only on the cable signal but on WNYC/Channel 31.)



But the greatest change this year comes with a new aggressiveness among local
stations, which are, it seems, becoming the small newspapers of the 80's. The
hinterland Mencken once called a Sahara is no longer part of a
media-unsophisticated America. Stations have found that with cheap and light
equipment, experienced TV journalists and some rented time on a satellite they
can send local stories home. Working with a capacity that until recently only
the networks had, and shortly before that, no one had, 392 television stations
are sending crews and reporters to San Francisco, covering their delegations,
sharing equipment, and generally demystifying the power of the few to broadcast
events.

''There will be between 100 and 200 stations broadcasting from the floor,'' said
Reuven Frank, the executive producer of NBC's coverage this year, and a producer
who, as much as anyone in television, created the structure of convention
coverage that has held since the 1950's. ''Stations are less willing to carry
our stuff, they want to carry their own stuff. There's a fragmentation, an
atomization in terms of the basic coverage.''

''There is an explosion,'' said Robert Siegenthaler, ABC News executive producer
for special events, ''of the amount of local people who are coming, of the
number of stations that can get satellite pictures and send home images of home
delegates. It's an exponential growth.''



Just as in the 50's the conventions forced the networks to stretch themselves,
this year's conventions are pushing the smaller, newer stations. An operation
called Newslink is renting equipment and satellite time to 44 stations who want
it; stations from Weslaco, Tex., Wichita, Kan., Spokane, Wash., and Madison,
Wis., will be spending around $13,000 apiece for broadcast rights at both the
Democratic and Republican Conventions.

''Nominees become nominees one state delegation at a time,'' said Brad Niemcek,
the president of Newslink, ''and people will know for the first time who the
personalities are at the convention, not just when Chancellor or Brokaw decides
to look at the hardware man who runs his delegation, but on a daily basis. Up
until now, only newspapers have done this on a daily basis. Now TV will. We're
going to show that local stations can go after a story and stay with it.''

This new television populism is the latest development in a decentralization of
the medium that has been going on for the past 10 years. ''People forget,'' said
Mr. Frank, ''that conventions were a novelty that wore off. In 1956 and 1960,
the sales of sets went up before the conventions. In 1968, the color set sales
went up before the conventions. People wanted to see them.''

This, the networks' imperial period, began in 1952 when television lifted itself
to the point where it could mobilize to broadcast a weeklong complicated event
and define its issues. In 1956, the networks learned to bring their
transmissions from the floor and created the basic start-in- the-anchor-booth
and cut-to-the-floor format they have implemented ever since; 1960 brought
faster, more intimate pictures from among the delegations and more aggressive
reporting from among the politicians; 1964 brought color television to news. It
was a period that came to a crescendo in 1968 when the nation was brought
together watching the violence at the Democratic Convention in Chicago, a night
that in some ways represented the peak of the networks' power in seizing the
nation's attention.

''We broke into Hubert Humphrey's acceptance speech to show the violence in the
streets. There are still old Humphrey aides who will tell you if you ask, 'Who
lost the 1968 election?' that 'Reuven Frank lost the 1968 election.' We were
showing Humphrey's speech and my producers were screaming at me, 'You've got to
look at this.' We put it on. To this day I don't know whether I made the right
decision. I think I did.''



That was the last tremendously tumultuous convention, and since 1968 the number
of households watching the events has got smaller each convention year. ''Three
things have changed,'' Mr. Frank said. ''One was, the novelty itself wore off.

''The second was that the parties reorganized themselves over and over and over
until it turned out that there was very little that was going to be decided at a
national convention. All the hoo-hah began to die down, and after 1960, there
were no more seriously contested nominations.

''The third was that the time when the conventions were novel coincided with two
great issues - civil rights and Vietnam. They brought the country together in
watching them.''



''I remember leaving Chicago,'' said Peter Jennings, the ABC anchor, ''feeling
that the process had come to a kind of peak. When I went to work overseas in the
next years, I saw that the British and the French were watching this process
with wide-eyed curiosity. Half of it was they think we're absolutely nuts, and
the other half was envy. So, even if Americans aren't watching our coverage as
much as they once did, we are being watched more overseas. The Americanization
of campaigning has been exported from Great Britain to the Middle East. And the
cultural impact of our conventions is vast.

''We have to get closer and closer. We have to take a delegation and follow it.
We have to find out how these people operate and do what television does best,
which is to show you the sweat on the brow.''

Which is, finally, what the new non- network news organizations are doing. They
are focusing on ''sweat on the brow'' journalism, and it will be what viewers
will see more and more of as the scope of convention coverage moves from the big
players to focus on less exalted individuals.

''At the 1972 Republican Convention,'' said Mr. Frank, ''the party approached us
with lists of people to interview. If they wanted the story to be the Secretary
of State, they'd run Kissinger through the three networks. We were no longer
running the story, they were controlling us. Cutting back on time was something
that had to be tried, and this is a pretty good time to try it.

''Institutionally, the conventions were television's great hour. It's still a
big deal, but in the old days it was the only thing we ever got on the air
besides the evening news. Not anymore. Now we're on all the time. CNN is on with
news 24 hours a day. Someday they'll play it on elevators.''

The story has got smaller, and television has got bigger. There still seem to be
a massive number of people and organizations - 6,000 broadcast people will be
there - convinced that their business is where the conventions are. By this time
next week, television will know whether the public agrees with them.  Starting
tomorrow, we can ask of television, as H. L. Mencken asked of the conventions of
60 years ago: ''But what does the general public get out of it?'' At its best,
it can come up with the answer he did: ''The general public gets precisely the
same show - a bit diluted, perhaps, by distance, but still incomparably humorous
and thrilling. Herein, indeed, lies the chief merit of democracy, when all is
said and done: It may be swinish, it may be unutterably incompetent and
dishonest, but it is never dismal - its processes, even when they irritate,
never actually bore.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of network newsmen (page 21)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA-U.S. TIES MAKE SOUTHEAST ASIA SQUIRM

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 864 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia


Secretary of State George P. Shultz has ended a trip to Southeast Asia obviously
nettled by some of the criticism he has heard about American policy toward
China.

In Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia, he was reminded by government leaders that
an economically strong China, aided by the United States, might only cause
trouble later on for them if Peking sought to expand its power southward. At
press conferences along the way, questions about American arms to China and
about the cozy relationship between Peking and Washington produced the most
headlines.

''I don't know how to allay fears people have,'' Mr. Shultz said. ''People had
fears in the past that we didn't have a constructive relationship with China and
now they fear that we do.''

At another stop, Mr. Shultz tried to reason with journalists. ''I think you have
to start with the proposition that China is there,'' he said. ''It is an
important country. It has been for a long time. It will continue to be, and I
don't have any doubt in my mind at all that as an economic proposition, China
will develop and it seems to me that's to be expected.''

Mr. Shultz added that ''the question is whether that development, from the
standpoint of stability in this region, is best done with other countries
cooperating and being a part of it. And we believe that it is important for our
own interests as a potential trading partner, and in the interests of security
and strategic considerations that are very clear, to have a good working
relationship with China.''

Reaction in Southeast Asia toward China, however, is more complicated. Diplomats
and journalists in those countries note that official policies toward China are
shaped by many elements, and what is said publicly does not necessarily match
what is done privately. For instance, the initial report of Malaysian
displeasure with American help to China came from a briefing given by a
Malaysian Foreign Ministry spokesman, who said that Mr. Shultz had been told of
his nation's concerns about China's becoming an economic power.

But in fact, American diplomats who were in the meeting in Kuala Lumpur say Mr.
Shultz was given a somewhat different line: Despite its concerns, Malaysia
believed China was ''on the right track'' and Malaysia was actually helping
China modernize. The reason the press was given a more negative view was that
this suited domestic policy, the Americans said.  The Malaysian Government is
concerned about the influence of Chinese people in its country and has tried
through the years to give preference to ethnic Malays who make up 50 percent of
the population. Chinese account for about 36 percent but predominate in business
and in education.  In Indonesia, the Chinese are only five million out of some
150 million people, but nevertheless are perceived as having enormous power over
the economy. Moreover, the military leadership of this Government repeatedly
reminds visitors how the Communists, known as the P.K.I, came close to seizing
power in 1965 with the aid of China. Relations with Peking were suspended in
1967 and have not been restored.  Thais See It DifferentlyAt the meeting of the
six-nation Association of Southeast Asian Nations that Mr. Shultz attended in
Jakarta, he heard a different concern from Thailand. The Thais, who once feared
the Chinese because of their aid for the Thai Communist Party's insurgency, now
see China as their main ally against the Vietnamese, whose troops in Cambodia
endanger Thai security. Thailand welcomes close American-Chinese collaboration
and would like to see increased American aid for the anti-Vietnamese coalition
of Cambodians led by former Prince Norodom Sihanouk. Washington is not ready to
do more than provide more aid to refugees and to bolster Thailand's defenses.
But the Indonesians, while unhappy with Hanoi's recalcitrance, are relatively
unworried about the Vietnamese and would prefer to see a negotiated settlement
with Vietnam before China becomes strong enough to thrust itself into the
region. The Indonesians are worried about a possible Soviet-Chinese
confrontation, which inevitably would put pressure on the United States to be
drawn into the conflict too. In the meantime, the periodic warfare between China
and Vietnam resumed last week. The Chinese said they repulsed a large-scale
attack after heavy fighting.

That kind of scenario terrifies the Southeast Asians, who are in the midst of a
dramatic economic boom, with skyscrapers rising over former slums, and roads and
electricity networks spreading out. They would like to trade with the rest of
the world but be free of military pressure. For the Malaysians and Indonesians,
the growth of a powerful, economically strong China is more of a nightmare than
anything else.

For Washington, Mr. Shultz's visit is a reminder that even the most
inconsequential arms sale to China, such as the antitank weapons now being
considered, has profound symbolic importance in Southeast Asia. It is also a
reminder that the nations of the region, who were courted avidly by Washington
when relations with Peking were poor, do not want to be forgotten now that those
relations have improved.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of world

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A COMMANDING VOICE FOR THE MILITARY

BYLINE: By Richard Halloran

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4429 words


Richard Halloran, a member of The Times's Washington bureau, covers military
affairs.



 IT IS A POINT OF SATISFACTION FOR Gen. John W. Vessey Jr. that he has started
to accomplish the task he set for the nation's military leaders two years ago
when he became Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff: ''To give the President
and Secretary of Defense military advice before they know they need it.'' Since
then, General Vessey and the chiefs have taken the initiative in counseling
President Reagan and Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger on current
military operations, the needs of the armed forces in the 1990's and national
defense in the 21st century.

In so doing, General Vessey has emerged as the principal military adviser to the
Administration in fact as well as in law. He has made the present Joint Chiefs -
Army Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., Air Force Gen. Charles A. Gabriel, Marine Corps
Gen. P.X. Kelley and Navy Adm. James D. Watkins - more influential than any of
their predecessors in 20 years. With them, General Vessey has established new
relations with the President and the Secretary of Defense, started breaking down
barriers to interservice cooperation, and drawn field commanders into closer
contact with Washington.

That has been achieved, White House and Pentagon officials point out, with the
blessing of the President and Mr. Weinberger, who have been receptive to
military advice in their effort to ''rearm America.''

''This Administration,'' said one official, ''wants to listen.''

Beyond that, General Vessey, unlike most of his predecessors, has taken control
of military operations under an agreement with Mr. Weinberger. Although the
Chairman is not authorized by law to command forces, General Vessey has asserted
that he and other commanders should control military operations once strategy
has been decided by the President. Thus, when the President decided to invade
Grenada, General Vessey insisted that the military, not the White House, run the
operation.

Despite his growing stature, General Vessey is probably less well known to the
American public than almost any of his predecessors. The general has sought what
he calls ''effective anonymity.'' He has assiduously shunned publicity, and
believes that the armed forces are better off if they are out of the public eye.
That attitude, as well as a perceived need for operational security, was behind
the ban on news coverage of the Grenada invasion, for example.

In particular, General Vessey fervently wishes to prevent his post from being
politicized and thus will not permit himself to become involved in the election
campaign this year. The Democrats, whose nominating convention opens in San
Francisco tomorrow, can be expected to try to exploit fears that President
Reagan is prone to military ventures overseas. But that is a battle, say
officers around General Vessey, that Mr. Reagan and his political allies must
fight themselves.

The military advice of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on immediate issues has been
marked by restraint. General Vessey and the chiefs have urged the President to
be wary of deploying American forces to the Persian Gulf. They have proposed
limiting the American military presence in Central America to maneuvers. In
1983, they advised against sending the Marines to Lebanon and were ahead of the
Administration in urging that they be withdrawn.

For the longer run, General Vessey has said, ''I continually tell the Secretary
of Defense and the President that they ought to spend more for strategic
mobility,'' although American air and sea transport is the world's best. The
chiefs have won approval for plans to revise operational areas for the four
service's combat commands. They have refined doctrines for joint operations,
commando operations, psychological warfare and electronic warfare. The Joint
Chiefs have told Mr. Weinberger that while enlistments are going well now, a
shrinking pool of 18-year-olds will make recruiting difficult by 1990. They have
urged a push on ''smart weapons'' and other high technology.

Perhaps most vividly, the Joint Chiefs told President Reagan last year it might
be possible in the 21st century for the United States to defend itself against
nuclear missiles, thus removing the need to rely on threats of retaliation to
deter attack. Both the chiefs and Pentagon technicians were surprised, however,
when Mr. Reagan announced that goal in visionary terms in his ''Star Wars''
speech. The proposal touched off a dispute in which some reputable scientists
asserted that the plan was not feasible.

But General Vessey and the chiefs have not always had their way. They
recommended, in a 3-2 vote, against the ''dense pack'' base for MX nuclear
missiles and were overruled. Their views were not sought when the President
decided last year that military pay raises must be forgone in the name of fiscal
constraint.

Perhaps most far-reaching, the chiefs have failed to persuade the Administration
that its global military strategy is too ambitious. The Administration wants a
military force able to meet any contingency - from insurgency in Central America
to an Iranian attempt to halt the flow of oil from the Persian Gulf to a Soviet
invasion of Western Europe with conventional arms to protracted nuclear war.
The chiefs have warned the Administration that such a capability would require a
military budget 50 percent greater, or $750 billion more, than it has planned.
Nor has General Vessey, who has just begun the second of the pair of two-year
terms permitted by law, won universal applause. Some Republican political
operatives in the White House and on Capitol Hill have complained that he has
not been visible enough in supporting the Administration's military budget. The
Navy, which has traditionally opposed giving an officer from another service
control of naval forces, has chafed under the Army general's attempts to tighten
the reins.





 IN SOME RESPECTS, JOHN WILLIAM VESSEY JR, of Crow Wing County, Minn., seems a
surprising choice to be the nation's top soldier. Unlike his predecessors, he is
not a graduate of West Point or Annapolis, but won his commission on the
battlefield during World War II. Nor was he a ''fastburner'' who won swift
promotion. He was 41 years old when he received a degree from the University of
Maryland after struggling in night school, and 45 when he won the Distinguished
Service Cross, the Army's second-highest decoration, usually awarded to
aggressive young officers. He completed helicopter school at 48, when other
students were his son's age, and got his first star as a brigadier general in
his 27th year of commissioned service, several years later than most.

But General Vessey, the last of the chiefs to have fought in World War II, is a
late bloomer. In only five and a half years, he was promoted to four-star
general - his reward, Army officers said, for superb leadership, skilled
planning and an ability to inspire confidence at the highest levels.

The general has spent much of his career commanding combat soldiers, and is
known as a ''grunt's general.'' He is an unassuming officer, entitled to wear
seven rows of battle decorations and campaign ribbons but usually seen with one.
Instead of taking a staff car to a football game, he dons civilian clothes and
rides the subway.

That, along with his reputation for quiet team playing, was among the reasons
President Reagan picked General Vessey, White House officials said. ''The
President didn't want a flamboyant MacArthur,'' said one official. Although the
general is 11 years younger than the President, he shares Mr. Reagan's belief in
old-fashioned virtues. They are Middle Westerners who came of age during the
Depression and the patriotic years of World War II. ''The President,'' the
official said, ''is just very comfortable with Jack Vessey.''

The general is plain-spoken. He says ''resource- constrained environment'' are
''fancy Pentagon words that mean there isn't enough money to go around.'' He
told a college audience: ''From my own experience, I can tell you, more has been
screwed up on the battlefield and misunderstood in the Pentagon because of a
lack of understanding of the English language than any other single factor.''

General Vessey holds strong religious convictions. He is active in the Lutheran
Church and once considered leaving the Army to become a minister. He spends a
few minutes each day reading the Bible, and electrified a National Prayer
Breakfast last year with a moving talk on enlisting in the army of the Lord.

At the age of 62, General Vessey keeps fit with running and handball, hardly
drinks or smokes and seldom utters a swear word. He likes to tell stories about
Scandinavians in Minnesota but was cautioned by a minister that ethnic jokes
were unbecoming. So now he tells jokes about the two ancient Hittites - one
named Ole, the other Sven.

Beneath General Vessey's homespun air, however, is a cool, determined officer
with self-confidence bred of years in command. ''Jack Vessey likes to play the
simple soldier,'' says an official, ''but don't be fooled. He is a tough, shrewd
man.''

General Vessey is secretive, and has mastered bureaucratic politics. ''He knows
how to get a paper tabled at the four-star level, what the machinations are and
what gates you have to go through to have it come out in a predictable way,''
said an officer. The general also knows when to set aside a paper. ''He
realizes,'' the officer said, ''that he who controls the agenda controls the
action.''

On the other hand, General Vessey, having served mostly away from Washington,
seems ill at ease in the political arena and has shown little interest in
explaining his views on defense issues to the American public. He speaks to
military gatherings and church groups, but not to audiences that might be
hostile. He rarely holds news conferences or appears on television. His
testimony before Congress tends to be bland, and he seems taken aback when
something he has said stirs dispute.

''We have had a lot of famous generals who have been in the public eye, and I
think rightfully so - MacArthur, Eisenhower, Bradley,'' General Vessey said
during a rare interview in his comfortable but unpretentious Pentagon office.
''But I am not in that category.'' He feels he can accomplish more without
public attention. ''They don't need to see me. What they want me to do is to
make sure that the armed forces of the United States are as effective as we can
make them.''



 N 1939, JACK VESSEY WROTE A HIGHschool essay on ''The Evils of War,'' then
fibbed about his age to join the Minnesota National Guard just before his 17th
birthday when the minimum age was 18. He enlisted for several reasons - the
Depression, friends who had fought in the Spanish Civil War, the storm clouds
gathering in Europe. ''But it wasn't any great idealistic thing,'' he says. ''I
guess it was probably more an opportunity to wear high leather boots and ride a
motorcycle.''

Called to active duty, he fought in the 34th Division's artillery in Tunisia and
Italy. By 1944, he was first sergeant of an artillery battery on the Anzio
beachhead. On May 6, he and two other sergeants were promoted to second
lieutenant, which meant becoming forward observers. Several days later, he said,
''one was dead and the other was seriously wounded.''

After the war, Lieutenant Vessey married Avis C. Funk from Minnesota and settled
down to troop duty, military schools and staff jobs. He missed the Korean War,
having been sent to Germany, and thought of leaving the Army ''to do the Lord's
work.'' But he was dissuaded by a friend who argued that he could do the Lord's
work by soldiering. ''In his view,'' General Vessey says, ''I was a far better
soldier than I would ever be as a pastor.''

Lieutenant Colonel Vessey went to Vietnam in 1966 to serve in the 25th
Division's artillery. There he won the Distinguished Service Cross as commander
of a battalion that was hit by five battalions of North Vietnamese regulars. The
enemy got so close that Colonel Vessey and a sergeant major manned a howitzer,
depressed the gun barrel and fired point-blank to drive off the attackers.

When he later learned to fly helicopters, he was 15 years older than anyone in
the class. ''But I was the first to solo,'' he says, ''and there were a lot of
guys who would have dropped out but said: 'If that old fogy can do it, we can do
it.' I think it was absolutely the most fun I ever had in my life. It was like
drinking out of the fountain of youth.''

Then came promotion to brigadier general in 1971 and command of a unit in
Thailand that supported anti-Communist tribes in Laos. For that he was awarded
the Distinguished Service Medal, the Army's highest noncombat decoration. In
1974, as a major general, he led the Fourth Division in Colorado out of what one
officer called ''chaos and disaster'' in the undisciplined early days of the
volunteer army. As a lieutenant general, he was Deputy Chief of Staff for
Operations and Plans, the No. 3 post on the Army staff.

There, General Vessey's career became linked with that of his deputy, Maj. Gen.
Edward C. Meyer. The differences between them were striking. General Meyer was
seven years younger, a West Pointer and a fast-rising star nicknamed ''Shy'' the
way a chubby man might be called ''Slim.'' When Vessey was promoted to full
general in 1976 and assigned to command United States forces in Korea, General
Meyer succeeded him in the Pentagon.

In Korea, General Vessey was a skilled operator in a delicate political
situation. He learned Korean, worked well with Korean officers, won the respect
of Air Force and Navy officers under his command and got along with the American
Embassy. But he stubbed his toe with President Carter when Mr. Carter announced
that he intended to withdraw American ground forces from Korea in five years.
General Vessey protested, but kept his disagreement inside the Government.

Several months later, however, Maj. Gen. John K. Singlaub, the chief of staff
under General Vessey's command, criticized Mr. Carter's decision publicly,
asserting: ''If we withdraw our ground s orces on the schedule suggested, it
will lead to war.'' An angry President summoned General Singlaub to the White
House and relieved him.

Even so, General Vessey continued to oppose the President's policy. In 1978, the
Army produced new intelligence placing North Korea's troop strength at 600,000,
25 percent above the previous estimate. When Mr. Carter visited South Korea in
1979, General Vessey urged him to set aside the pullout plan. Within a few
weeks, the White House said the withdrawal had been ''suspended.''

Later that summer, President Carter picked General Vessey's former deputy,
General Meyer, a bright, energetic young officer junior to 18 generals and
lieutenant generals, to be the Army's new Chief of Staff. The Army, a carefully
ordered, rank-conscious society, was stunned.

Then, in a move almost as stunning, General Meyer asked General Vessey to be
Vice Chief of Staff. General Meyer says he wanted ''to balance my youth with his
experience.'' He also wanted to show other senior officers that he would avoid
disruptions. General Vessey agreed, explaining: '' 'Shy' Meyer wasn't the only
one who talked to me at that time and asked me to do it. But we had worked
together before. We think enough alike so that we don't have to spend a lot of
time talking to each other about what needs to be done, or arguing. I knew I
could work with Shy Meyer, and it just seemed like the right thing to do.''

For the three years as Vice Chief of Staff, General Vessey never showed rancor,
never upstaged General Meyer and often saved his boss from making mistakes.
General Meyer says that General Vessey was ''selfless.''

When Air Force Gen. David C. Jones was about to retire as Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs in 1982, Generals Jones and Meyer caught the eye of the Reagan White
House by writing articles recommending that the Chairman be given greater
authority.

''That,'' said an official, ''pointed away from the military bureaucrat or
technocrat and toward somebody identified as an old soldier, an old salt, a
silk-scarved flyer.'' The White House found General Vessey getting a steady
stream of recommendations. Among his strongest advocates was General Meyer.

In March 1982, President Reagan picked General Vessey. The general was
surprised; he had planned to retire and had begun building a house in Minnesota.
When he told his wife, she teased him: ''You lied about your age to get into the
Army, and now God is punishing you.''

That June, at the White House ceremony to swear in the new chairman, an elderly
retired major general, Charles C. Bolte, drew himself to attention to salute
General Vessey. Thirty-eight years before, General Bolte had been Sergeant
Vessey's commanding general on the Anzio beachhead.

At that point, the Joint Chiefs may have been less influential than at any time
since they were organized in 1947.

After World War II, President Truman presided over demobilization, then set
strategy for the Korean War with civilian advisers. President Eisenhower was his
own Secretary of Defense, and often ignored the Joint Chiefs. But President
Kennedy brought Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor, who had been Army Chief of Staff, out of
retirement to be Chairman, and sought his advice. President Johnson, on the
other hand, ran the Vietnam War from the White House. President Nixon distrusted
military officers as he pursued detente.  President Ford lacked time to effect a
military policy. President Carter ignored military matters until near the end of
his Presidency.

During his first year, President Reagan left military affairs to Mr. Weinberger.
But in early 1982, the Administration went through a time of ferment on military
policy. It was during that shake-up that General Vessey was appointed Chairman,
which gave him a clean slate on which to write. In his first meeting with the
chiefs, General Vessey said he wanted them to produce timely advice by nurturing
three sets of relationships - between themselves and the President and Secretary
of Defense; among themselves, and between the chiefs and commanders of the
operational commands.

''In the past,'' General Vessey says, ''the relationship of the chiefs to the
President at times had been only through the Secretary of Defense, except for
annual potted-palm operations,'' meaning formal receptions. Thus, he says, ''we
needed to make it known to both the President and the Secretary of Defense that
we thought the relationship needed tending.''

General Vessey persuaded the President to meet the chiefs every two or three
months, more than other chiefs have met with other Presidents. At those
meetings, General Vessey says, the chiefs give the President their ''general
philosophy on how to defend the nation.'' Said an official: ''Those meetings
give Jack Vessey a chance to prove his mettle in a way that is different from
the past.''

It has been, perhaps, even more important for General Vessey and the chiefs to
revitalize communication with the Secretary of Defense. They meet weekly with
Mr. Weinberger and a few top defense officials without the ''straphangers'' who
populate most Pentagon meetings. General Vessey says: ''We decided we needed to
make those important meetings, that we and the Secretary should agree in advance
on the agenda and prepare ourselves personally and give him the opportunity to
prepare personally.''

In addition, the general and the Secretary talk once a day. General Vessey says
he and Mr. Weinberger have agreed that ''he and I, not his staff or the joint
staff, will argue out the issues between us.'' In public they address each other
as ''Mr. Secretary'' and ''General,'' but in private it's ''Cap'' and ''Jack.''

Among the chiefs, General Vessey is a firm but fatherly squad leader. At the
start, he suggested that they themselves find ways to be more effective. ''We
wanted to cut the staff theologians out of the pattern,'' he says. ''We didn't
even include the Vice Chiefs. We agreed that we were the ones designated by law
to take up the job, so we and we alone had to do it.''

General Vessey has erased the pecking order among the chiefs. Instead of having
the next senior officer act as Chairman when General Vessey is away from
Washington, he has asked each chief to take a turn as Acting Chairman for three
months of the year. Thus all have a chance to meet with the Secretary and the
National Security Council.

The chiefs have been plagued for years by arguments over service missions,
assignments for senior officers and funds. General Vessey, however, has fostered
agreements between the Navy and the Air Force, and between the Army and the Air
Force, on combat coordination. Those agreements fall far short of resolving
underlying issues, but General Vessey says ''we have gotten to the point where
we can wrestle with the nation's problems despite the constant charge of
interservice bickering.''

During the Memorial Day ceremony in May in which the Unknown Soldier of the
Vietnam War was buried in Arlington Cemetery, General Vessey asked the chiefs to
walk rather than ride in the parade. Later, with a twinkle, he said: ''We
marched all the way from the Capitol to the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier - and
stayed in step the whole way.''

Legally, neither General Vessey nor the chiefs command forces. In practice, they
translate national strategy into battle plans for field commanders to execute.
When he became Chairman, General Vessey received authority over those
operations. ''It was an oral directive given me by Mr. Weinberger when I assumed
my duties,'' he told Congress.

Early in his tenure, General Vessey wanted each command's war plans, which he
thought outdated, to be rewritten. He told the chiefs: ''We could blame the
Congress if the defense budget was too low; we could blame the parents and the
educators if the recruits could not be trained easily; we could blame the
defense contractors if they didn't produce good equipment; but if our
contingency plans were no good, it was our fault and ours alone.''

Those contingency plans, which are highly perishable because situations change
so quickly, cover potential operations in Central America, the Persian Gulf,
Korea and Western Europe.

For the future, General Vessey has proposed that the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs be placed in the chain of command so that he could issue orders directly.
As it stands, he has authority to issue an order only in the name of the
Secretary of Defense. Congress is considering legislation to codify his
agreement with Mr. Weinberger giving him operational control of combat forces.
In justifying the proposal, General Vessey told Congress: ''In the event of war,
the Secretary of Defense would not be able to focus on the daily operational
decisions he has to address. We see where the Chairman would do much of that,
referring the larger matters, such as national strategy and policy, to our
civilian leadership.''

In his 45 years of service, General Vessey has arrived at several basic ideas on
military power.

''We live at a time when we all fear greatly the consequences of war,'' he says,
''yet we recognize that we really don't know any other way to prevent war and/or
political blackmail or persecution other than to have a big arsenal of military
power. But if we think that military power is the supreme power, we are kidding
ourselves. We see every day the limits of military power in solving problems in
the world.''

On the other hand, he says, ''Weakness is provocative.'' In a talk to soldiers
at Schofield Barracks in Hawaii, he said: ''Our strategy is one of preventing
war by making it self-evident to our enemies that they're going to get their
clocks cleaned if they start one.'' Discussing strategy before an audience of
sergeants major at Fort Bliss in Texas, he said: ''It is also designed to
restore peace - or what in Washington the wordmongers call 'restoring peace on
favorable terms.' Now, that means to me, in soldier language, that we win the
war.''

Among the legacies of Vietnam, many officers have said, is a conviction that
political leaders must define objectives before putting soldiers at risk.
General Vessey agrees. In a talk last year, he said: ''Don't send military
forces off to do anything unless you know what it is clearly that you want done.
I am absolutely, unalterably opposed to risking American lives for some phony
sort of military and political objectives that we don't understand.''

Replying to a letter from Andrew Metropolis, a high-school history teacher in
Peabody, Mass., the general said: ''My most difficult decisions all revolved
around ordering people to do something in combat when I was not completely
confident about the prospects for success.'' Thus, he said, ''a military leader
should not commit the forces under his charge lightly.''

General Vessey has also given much thought to possible conflict between his
military profession and his religious convictions. Asked about that, he said:

''Well, that's a question with which I have wrestled more than a little bit. I'm
a Christian. I guess if we examined it, I might call myself an existentialist
Christian. It seems to me that the Lord has given us a world, the only world
we've got, and we have to deal with that world the way it is. There are two
primary relationships that count - our relationship with the Lord and our
relationship with our fellow men.

''As I look at it, it would be as immoral for me not to be ready to protect my
fellow citizens as it would be to use violence to protect them. I would much
rather not use violence, but we live in a violent world.

''Some people say that golf was invented for the entertainment of the rich. I
tell them that God invented golf to teach us something about life. He may
forgive your sins but he doesn't give you mulligans,'' a chance at a second
drive after a poor shot.

''The ball is where it lies,'' he said. ''You are where you are. And it seems to
me that where we are, there really isn't any substitute we can see right now.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Vessey in Grenada (page 23); photo of Memorial Parade
(page 23); photo of Gen. Vessey, President Reagan and Casper Weinberger (page
20); photo of General Vessey

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS July 15, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1349 words


Fiction1

15

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932.  2

44

LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency.  3

28

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter changes with the values of the past 40 years.  4

319

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  5

58

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.  6

77

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and a Soviet plot.  7

614

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  8

107

THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch.  (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The legends
of an old manor haunt four generations of an English family.  8

87

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Three witches wreak
havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town.  10

918

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  11

1115

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  12

125

HIM WITH HIS FOOT IN HIS MOUTH AND OTHER STORIES, by Saul Bellow. (Harper & Row,
$15.95.) A novella and four short stories by the Nobel laureate.  12

135

POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A
woman discovers the truth about her husband after he disappears.  14

1

THE GREMLINS STORYBOOK, by Mary Carey.  (Golden Books, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the current film ''Gremlins.'' 15

13

THE DANGER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $15.95.) A kidnapper at large in the horse
racing world.  15

1

THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING, by Milan Kundera. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) The
disastrous history of modern Czechoslovakia, seen through the mind of an emigre.




Nonfiction1

15

WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The troubled life of the
late entertainer John Belushi.  2

52

IN GOD'S NAME, by David A. Yallop. (Bantam, $16.95.) A British journalist argues
that Pope John Paul I's death in 1978 was a case of murder.  3

23

THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and David Horowitz. (Summit,
$20.95.) The dark as well as the glamorous sides of four generations of a
prominent family. 4

36

THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent.  5

49

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  5

610

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  5

819

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard, $10.) The novelist recalls
her childhood in Mississippi.  8

943

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  9

1111

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.  (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  9

912

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' television series.  11

718

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  12

144

GOOD MORNING, MERRY SUNSHINE, by Bob Greene. (Atheneum, $14.95.) The syndicated
columnist's journal of his child's first year.  13

91

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.  (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  13

19

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.  (Dodd, Mead, $15.95.) A psychologist's
analysis of the plight of men who have never grown up.  13

135

POWERPLAY, by Mary Cunningham with Fran Schumer. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster,
$16.95.) The rise and fall of a woman executive at the Bendix Corporation.

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE ABOLITION, by Jonathan Schell. (Knopf, $11.95.) The author

of ''The Fate of the Earth'' eloquently sets forth our nuclear

predicament and takes on the daunting challenge of defining a

policy to prevent nuclear holocaust.

CONCRETE, by Thomas Bernhard. (Knopf, $12.95.) A novella by the

53-year-old Austrian writer, whose models include Kafka, Beckett

and Kleist, presenting a tortured author's ruminations on his

hatred of life and mankind, his sister and his country.

EXILE: The Unquiet Oblivion of Richard M. Nixon, by Robert Sam

Anson. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A conscientious report on the

activities of the 37th President since his l974 retirement, revealing

his strenuous efforts to remain influential.

INTIMATE MEMOIRS: Including Marie-Jo's Book, by Georges

Simenon. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,

$22.95.) The long story of his long life - full of women, success and

sadness - by the creator of Maigret and scores of other novels.

JAMES AGEE, by Laurence Bergreen. (Dutton, $20.) A well-

researched, dispassionate biography of the Southern writer and

critic who, in the 1950's, became legendary for his attractive

personality, extravagant behavior and unrealized genius.

MACHINE DREAMS, by Jayne Anne Phillips. (Seymour

Lawrence/ E. P. Dutton, $16.95.) A first novel, by the author of the

well-received stories, ''Black Tickets,'' about small, ordinary

moments in a family's life that burst into unexpected meanings.

A VERY PRIVATE EYE: An Autobiography in Diaries and Letters,

by Barbara Pym. (Dutton, $19.95.) In this marvelous compilation,

one of the most restrained of modern British novelists, surprises

us by revealing how emotionally unrestrained she really was.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous1

116

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

25

BOOK WITHOUT A NAME, by Kit Williams.  (Knopf, $10.95.) New picture story by the
author of ''Masquerade,'' offering a prize for the finder of the book's true
title.  3

481

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  4

2

THE 100 BEST COMPANIES TO WORK FOR IN AMERICA, by Robert Levering, Milton
Moskowitz and Michael Katz. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Profiles of the country's
most successful businesses.  5

2

CHEF PAUL PRUDHOMME'S LOUISIANA KITCHEN, by Paul Prudhomme. (Morrow, $19.95.)
Recipes for Cajun and Creole cooking by a New Orleans chef.  The listings above
are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every
region of the United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all
bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that
point, sales in this category are not generally large enough to make a longer
list statistically reliable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1139 words


GAMBLING WITH HISTORY: Ronald Reagan in the White House, by Laurence I. Barrett.
(Penguin, $8.95.) Our reviewer, Nicholas Lemann, described ''Gambling With
History'' as ''an impressively clear and thorough account of the past three
years'' of Ronald W. Reagan's life. Laurence I. Barrett, chief White House
correspondent for Time magazine for those three years, ''obviously likes the
President personally,'' Mr. Lemann believes, but ''there is no cheerleading
here.'' Portraits of Reagan lieutenants are vivid, Mr. Lemann wrote, and
''descriptions of their elaborate efforts to change the mind of the
intellectually immobile leader on issues like the Federal deficit are a little
scary.''

THE GEEK, by Craig Nova. (Dell, $3.95.) The story of a young American expatriate
on a Greek island and his relationships with the islanders and a young American
woman, ''The Geek'' is one of Craig Nova's four novels. C. D. B. Bryan, our
reviewer, wrote, ''It has been a long time - a very long time - since I have
come across a novel so gripping, a talent so exciting, so immense and so pure
that I am ashamed I have not read him before. This book is so powerful, so
alive, it is a wonder that turning its pages doesn't somehow burn one's hands.''


A GENERAL'S LIFE: An Autobiography, by Omar N. Bradley and Clay Blair. (Simon &
Schuster, $12.95.) Since General of the Army Omar N. Bradley died in 1981 before
finishing this autobiography, Clay Blair, an author and former Time-Life
correspondent, said in ''A Collaborator's Foreword'' that the book is ''half
Bradley, half Blair.'' Drew Middleton wrote in The Book Review that ''A
General's Life'' ''should be read first as an unmatched panorama of 40 years of
American military history and second as a well-documented record of envy, spite,
ambition and boorishness within the Allied high command in World War II.''

KILLDEER MOUNTAIN, by Dee Brown. (Pocket Books, $3.95.) Various versions of Maj.
Charles Rawley's Civil War exploits are the core of what our reviewer, Jonathan
Coleman, called this ''mystery-and-adventure yarn.'' Dee Brown also wrote ''Bury
My Heart at Wounded Knee'' and ''Creek Mary's Blood.'' In ''Kildeer Mountain,''
Mr. Coleman wrote, the author created an ''engrossing'' novel with a strong
narrative. But, he added, ''this intriguing story does not reach a terribly
satisfying conclusion. It's too open-ended. Still, much of Mr. Brown's
considerable audience will not be disappointed.''

MILES DAVIS, by Ian Carr. (Quill, $6.95.) The trumpeter Miles Davis has ''piled
up one staggering creative achievement after another,'' our reviewer, Bill
Zavatsky, wrote. He said that this book ''offers the most complete portrait of
Davis that we have had, and it heralds not only his resurgence but promises a
new depth to the study of the music that its subject insists be called by some
other than that bordello word 'jazz.' '' Ian Carr, the British-born biographer,
is a professional musician and writer. The book contains a 32-page discography.

MAPP AND LUCIA, THE WORSHIPFUL LUCIA and TROUBLE FOR LUCIA, by E. F. Benson.
(Harper & Row, $3.95 each.) Of the 80 books of light fiction and historical
biography that Edward Frederic Benson wrote, the Lucia series, published in the
1920's and 1930's, appears to be his most lasting work. The main character is
Mrs. Emmeline (Lucia) Lucas, social and cultural queen of two small towns in
southern England. In 1977 the Lucia books were published as one 913-page volume,
''Make Way for Lucia.'' In a front-page review, Auberon Waugh said that Benson,
the son of an Archbishop of Canterbury, ''constructs a comedy that is as
exquisite, in its way, as anything in English humorous literature.'' Now Harper
& Row has republished the six books individually. The first three were published
in January.

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Penguin, $10.95.) This book has been
described as ''journalistic,'' meaning reportorial, not analytical; concrete
rather than abstract; concerned more with fact than interpretation. Stanley
Karnow has, in fact, been a newspaper, magazine and television foreign
correspondent. In The Book Review, Douglas Pike wrote that ''Vietnam: A
History'' ''is intended to be broad-brushed and interesting, (a work) that
leaves no questions unanswered.'' The author succeeded, Mr. Pike wrote, in
providing ''a popular history of the Vietnam War.'' The book is a companion to a
13-hour television documentary currently being rebroadcast on Channel 13 in New
York.

THE SLEEPERS OF ERIN, by Jonathan Gash. (Penguin, $3.50.) Lovejoy (only one
name) is the hero of Jonathan Gash's mysteries and a savvy antique dealer.
Lovejoy has a talent for divining a fake; he is not wealthy; he looks seedy.
''The Sleepers of Erin'' begins with his arrest for stealing antiques from a
church. The author is a London doctor who specializes in tropical medicine and
uses the pseudonym Jonathan Gash. A feature of the Lovejoy books is their
knowledge of antiques esoterica. Our reviewer, Newgate Callendar, wrote, ''The
Lovejoy books are beginning to attract attention, and 'The Sleepers of Erin' is
as good a place as any to enter Lovejoy's world.''

HEROIC MEXICO: The Narrative History of a Twentieth Century Revolution, by
William Weber Johnson. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $8.95.) This is an updated
edition, covering events through 1982. When ''Heroic Mexico'' was published in
1968, it was pointed out by our reviewer, Ramon Eduardo Ruiz, that most American
scholars have ''accented chronology and the nature of leadership,'' neglecting
the social and intellectual background that produced the leaders. But unlike his
predecessors, Mr. Ruiz wrote, William Weber Johnson is ''a writer in the
narrative model with an unerring instinct for the pertinent phrase to describe
the actions of men.'' Here he ''explores the Revolution - the cataclysmic
upheaval that toppled the long dictatorship of Porfirio Diaz in 1910 and
destroyed the society of an elite that worshiped foreign idols.''

THE BLACK HOUSE , by Paul Theroux. (Pocket Books, $3.95.) When this work was
produced, Paul Theroux was 33 and had written seven novels. Michael Mewshaw
wrote in The Book Review that ''The Black House'' was ''an abrupt departure from
the comic vision of his earlier work.'' It tells of an anthropologist and his
wife who after 10 years in Africa return to England because of his heart
condition. The couple settles in a remote area of Dorset in an apparently
haunted house. Mr. Mewshaw described the book as ''a hybrid composed of unequal
parts of social satire, commentary on colonialism, anthropological insights,
some randy sex and an inconclusive Gothic tale.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER JOURNAL

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 3, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1832 words


The lease of 22 acres of county-owned land on the Grasslands Reservation to the
Robert Martin Company, a construction firm, is to be challenged in court by the
Federated Conservationists of Westchester County, the Regional Review League and
three individuals.

A petition has been filed with the Board of Legislators in an action that would
give the county until Saturday to answer charges that it behaved improperly. The
petitioners have applied for a hearing in County Court on July 26.

County Executive

Andrew P. O'Rourke , who is named in the suit along with the Board of
Legislators, said county officials were ''doing our best to guard the
environment'' and that ''not a spade can go into the ground without a review.''
This protection is included in the lease as well as being part of state law, he
said.

He added that he did not ''suggest that they sue us,'' but had told the
environmentalists that if they wanted a judge to review the situation, he would
agree to a simplified judicial procedure, which is what the petition requests.

The conservationists complain in their petition that the county failed to obtain
an environmental review before approving a 99-year lease to Robert Martin that
would allow the company to put up office buildings on the site.

The complaint said the lease required the Robert Martin Company to build at
least 25,000 square feet of office space within eight years, and that because
the land was zoned for residential use, Mount Pleasant would have to rezone it.
This means, the complaint said, that Mount Pleasant would have to require an
environmental review and approve it, and that the county, which owns the land
and the adjoining 562 acres of the Grasslands Reservation, has delegated its
authority to Mount Pleasant.

J. Henry Neale , lawyer for the plaintiffs, said the environmental law described
two kinds of projects: Type 1, a large project requiring a review, and Type 2, a
smaller project that does not. Anything between is ''unlisted'' and has to be
evaluated, he said.

The criteria that would force a review include ''the encouraging or attracting
of a large number of people,'' ''the impairment of the character or quality of
important historical, archeological, architectural, or esthetic resources or of
existing community or neighborhood character'' and ''a substantial change in the
use or intensity of the use of land,'' among others.

The complaint also said the county had made a ''negative declaration'' of
environmental impact before signing the lease, but that the declaration
contained several errors.

Mr. Neale said these included the statement that development would not affect
more than 10 of the acres involved and would not affect historic sites, although
the Hammond House, a Revolutionary farm house, is nearby.

The lease was criticized in a public hearing by conservationists and by critics
who objected to the rental, which starts at $27,500 and rises to $217,500 a year
at the end of 99 years, as too low.

Some suggested the land be put up for other bids.

Vincent Castaldo , former assistant to the County Executive, responded that the
Robert Martin Company was a logical lessor because it owned the land to the
north and south and could join the three parcels with an interior road, rather
than adding a new access on Route 9A, where the land is situated.

In addition to the Federated Conservationists and Regional Review League, the
plaintiffs were

Gertrude R. Battaly , a member of the Federated Conservationists Board;

Eric W. Burgher , a resident of the unincorporated area of Mount Pleasant, and

George B. Case , the only speaker to oppose the lease when it was first brought
before the legislators.

- Betsy Brown



Veterans agree that progress has been made toward resolving some of the
lingering problems from the Vietnam War, citing efforts on such issues as Agent
Orange and Amer-Asian children, as well as the erection of a national monument
to the war's dead. But, they say, there is still one issue that remains
unresolved 11 years after the last U.S. combat forces left Vietnam: the question
of the 2,490 American servicemen listed as missing in action in Southeast Asia.

''If those guys are not alive, just send home the bodies,'' said

Louis Rea , a co-founder of the Vietnam Veterans of America. His words echo a
frustration shared by many veterans, and others, who believe that both the U.S.
and Vietnamese governments have failed to take e sufficient action to resolve
the question.

Earlier this year, Congress passed, and

President Reagan signed, the MIA/POW law. It designated July 20 as a National
Day of Recognition to honor soldiers declared to be missing in action or
prisoners of war in Southeast Asia. The day coincides with the founding date, 15
years ago, of the National League of Families of American POW/ MIAs in Southeast
Asia.

Several commemorative services have been planned in the county.

On Monday at 10 A.M., the Vietnam Veterans of America will present Mr. O'Rourke
with a POW/ MIA flag to be flown over the County Office Building.

On Friday, at the Montrose Veterans Administration Hospital, the Hudson Valley
Chapter of the American Ex-Prisoners of War - which represents about 88,000
surviving former POWs from all conflicts - will conduct a wreath-laying ceremony
with a National Guard Color Guard at 11 A.M. State Senator

John E. Flynn of Yonkers, State Assemblyman

Peter M. Sullivan of White Plains and Lt. Col.(Ret.)

Xavier M.E. LaRocca will speak.

At 5 P.M. on Friday, at the War Memorial in Getty Square in Yonkers, the Central
Committee of Yonkers War Veterans Association will hold an observance, complete
with firing squad salute. Mayor

Angelo Martinelli , Representative

Benjamin Gilman and a to-be-named former prisoner of war will speak.

Also on Friday, representatives from many of the county's Veterans of Foreign
War posts will accompany

John R. Scherer , VFW District 2 Commander and member of Carmel Post 1374, to
Yankee Stadium for a 7:30 P.M. ceremony at which

George Steinbrenner will be presented with a POW/MIA banner, to be flown at the
stadium during that night's game.  Next Sunday, the Vietnam Era Veterans, a
Yonkers-based support group comprised of both veterans and non-veterans, will
hold a ceremony at noon at the Yonkers Marina, where nearly 2,500 red, white and
blue balloons - one for each American still listed as missing in action - will
be released. Then one of the group's members,

Mark Fitzpatrick , will swim across the Hudson River and back again for
donations to benefit the group's POW/MIA Fund. According to the group's
president,

Steve Levandoski , the fund is used to buy POW/MIA flags, bumper stickers, pins
and key chains for distribution to the public in an effort to ''spread the
word.''

Statistics from previous wars - 78,773 men remained missing in action from World
War II; 8,177 from the Korean conflict - tempers optimism about the fate of
those missing in Vietnam.

''There is a kind of forlorn hope about MIA's, as if there will be a magical
moment when they will all be released and come walking across the bridge,'' said


Robert Flood of the American Ex- Prisoners of War group. ''It's unfortunate, but
there are hundreds and hundreds of unknown soldiers who are never identified.''

- John B. O'Mahoney


For

Hilary Shane , a 17-year-old tennis player from Armonk, ''good things'' do
indeed ''come in three's.''

Her third and most recent achievement came recently at the 22d yearly Eastern
clay court women's tennis championship at the Orienta Beach Club in Mamaroneck.
Seeded only sixth at that tournament's start, she captured the title in a
three-set final, 4-6, 7-6, 6-2, in a match lasting nearly three hours.

That victory followed closely on the heels of a welcoming letter from Princeton
University informing Miss Shane that she had been admitted to next September's
freshman class. Rounding out the ''triple,'' was her selection in May as the
validictorian at her Bryam Hills High School graduation.

''I enjoy my studies but I really do love tennis,'' said Miss Shane, whose
summer plans call for participation in several more tournaments. ''I'm thinking
in terms of a pre-med course at Princeton, but I also am hoping to go on the
professional tennis tour in between courses at school.''

The victory by Miss Shane in the Eastern final, where she defeated

Lynn Rosenstrach of Larchmont, marked the return of that tournament's title to
Westchester after a year's absence. Last season, the event was won by

Louise Feingold of River Edge, N.J, a seasoned player who this year will be
taking part in the women's 35-year-old division. In 1981 and 1982, the Eastern
championship was captured by

Terry Phelps of Larchmont, who is now on the World Tennis Association's tour.

Earlier in the Eastern tournament, Miss Shane upset top-favored

Alissa Finerman of Scarsdale in a contest lasting 3 hours and 15 minutes.

''This long match sort of made me prepared for the one in the final,'' said the
Armonk player, who began playing tennis about seven years ago.

- Michael Strauss



Its official motto is ''Be Prepared,'' and the Girl Scouts of the U.S.A. are
preparing to welcome officially some 450 adult delegates from 104 countries to
Westchester. Beginning Tuesday, the county will be the site of a 10-day-long
world conference of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts.

''The world conference is important because at it the delegates can decide on
policy and do things that would affect the organization on a worldwide level,''
explained

Patricia Sparlow , media representative for the Girl Scouts of the U.S.A., which
is host for the event. ''They talk about things that are international in scope
and they try to come up with projects and ideas that will promote global
understanding and world friendship.''

World conferences are conducted every three years, each time in a different
hemisphere. The last one was in France in 1981. This is only the second such
gathering to be held in the United States. The first was in upstate Cooperstown
in 1948.

While some of the delegates will be staying at the Edith Macy Conference Center,
which the Girl Scouts maintain in Briarcliff Manor, most of the meetings will be
held at Marymount College in Tarrytown, where the majority of those attending
the conference will be housed.

Miss Sparlow said that one of the reasons Westchester was chosen was because of
its closeness to New York City, where the organization's national headquarters -
which coordinates the activities of 2.2 million Scouts and 607,000 adult
volunteers in the United States - is based.

''We also chose Westchester because of its setting,'' she explained. ''It's very
nice, very green, just very pleasant.''

- Gary Kriss

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of U.S. and MIA/POW flags in Yonkers

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 16, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
China Criticizes Vietnam For Border Attacks

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 119 words

DATELINE: PEKING, July 15


China criticized Vietnam today, saying that the main reason for what it called
Hanoi's ''wretched'' economic state was its occupation of Cambodia and its
intensified provocations on the Chinese border.

The commentary by the official New China News Agency came three days after China
asserted that a Vietnamese division had attacked Chinese positions in Yunnan
Province. On Saturday, Vietnam's state-run press agency said many Chinese
divisions had attacked and occupied a number of hills in Vietnam's border
province of Ha Tuyen.

The Chinese agency said Hanoi was looking for a new scapegoat for Vietnam's
acute economic problems, and hoped to convince its population that Chinese
aggression was responsible.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 16, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE DEMOCRATS IN SAN FRANCISCO;
Convention Rostrum Highlights

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 349 words


Here is the tentative schedule for the Democratic National Convention in San
Francisco. (All times are Eastern daylight time; Pacific time is three hours
earlier.)

Tomorrow 4:30 P.M. (1:30 Pacific time) - Session opens. 7 P.M. - Adoption of
platform report. Address by

the Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. 8 P.M. - Platform presentations
by Representative Timothy E. Wirth of Colorado; Glenn Watts,

president of the Communication Workers of

America, and Representatives William H. Gray

3d of Pennsylvania, Mary Rose Oakar of Ohio and

Claude Pepper of Florida. 9 P.M. - Address by the Rev. Jesse Jackson. 9:45 P.M.
- Platform presentations by Mayor

Henry Cisneros of San Antonio, former Representative Martha Keys of Kansas,
Representatives

Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri and Barbara

Boxer of California, and Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine. 10:30 P.M. -
''America the Beautiful'' sung by

Charlie Pride.

 Wednesday 4:30 P.M. (1:30 Pacific time) - Addresses by Gov.

Charles S. Robb of Virginia, Representative Gillis

W. Long of Louisiana and Representative Dan

Rostenkowski of Illinois. Report on Vietnam veterans by Gov. Bob Kerrey of
Nebraska. 7:05 P.M. - ''Why I Am a Democrat,'' by a cross-

section of delegates. Presentation of Sojourner

Truth's speech to a women's convention in 1851, by

Cicely Tyson. Report on women's rights. Eleanor

Roosevelt centennial film narrated by former Representative Barbara Jordan of
Texas. 8:30 P.M. - Address by Senator Gary Hart of

Colorado. 9:25 P.M. - Nominating speeches for Presidential

candidates, followed by roll-call vote. 11:30 P.M. - Closing song by Oakland
Castaliers.

 Thursday 5 P.M. (2 P.M. Pacific time) - Reports from the

Senate and House. 6:10 P.M. - Nominating and seconding speeches

for Vice Presidential candidates, followed by roll-

call vote. 8:30 P.M. - Acceptance by the Vice-Presidential

nominee. Film on the Presidential nominee. Introduction of the Presidential
nominee. The nominee's acceptance speech. ''Battle Hymn of the Republic'' by
Miss Holiday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: schedule

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 16, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE CALENDAR

BYLINE: By Jonathan Fuerbringer

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 491 words


Monday

Despite all the action expected this week at the Democratic National Convention
in San Francisco, there are still some key events to watch for in the capital
city.

The Federal Open Market Committee of the Federal Reserve Board is to meet today
and Tuesday to review its monetary policy targets for this year and to set
tentative targets for 1985. This is one of the Fed's most important meetings of
the year and the decisions, which will affect the growth of the nation's money
supply, will have an impact on interest rates, which have been rising, and the
recent strong growth of the economy. Paul A. Volcker, the chairman of the Fed,
is scheduled to announce the decisions to Congress July 25.

Tuesday

President Reagan is to sign the bill that will reduce Federal highway funds to
any states that do not raise their legal drinking age to 21 within two years.
Later this week - the date has not been set - he is also expected to sign a bill
that sets forth a $50 billion package of tax increases through 1987 as well as a
package of spending reductions worth $13 billion in savings. The bill is a major
part of the deficit reduction ''down payment'' that Congress and the Reagan
Administration have been working on this year.

English Choir: The Choir of Men and Boys from St. James the Greater, Leicester,
England, will perform at the Washington Cathedral's Summer Festival. 8 P.M.

Wednesday

The Commerce Department is scheduled to report on new housing starts for June.
There was a 10.5 percent drop in housing starts in May, after a 19.7 percent
rise in April. Some analysts expect starts to decline again but not as sharply.

Thursday

President Reagan plans to travel to Columbia, S.C., to attend a meeting of
leaders from the Caribbean. The session, sponsored by the University of South
Carolina, is meant to strengthen ties among the Caribbean nations. Leaders from
15 independent countries and 12 other Caribbean entities have been invited. The
meeting follows the approval by Congress last year of the Caribbean Basin
Initiative, which gave $350 million in economic aid and, to encourage
development, dropped United States duties on many products made in the
Caribbean.

Student Aid: A policy seminar will be held on a new report, ''Who Gets Student
Aid: A 1983-84 Snapshot.'' 9 A.M., Brookings Institution.

Speech Talk: Aram Bakshian Jr., a former speechwriter for President Reagan,
addresses the National Capital Chapter of the Public Relations Society of
America. At the Capital Hilton, 12:30 P.M.

Friday

President Reagan plans to attend a ceremony on the South Lawn of the White House
in honor of National P.O.W./M.I.A. Recognition Day, 1984. The day, which was set
by Presidential proclamation, is to honor the 2,500 Americans who are unaccouted
for and still listed as missing in action in the Vietnam War.

Apollo: President Reagan is to honor the Apollo astronauts at a luncheon at the
White House.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 16, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IOWAN TRIES TO HOLD RACE TO 'SUBSTANTIVE ISSUES'

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words

DATELINE: DES MOINES, July 13


A campaign button says, ''Roger Jepsen - Porn Again.'' A bumper sticker
promises, ''The Leisure Spa Sex Shop Is Not an Issue.''

At first the disclosure that Senator Roger W. Jepsen of Iowa briefly visited a
house of prostitition seven years ago created a summer diversion celebrated in
floats and signs in Fourth of July parades in river towns and prairie hamlets.
Democrats seek to keep the issue alive in buttons and bumper stickers while Mr.
Jepsen seek to focus the campaign on ''substantive issues.''

Barely a month has gone by since the 55-year-old Republican Senator, seeking his
second term, acknowledged that out of ''curiosity and weakness,'' he visited a
brothel patronized by some of the state's political and business leaders. It
happened in early 1977, after his term as Lieutenant Governor but months before
he became a born-again Christian and began a campaign for the Senate, defeating
Dick Clark, the Democratic incumbent.

A Jepsen aide said initially that Mr. Jepsen thought the place, Leisure Spa
Ltd., was a health club. There was a spate of cartoons, including one in The Des
Moines Register depicting the Senator holding his signed membership application
and asking, ''Could someone tell me where the exercise machines are?''

'Humbled Before a Nation'


The case led to speculation that Iowa Republicans might deny him renomination.
Mr. Jepsen prevailed, however, after saying at the Republican state convention
that he had been ''stripped of all worldly pride and humbled before an entire
nation.'' He added: ''A Lord who is faithful - as well as forgiving - by His
grace, gave us the strength not only to walk through it but to grow from it, and
we give Him all glory.''

''This is a real morality play,'' said Mr. Jepsen's opponent, Representative Tom
Harkin, a five-term Democratic Congressman.  He said Mr. Jepsen had sinned,
repented, and now sought redemption from both God and the voters.

Thursday night, at the first debate of the campaign, Senator Jepsen said he was
facing an ''ultraliberal'' and ''consumer activist'' opponent in the 44-
year-old Mr. Harkin. He also once referred to his opponent as ''Senator.''

The debate focused on the plight of the family farm and the effect of high
interest rates, plummeting land values, last year's drought and this year's
flooding. The Senator blamed the ''free spending'' Democrats for many of the
ills of the farm community, and Mr. Harkin assailed the Republicans' ''tight
money'' policies, the Administration's $200 billion deficit and ''insensitivity
to human needs.'' According to Mr. Harkin, Mr. Jepsen's agenda ''is that of the
right wing and Moral Majority.''

Party's Eyes on Iowa Race


Democrats, who regard the Iowa Senate race as their best chance to unseat an
incumbent Republican in their effort to recapture control of the Senate, have
cited the shaky farm economy, other incidents involving Mr. Jepsen, and an
aggressive, articulate opponent. Mr. Harkin worked on a farm his father lost in
the Depression. He later served as a Navy fighter pilot in Vietnam.

To Mr. Jepsen, the Leisure Spa disclosure was a ''character assassination.'' His
aides traced the story to Mr. Harkin because it was first told by a radio
reporter who had been a business partner of the Congressman's press secretary.

''I think it's behind us,'' Mr. Jepsen said before the debate. ''It's just been
dribbling away.'' He said the incident has created a sympathetic backlash. To
the Harkin campaign, whose slogan is ''Tom Harkin - a Senator Iowans Can Be
Proud Of,'' Mr. Jepsen's leadership and effectiveness are the major issue. They
regard the brothel incident as the latest in a series of blunders.

Laughter Can Be 'Fatal'


''You represent people not only in your votes, but also in your demeanor,'' Mr.
Harkin said. ''Iowans don't like to feel embarrassed by people they elect and
place their trust in.''

John Frew, Mr. Harkin's campaign manager, said: ''This is not going to go away.
This is a proud state. Its politics are decency, honesty and accomplishment. In
any race, the question of competency and credibility are an issue.''

David Yepsen, the chief political reporter for The Des Moines Register, said of
Mr. Jepsen, ''People are laughing at him, and that can be fatal, at least in
this state.''

Mr. Jepsen has sometimes bewildered his Senate colleagues. The Senator, who had
led the opposition to the Reagan Administration's proposal to sell Awacs
aircraft to Saudi Arabia in 1981, reversed himself and voted for the measure at
the last minute, saying he had received ''highly classified information.''

When Senate Democrats demanded a closed session to study that information, the
Senator said there was none. A White House lobbyist said that the real reason
for the Jepsen reversal was that ''we beat his brains in.''

The Traffic Case


More recently, Mr. Jepsen was stopped by the police in a Washington suburb for
driving alone in a freeway lane reserved for car pools. He avoided a $35 ticket
by asserting Congressional immunity, then criticized Mr. Harkin's' aides for
publicizing the incident.

Mr. Jepsen was the host Wednesday night at a fund-raising event here to six
out-of-state Republican senators who praised him. They also stressed Republican
control of the Senate.

''Roger Jepsen has assured that never again will agriculture be singled out for
unfair attention, as it was by the Carter Administration's grain embargo,'' said
Senator John Heinz of Pennsylvania.

Senator Warren B. Rudman of New Hampshire added, ''Roger Jepsen helped convince
me that agriculture is the only way we can restore the balance of trade.''

Although President Reagan is expected to do well here in Iowa, the lagging farm
economy could hurt Republicans. The farm economy also could reinforce Mr.
Jepsen's problems. ''It's one of our toughest races,'' said Mitchell Daniels,
executive director of the National Republican Senatorial Committee.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Roger W. Jepsen; Photo of Representative Tom Harkin

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 16, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;

BYLINE: By Colin Campbell

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words


THE QUALITY OF MERCY: CAMBODIA, HOLOCAUST AND MODERN

CONSCIENCE. By William Shawcross. 464 pages. Simon & Schuster.

$19.95.  William Shawcross's

''Sideshow'' defended a single, terrible hypothesis: that Richard M. Nixon and
Henry A. Kissinger, by pursuing the Vietnam War into Cambodia, tortured that
country needlessly and set the stage there for the victory of the cruelest
revolution.

''The Quality of Mercy'' deals again with Cambodia's victimization, but in more
complicated ways. It describes a web of humanitarian aid agencies, governments,
armies, do- gooders, journalists and others as they responded to Cambodia's
human suffering after Vietnam invaded the country at the end of 1978. Most of
the actors in this drama emerge less tainted by the analysis than Mr. Nixon and
Mr. Kissinger did earlier. Yet Mr. Shawcross remains a careful journalist, and,
since he is a moralist besides, he describes a humanitarian outpouring that was
shot through with misrepresentations, incompetence, callousness and shirking of
principle. This is a startling book and most of it is very persuasive.

Several months after the Vietnamese army drove their former Communist allies,
the Khmer Rouge, out of Phnom Penh and into the forests near Thailand, masses of
sick, starving and often dying Cambodians began appearing at the Thai border.
When the Vietnamese finally allowed a few Western journalists and aid officials
to visit Phnom Penh, their reports, together with the border scenes, indicated
that millions of Cambodians, after four years under the Khmer Rouge, could
easily die from famine by the end of 1979. Mr. Shawcross joined in such
warnings.


But he later discovered that, though Cambodia was hungry and though many
Cambodians were dying, a general famine was not about to happen.

Was it averted by the horrified world's huge gifts of food, as aid agencies
assserted and as many of us who followed their efforts believed? Probably not,
Mr. Shawcross says. After interviewing numerous aid officials and burrowing
diligently through their public and confidential records, he became convinced
that only a tiny percentage of the food the world had agreed was essential to
Cambodia's survival actually reached the Cambodian people over the rest of 1979.
And yet the people survived.

There was more than miscalculation here. Several humanitarian agencies, after
some of their most experienced workers were allowed into the countryside,
discovered no impending famine. Yet the agencies evidently declined to disclose
the fact. British Oxfam, for instance (a different group from the Oxfam in
Boston), kept warning of famine and extinction even after its field workers
described the situation as surprisingly less grave.

The Vietnamese at first denied that famine threatened, and they kept foreigners
away. Later they changed their minds and in July 1979 Cambodia's
Vietnamese-backed Foreign Minister, Hun Sen, declared that 2.25 million people
were starving to death. The claim was false, Mr. Shawcross writes, though the
food aid it helped attract fed the new Government's 250,000 employees.


The humanitarians made other missteps. The United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization seems to have been grossly incompetent in fulfilling its promise to
deliver thousands of tons of rice seed. The United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mr. Shawcross writes, failed to protest when tens of thousands of
Cambodian refugees were forcibly and in some cases fatally repatriated by the
Thai Army. Some Thai officers behaved execrably and profited from the relief
effort.

Most cynical of all, excepting the Khmer Rouge, for whom Mr. Shawcross saves the
word ''evil,'' were the Vietnamese. They had liberated Cambodia and claimed to
be humanitarians, but then they repeatedly obstructed humanitarian aid. They
told the Cambodians that the foreign helpers were hostile agents of the United
States and China. And they distorted history in the way they compared Cambodia's
fate under the Khmer Rouge to the Jewish Holocaust. The analogy distracted
attention from Vietnam's own responsibility in helping to establish the Khmer
Rouge, who were in any case Communists, not fascists. Many born-again Khmer
Rouge, moreover, have since been installed by Vietnam in Phnom Penh's new
government.

Mr. Shawcross is right to stress this distortion of history and right also to
criticize Western aid officials who warned of ''holocaust'' and ''genocidal''
famine after discovering contradictory evidence.


But I think he overstresses the centrality of a misleading historical image in a
book that deals mainly with what people did, and why, in 1979 and after. The
world's ''panic'' at Cambodia's refugees, as Mr. Shawcross calls the response,
may in fact have been influenced less by recollections of Nazi Germany than by
memories of Cambodia's own recent sufferings, including those so movingly
recounted in Mr. Shawcross's ''Sideshow.'' Moreover, the holocaust imagery was
often spontaneous. The Cambodians who were starving did resemble the inmates of
concentration camps. Countless Cambodians (though fewer than the three million
claimed by the new regime) had indeed died under Pol Pot's rule.

In all other respects Mr. Shawcross's subtlety and lack of sanctimony are
remarkable. It is also noteworthy that a journalist who in the past attacked
American policy so fiercely has, in this book, portrayed at least the United
States Embassy in Bangkok as one of the best informed and most decently
efficient actors in the refugee drama. His high opinion of some American
officials, it should be added, does not keep him from detailing how the
American-backed relief effort along the Thai-Cambodian border also served to
preserve Pol Pot and his Khmer Rouge guerrillas, whose opposition to Vietnam
remains useful to China, Thailand, the United States and most of the United
Nations General Assembly.

Alas for simplicity, Vietnam emerges from Mr. Shawcross's honest book as a
depressing alternative. Alas for Cambodia, always.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of William Shawcross

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTER'S PROJECT RUINS HIS CAREER

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1015 words


An investigation by a news organization often ends with the subject of the
inquiry under a cloud and the reporter accepting praise. Carlton Sherwood's
inquiry into alleged financial irregularities in the construction of the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial in Washington has ended the other way around.

''It ruined me professionally,'' said Mr. Sherwood, a 37-year-old reporter who
earlier won a Pulitzer Prize and a Peabody Award. He said his reports on the
memorial's financing were fair and accurate, but the television station for
which he did the inquiry would not defend it after a Federal investigation did
not back up the reporter.

The history of Mr. Sherwood's inquiry provides new fuel for debate over whether
some ''investigative journalism'' has become prosecutorial.

Many journalists say designating reporters as ''investigative'' raises problems
by creating pressure for results and encouraging reports based more on
suspicions than on proof of misdeeds. In libel suits plaintiffs often say the
news organization was trying to ''get'' them.



They Want an Apology

The two men who were the subject of Mr. Sherwood's investigation, John P.
Wheeler 3d, chairman of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, and Jan C. Scruggs,
its president, did not sue. But they want an apology from television station
WDVM in Washington. ''He really made us look like cheap crooks,'' Mr. Scruggs
said.

The general manager of WDVM, Edwin Pfeiffer, said the station, a CBS affiliate,
did not intend to apologize because it had already told its viewers it could not
substantiate what Mr. Sherwood reported. ''There is no part of the story that I
feel particularly good about,'' Mr. Pfeiffer said.

Mr. Sherwood's reports concentrated on how the memorial fund, a private
organization, spent the $9 million it collected. In his series of reports, he
said Mr. Scruggs and Mr. Wheeler had refused to provide financial information
but that internal audits on file with the Better Business Bureau showed that
only $2.6 million was spent on actual construction, that fund-raising costs were
excessive, that $2 million was being banked for salaries even though the fund
itself was to go out of business and that other money was ''diverted'' to
promotional events instead of fulfilling ''promises'' to help other memorials.

The series by Mr. Sherwood, who was hired in March 1983 as WDVM's first
''investigative reporter,'' began on the evening news programs of Monday, Nov.
8, after heavy promotion.



They Charge Bias in Inquiry

While the reporting was under way, Mr. Scruggs and Mr. Wheeler told station
executives that Mr. Sherwood was biased against the memorial and was relying too
much on the word of H. Ross Perot, the Texas industrialist, and other declared
opponents of the memorial's design. The station said there was no basis to the
complaint, pointing out that such complaints were often lodged by subjects of
investigations.

On the eve of the first program, Mr. Wheeler struck a counterpunch. He had
refused to be interviewed, but Mr. Sherwood appeared at his home in Bethesda at
7:30 A.M. on the Friday before the broadcasts. The reporter was wearing a
microphone that could transmit to recording equipment. Mr. Wheeler, a special
counsel to the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, told Mr.
Sherwood to remove the microphone, and he did. Later Mr. Sherwood was arrested
on Mr. Wheeler's complaint that he had violated a Maryland law against recording
a conversation without permission.

WDVM reported the arrest with the first of Mr. Sherwood's series. The incident
''took the focus off them and put it on me,'' the reporter said.

The charge was later dropped. Mr. Wheeler said the station had erased the tape;
the station and Mr. Sherwood said nothing had been recorded.



He Quits His Job

In December, the station refused to air a report by Mr. Sherwood saying the fund
was not honoring an agreement to let outside auditors examine the books. The
reporter quit.

A group of members of Congress, responding to the broadcasts, asked the General
Accounting Office to examine the fund books. Its audit, made public this May,
dismissed every charge that Mr. Sherwood raised.

It counted nearly $4 million in memorial building costs, $2.5 million for
fund-raising, $1 million each for administration and promotion and $1 million
left in the bank, and said all of it was properly spent. There was ''no evidence
of any improper or illegal actions,'' the auditors concluded.

Mr. Scruggs and Mr. Wheeler have been seeking publicity for the audit,
contending that it ''officially'' discredits the reporter's work. Mr. Wheeler
said the only effective antidote to news workers' misconduct was ''humiliation
before their peers.''



He Says Figures Varied Mr. Sherwood, who said his reports ''were so fair it was
painful,'' said the figures the fund gave to the G.A.O. did not match the
numbers on which he relied and that questions still remained about whether money
was wasted. Mr. Pfeiffer said the G.A.O. audit was ''as definitive as anything
that exists.'' Mr. Scruggs and Mr. Wheeler said that any differences between the
audits could be traced to the dates of the fiscal years, progress in
construction and other routine variations.

Both Mr. Pfeiffer and Mr. Sherwood said that the problem would not have
developed if the fund had made its books available when the reporter asked to
see them, that such refusals usually denoted efforts to hide guilty secrets.

WDVM has been looking for a reporter to take Mr. Sherwood's place, but Mr.
Pfeiffer said future investigations would be ''more sensitive to the idea that
the allegations could be proved wrong.''

Mr. Sherwood now works for The Washington Times, at a salary below the $100,000
WDVM reportedly paid him. In an interview published by The Washington Times when
he went to work for WDVM, the reporter discussed risks in investigative
journalism. ''The facts in this business are everything,'' he said. ''You don't
get a second chance. If you mess up once, you're finished.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jan C. Scruggs; photo of Carlton Sherwood

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE REGION;
 7 Are Sentenced In B-52 Vandalism

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 178 words

DATELINE: SYRACUSE, N.Y., July 16


Seven antinuclear activists, including the wife of Philip Berrigan, the former
priest and Vietnam War protester, were sentenced today to two to three years in
prison for hammering and splashing blood on an Air Force bomber.

Elizabeth McAlister, a former nun and the wife of Mr. Berrigan, was ordered to
serve three years after her June 13 conviction on charges of damaging Government
property and conspiracy to damage Government property.

The seven entered Rome's Griffiss Air Force Base last Thanksgiving and hammered
the bomb-bay doors of a B-52 and its engines, and scrawled antinuclear messages
in paint and their own blood.

During the trial they were acquitted on a charge of damaging national security.

Sentenced to three-year terms were Miss McAlister, 44 years old, of Baltimore;
Vern Rossman, 56, of Boston; Dean Hammer, 29, of New Haven, and Karl Smith, 27,
of Baltimore.

The defendants who received two- year terms were Kathleen Rumpf, 32, of
Marlboro, N.Y.; Jacqueline Allen, 22, of Hartford, and Clare Grady, 25, of
Ithaca, N.Y.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

INDUSTRY TAKES DOMINANT SCIENCE ROLE

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2585 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 16


American industrial research, once thought to be wilting in the face of economic
recession and Japan's technological challenge, appears to be surging ahead with
unexpected vitality.

For several years, American companies have been raising their research
expenditures far faster than the rate of inflation, hiring the best college
graduates in science and engineering, setting up new consortiums to perform
fundamental research of value to all companies in an industry and forging new
links with leading universities and academic scientists.

In a shift of historic roles, American industry is now spending more money on
research and development than is the Federal Government, which for decades had
been the chief patron of science and technology.

Industrial scientists are also achieving greater power in the making of Federal
science policy, with technical officers of corporations now holding the top
posts in the White House Science Council, the National Science Board and the
National Science Foundation.

''The health of industrial research and development is probably the greatest it
has been since corporations first discovered that they ought to do research and
development,'' said Hugh H. Miller, executive officer of the National Academy of
Engineering, the nation's top honorary society for technologists and engineers.
''Almost all the major corporations now are putting more money into their
research and development programs.''

''I think it's positive, terrific, unique, the envy of the world,'' said Frank
Press, president of the National Academy of Sciences, the top honorary society
for scientists working in basic research. ''It's the American giant awakening
from a slumber, you might say.''

While the quickening pace of industrial research and development is winning
applause from most of those concerned with the vitality of the American economy,
it is causing concern among some observers. They fear that industrial priorities
may gradually distort the nation's entire research enterprise, sucking talent
and financing from such areas as health, nutrition and the environment, and from
basic scientific studies that seek to increase human understanding but have
little commercial value.

Some analysts also fear that the growing collaboration between the universities
and industry, although initially beneficial to both, may eventually destroy the
very values of unfettered scientific inquiry that make academic research unique.

''The Reagan Administration talks loudly about the importance of basic research
in improving productivity and the economy,'' said William D. Carey, executive
officer of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. ''I worry
about this because the rhetoric tends to pull the resources after it. For the
time being it's a honeymoon, and industry is responding by putting more money
into the universities.''

''But if this were to go on for six or eight more years,'' he said, ''the mix
and spread and versatility of basic research would narrow very dangerously. You
could get an overemphasis on areas of basic research that are likely to produce
near-term economic benefits.''



Wide Range of New Research

The range of new research and development efforts is almost as varied as
American industry. At E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, which has dominated the
chemical industry with such discoveries as nylon and Teflon, a new research
effort has been mounted over the last five years to penetrate the life sciences,
biotechnology and electronics. Du Pont scientists are studying such varied
subjects as the structures of polymer chemicals, the genetic controls of tobacco
plants, the molecular biology of immunology and leukemia, and optical laser
recording disks.

''There's definitely a commitment by the chemical industry and by industry as a
whole to put more research into our business,'' said Robert C. Forney, executive
vice president in charge of Du Pont's research.

At the General Motors Corporation, often criticized as an unimaginative,
traditional manufacturing company, a major new research effort is under way to
integrate computers, software, robots, sensors and telecomunications systems
into a highly automated manufacturing process that might lower the cost of
producing automobiles and conceivably revolutionize the production processes in
a range of other industries as well. And at Merck & Company Inc., a leading drug
company with headquarters in Rahway, N.J., a major new laboratory is being built
to pursue research in microbiology, genetics, recombinant DNA technology and
synthetic and process chemistry.

Meanwhile, the microelectronics revolution, now a quarter-century old, shows no
signs of abating as companies compete to put ever more circuits on ever tinier
chips. The rapid advances in molecular biology and genetic engineering have
spawned a host of research-oriented companies that seek to develop new drugs,
hardier plants and a range of medical diagnostic tests using monoclonal
antibodies to identify disease agents.



Concern on Industrial Priorities

Industry has long been the chief performer of research and development in this
country, concentrating on work that is closely related to product development
and leaving most basic research to the universities. But for most of the last
three decades, the Federal Government has been the chief source of research
funds, providing money not only to Government laboratories and universities but
also to industry through contracts with individual companies.

In the late 1950's and early 1960's, for example, the Federal Government spent
twice as much money on research and development as industry did from its own
funds. The gap gradually closed during the 1970's, and in 1980, for the first
time industry spent more than the Federal Government. Industry has forged
steadily ahead since.

The surge shows up in virtually all statistical indicators. For example,
Business Week's annual tally of research and development spending by 800
companies, published in the July 9 issue, showed what the magazine called ''a
deepening commitment to R&D.'' Total research and development outlays for the
companies reached $39.2 billion in 1983, a gain of 9.8 percent from the previous
year. Even after adjusting for inflation, the gain was still nearly 6 percent.
The outlook is for even faster growth this year. A survey of industrial research
and development directors by the National Science Foundation last year found
that officials in each industry projected that spending would ''grow at a
somewhat faster rate'' in 1984 than in 1983.



Spending Rose During Recession

Surprisingly, although many company officials told the Foundation that the
1981-82 recession had forced them to slow the rate of increase, few companies
actually cut their research budgets in the bad times. In fact, most companies
continued to raise their research spending even though company revenues were
stagnating. As a result, the percentage of industrial sales income spent on
research and development, perhaps the most commonly used measure of commitment
to research, jumped to 3.6 percent in 1982 from 3.1 percent in 1981, the largest
single-year increase in the quarter of a century that the statistics have been
kept.

''It's a very, very positive sign that American industry did this during a
rather intense period of recession,'' said Roland W. Schmitt, senior vice
president for corporate research and development at the General Electric
Company. ''It shows a new understanding and realism toward what's required to be
at the forefront of technological change.''

''What's more important to me is not just the magnitude of the investment but
the fact that it's been more innovative,'' said George A. Keyworth 2d, President
Reagan's science adviser. ''The best thing I've seen in my years here is a
renewed vigor, vitality and imagination in a great number, even a majority, of
American industries.''



Desire to Beat Back Competition

The chief reason for boosting research and development spending, according to
company officials and knowledgeable observers, is a desire to beat back foreign
competitors, particularly the Japanese, but also the Western Europeans. ''The
fact that the Japanese scared us and still are scaring us is very healthy,''
said Mr. Miller of the engineering academy. ''It affected not only the research
people but corporate management at the very top.''

Other factors that have boosted research efforts include the business climate of
the Reagan Administration, with its tax incentives for industrial research and
reduction of regulatory pressures; the rapidly shortening time lag between
scientific discoveries and their commercial applications in such fields as
molecular biology and microelectronics, which forces companies to stay at the
forefront of knowledge or fall behind their competitors; and a growing
realization by many companies in the traditional manufacturing industries that
they, like the high-technology companies, also need strong research and
development programs to modernize their processes and products.

For example, General Motors, which according to the Business Week survey spent
more on research and development again last year than any other company, has
embarked on an ambitious program to turn itself into a world leader in automated
production processes. The company's research laboratories are now headed by
Robert A. Frosch, former administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration and former deputy director of the Pentagon's high-technology
research agency.



Surge of Employment of Scientists

The surge in industrial research has been accompanied by a surge of scientists
and engineers into industrial laboratories. Employment of scientists and
engineers in industry rose at an annual rate of 6 percent from 1972 to 1982, in
contrast to 4 percent in educational institutions and 1 percent in the Federal
Government, according to a statistical report issued last month by the National
Science Foundation. Although most people probably picture scientists as
white-frocked academics, more than half of all scientists and more than
three-fourths of all engineers were employed in business and industry in 1982,
according to the report.

Students have been propelled toward industry partly by shrinking job
opportunities in the universities and partly by a shift in student ideologies.
''There's been a tremendous change in attitude among the students over the past
decade,'' said George C. Pimentel, professor of chemistry at the University of
California at Berkeley, who headed a study of research opportunities in
chemistry for the National Academy of Sciences and the White House science
office.

''In the late 60's and early 70's, as part of an enormous overreaction to the
Vietnam war, it was considered socially unacceptable to work in industry,'' Dr.
Pimentel said. But now, he finds, student interest has shifted back to
industrial careers, including engineering and science.

Although industry has traditionally put most of its money into applied research
and development aimed directly at new products, in recent years it has been
showing increased interest in basic research of the sort traditionally carried
out at universities. Some industries, such as electric utilities, semiconductor
manufacturers and microelectronics companies, have established research
consortiums among themselves to conduct or sponsor fundamental research of
interest to the entire industry. Other companies are developing close ties with
universities by forming research partnerships that call for joint planning of
research programs and sharing of any financial rewards from commercially useful
results.



Trends Criticized and Praised

These trends have been criticized as a threat and praised as a boon to the
universities. A recent report on ''The Science Business,'' issued last month by
The Twentieth Century Fund, conveyed both sides of the argument, with a
particular focus on molecular biology.

A background paper in the report written by Nicholas Wade, an editorial writer
for The New York Times, stressed the fragility of academic values in the face of
industrial pressures. It warned that the directions of academic research might
be dictated by commercial interests, that the credibility of the universities
might be damaged and that the public might be deprived of independent scientific
advice if academics become subservient to industrial sponsors.

However, a ''task force'' of university administrators, research scientists and
corporate executives assembled by the Fund reached the opposite conclusion,
namely that the ties binding corporations and universities are beneficial to
both parties and to the economy as well.  The task force, with Robert L.
Sproull, president of the University of Rochester, as chairman, said that
corporations would gain prestige, exposure to new discoveries, and access to
talented recruits and consultants from their collaboration with universities. In
return, the universities would get financial support and exposure to practical
problems faced by industry.

The task force noted that Government financial support to universities, far
larger than industry's financial support, often has strings attached or is
subject to political pressures. Industry support, it suggested, would broaden
the financial base of the universities and thus strengthen their independence.



Administration Jobs Affected

Industrial scientists have also taken over some of the top science policy
positions under the Reagan Administration. For the first time in its 35-year
history, the National Science Foundation, the Government agency that supports
basic research, will be headed by an industrial scientist, Erich Bloch, a vice
president of the International Business Machines Corporation. Meanwhile, the
National Science Board, the Foundation's policy-making body, is headed by Dr.
Schmitt of General Electric, the second successive industrialist to hold the
job, and the White House Science Council, which advises the president's science
adviser, is headed by Solomon J. Buchsbaum, executive vice president of Bell
Laboratories.

''Industry is appreciating more and more that to be competitive it has to pursue
R&D,'' Mr. Buchsbaum said, ''but industry also recognizes that it cannot do so
in isolation. So industry right now is re-examining how to strike partnerships
with other industrial partners, primarily with the universities, and, most
important, with the Government.''

This growing industrial presence has raised some concern that Federal policies
for basic research may become subordinated to commercial interests, but the
companies represented by all three of these industrial scientists have strong
commitments to basic research and the men themselves are highly regarded by
academics who know them.

Whether the rising level of industrial research will pay off in the long run is
an open question. While the overall spending totals are going up, some segments
of industry, such as aerospace, farm and construction machinery and oil service
companies, are reducing their research and development spending because of
pessimism about their short-term business prospects, according to the Business
Week survey. Moreover, economists have long noted that research and development
are only one part of a long and complex process by which scientific discoveries
are ultimately converted into new products.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of DuPont scientist

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 886 words


ENDLESS ENEMIES. The Making of an Unfriendly World. By Jonathan Kwitny. 435
pages. Illustrated with endpaper maps. Congdon & Weed. $19.95.

THE ultimate irony of this irony-haunted book about foreign policy is that
Jonathan Kwitny's message is simple and seems nearly unassailable. What it boils
down to is that when a free- market economy is allowed to compete openly with a
Socialist one, the former wins the battle every time. Even countries in the
Soviet Union's sphere of influence prefer to do business with capitalist
countries if the latter are willing to pay more for raw materials or to make
available superior products.

But the United States won't let that competition happen, Mr. Kwitny insists. For
a variety of complex reasons, mostly having to do with either misguided ideology
or sheer greed, this country keeps obstructing the free play of developing
economies. In the process, the author stresses, we either reduce them to
corruption and poverty or we force them to embrace the alternative of socialism.

Take Zaire, where, according to Mr. Kwitny, the Central Intelligence Agency
collaborated with businessmen and banks to martyr the popular Congolese leader
Patrice Lumumba and to bend the country to the malign rule of Mobutu Sese Seko
and breed revolutionary ferment. Or take Cuba, where the United States' embargo
- along with the C.I.A.'s 17 separate attempts on the life of Fidel Castro - has
served, the author claims, both to invigorate the people's spirit of defiance
and to drive their economy into dependence on the Soviet Union.

Or take Angola, Algeria, Ethiopia, Zimbabwe, Lebanon, Iran, Baluchistan,
Indonesia, the Philippines, Guatemala, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Chile and
Grenada. Mr. Kwitny takes them all and several other nations, and attempts to
show how, ever since the end of World War II, our foreign policy has mainly
succeeded in producing precisely the opposite of what would be desirable for us.
He reports in compelling detail based on his travels all over the world as a
reporter for The Wall Street Journal. He's a liberal with a heart that doesn't
bleed easily. His book is stirring, if only one will exercise some patience.

I therefore urge readers to overlook some initial obstacles. Never mind the
simplistic title ''Endless Enemies: The Making of an Unfriendly World.'' Look
past the explanatory line on the dust jacket, ''How America's Worldwide
Interventions Destroy Democracy and Free Enterprise and Defeat Our Own Best
Interests,'' which sounds a shade simplistic when one thinks of some of the
democracies and systems of free enterprise we have tried to defend in Central
America and Asia.  Skip over the endpaper maps, which bear labels with simple-
minded and ambiguous messages such as ''Zimbabwe - Where the U.S. lost a war to
somebody we thought was pro-Russian, but who isn't, so things are okay.'' Ignore
the author's rather helter-skelter organization of his book. And try especially
to overlook his rhetoric in the early chapters, where he writes of ''vested
interests in vested suits'' or describes a ''tax write-off lunch'' as having
been ''paid for out of the pockets of the millions of lathe operators, clerks,
computer programmers, dirt farmers, druggists, and hod carriers who are
harnessed collectively as the American taxpayer.''

What you finally end up with in ''Endless Enemies'' is a slightly overdocumented
but fair-minded survey of American foreign policy. It is filled with such
telling ironies as the exchange of high-technology military bases that the
United States and the Soviet Union inadvertently achieved by building and then
losing to each other Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam and ''a spiffy, Russian-built
base'' in Somalia.

Or take the weapons we supplied to the Shah of Iran that were used to wage war
from 1973 to 1977 against the people of Baluchistan, the Pakistani province that
now constitutes the only buffer between Afghanistan and the Soviet Union's
long-desired access to a southern seaport. Did we really want to supply the
means to wage war against the people of Baluchistan? Mr. Kwitny doesn't think
so, and one is inclined to agree with him.

Or take the resemblance Mr. Kwitny discerns between Afghan guerrillas and
soldiers of Polisario, the political organization that is seeking Saharan
independence from Morocco. ''Their dress is almost identical from the turban on
down, except that the Afghan stuffs wool into his robes in winter. Both would be
devout Moslems, most likely of the Sunni sect. Both would likely be carrying
Soviet-style AK-47 automatic rifles that were originally supplied by the Soviet
bloc for use by others.'' Yet the Afghan is perceived by the United States as a
courageous anti-Communist, while ''the Polisario guerrilla is bombed, strafed
and rocketed by U.S.-supplied planes for being a communist .'

Or take Fidel Castro and Lech Walesa. One is a hero to us and the other an
enemy. Yet Mr. Kwitny insists that both can plausibly be characterized as
admirable for having inspired their respective peoples to resist the oppressions
of misguided superpowers. These are the sorts of ironies that make ''Endless
Enemies'' worthwhile. It's an old and familiar form of idealism that Mr. Kwitny
is exercising. But by dint of hard reporting, he finally succeeds in
reinvigorating it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jonathan Kwitny

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 18, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

IRAN'S BOOTY: A RARE GLIMPSE OF U.S. SECRETS

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2263 words


Islamic militants in Teheran are continuing to publish photocopies of secret
cablegrams, Government documents and personal papers found when they seized the
United States Embassy there on Nov. 4, 1979. And since thousands of pages of
sensitive documents are believed to be still in the Iranians' hands, it is
possible they will be published for years to come.

Seventeen paperback volumes of the papers, titled ''The Spy Nest Documents'' and
published in Iran over the last two years, were recently made available to The
New York Times. Their contents were authenticated independently.

Together with 13 earlier volumes that came to the attention of Western
journalists two years ago, they represent one of the most extensive intelligence
losses since the United States hurriedly evacuated its embassy in Saigon in
1975. The books, which include translations into Persian, are sold in Teheran
bookshops, and some of them have already been been sold out in Iran.

The documents in the 17 volumes date from the early 1950's to just hours before
the embassy was seized. Many of them had been destroyed by embassy personnel in
shredders and were painstakingly pasted back together by the militants.  The
papers offer a rare glimpse of how American intelligence gathering is carried
out. They also provide graphic testimony of the Carter Administration's apparent
reluctance to face the erosion of the Shah's power and its near-total inability
to develop relations with the revolutionary regime of Ayatollah Ruhollah
Khomeini.

The continuing publication of the documents in Teheran is still compromising
United States intelligence sources and methods, some authorities believe.



Many Iranians Affected

''The most regrettable effect of the files falling into the hands of the
students was that every Iranian who had any contact with the embassy in the
normal course of diplomatic reporting was potentially subject to blackmail or
prosecution on the presumption that he was working for the United States,''
writes Gary Sick, who served as the principal staff member for Iran on the
National Security Council during the Carter Administration.

Mr. Sick contends in a forthcoming book that it was irresponsible for American
officials to have failed to take the most elementary precautions to prevent such
an overwhelming breach of security.

The militant group that seized the embassy, which calls itself the Students
Following the Line of the Imam, has said it believes that publication of the
purloined material is part of a divine revolutionary mission.

''One of the ways the United States gathered information about the Islamic
Revolution was through its official meetings with various individuals who were
all their spies in Teheran,'' said one commentary in Persian among the papers.
''It is a sacred duty for our Moslem nation to recognize the Great Satan's
conspiracy and to guard the Islamic Republic against the attackers of the East
as well as the West.''

Embassy Got Signals

Of Ruler's Illness

Among the most startling revelations was that United States Embassy officials
had warning signals that Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi was seriously ill months
before the Iranian leader abruptly left the country, but they appear to have
played down the evidence and continued to send optimistic reports on his chances
for political survival.

The Shah was ''physically all right'' but ''somewhat 'down' mentally'' and blood
tests were ordered, a reliable Iranian source with close ties to the Shah's
court told an embassy official in August 1978, six months before the revolution.

He added, according to one document, that the ''U.S. and others should keep an
eye on the Shah and if something were wrong, they should urge him not to convene
the Regency Council'' but to ''prepare Iran for change, not just depart Iran
abruptly as his father had done.''

The memo concluded, ''The embassy has no evidence to indicate there is anything
wrong, but the rumors are beginning to take on a life of their own.''

Because the memo was sent as a low priority airgram, not a cablegram, it never
received wide or high-level distribution in Washington, certainly not in the
White House, according to one high- ranking official in the Carter
Administration.

A subsequent memorandum about the Shah's health was never sent to Washington,
but circulated internally in the embassy and filed away. Quoting a source who
claimed to know the Shah's doctor, the memo said, ''The Shah suffered an
infractus three years ago and recently, after hearing news of the Afghanistan
coup d'etat, he suffered a stomach hemorrhage and had to be moved from Shiraz to
Kish Island for convalescence.''

''Infractus'' apparently refers to an infarction, which can be a cardiac,
pulmonary, cerebral or intestinal ailment.

Shah's Entry Into U.S.

Touched Off Crisis

A few months later, the Shah left the country, and in October l979 he entered
the United States for medical treatment, an action that led to the seizure of
the United States Embassy and set off the hostage crisis. He underwent surgery
for a number of ailments and died of lymphatic cancer in an Egyptian military
hospital in July 1980.

Other documents indicate the reluctance of embassy officials to draw tough
conclusions about the tumultuous events of the fall of 1978. They freely quote
Iranian sources who generally took the view that the Shah could survive.

One such source attributed the Shah's problems to his ''bad image'' and proposed
establishment of a think tank to change it.

Another source was convinced that the Shah could survive if he provided ''some
sacrifical lambs'' to give the impression that he was responding to charges of
corruption.

By the end of December, the embassy in Teheran and some Washington aides
concluded that the Shah was doomed, but President Carter and his key advisers
refused to accept that judgment until the Shah himself decided to leave Iran,
Mr. Sick writes.

The Carter Administration, especially the national security adviser, Zbigniew
Brzezinski, is known to have believed that even if the Shah's Government fell,
the Iranian Army would retain control, by coup if necessary. This view was based
in part on a visit to Teheran a month before the revolution by Gen. Robert E.
Huyser of the United States Air Force, who had met with several of the Shah's
top generals.

But a memorandum filed by the embassy's defense attache, Thomas E. Schaeffer,
only days before Ayatollah Khomeini's triumphant return to Iran from exile in
France and the army's collapse indicated that there were clear warnings on the
eve of the revolution that the army might support Ayatollah Khomeini.

People Termed Willing

'To Die for Freedom'

The memorandum quoted Ahmad Madani, a former rear admiral who was later to
become Ayatollah Khomeini's Minister of Defense, who said he ''had personally
talked with young officers who would not support a military coup.'' A military
coup organized by General Huyser ''would only postpone the revolutionary
struggle since people were ready to die for their freedom,'' he said.

The secret documents also include detailed reports of highly secret meetings
between Central Intelligence Agency officials and their local operatives as well
as more routine contacts between embassy personnel and a wide variety of Iranian
contacts, dozens of whom are identified by name.

Names of Western journalists and summaries of their conversations with United
States officials are also among the papers.

In one volume devoted to Kurdistan, ''T/1,'' a key operative and former agent of
Savak, the Iranian secret police, was instructed to get a job in the Foreign
Ministry during the brief administration of Prime Minister Shahpur Bakhtiar, who
fell from power shortly after Ayatollah Khomeini's return to Iran.

His instructions to meet his station officer on a certain busy intersection in
downtown Teheran are worthy of a spy novel.

''He will wait at site for maximum of 10 minutes,'' according to one secret
telex message that had been shredded but was pieced back together. ''He will
attempt to have in left hand small shopping bag, in right hand he will have
newspaper. He will be dressed in a black turtleneck sweater and blue jeans.

''He will wear heavy horn-rimmed glasses with clear glass.''

''T/1 is precise and intelligent,'' the message continues. ''He assumes
instruction without question and repeats back well guidance previously given
him.''

Information Sought

On Khomeini's Staff

One of T/1's first jobs was to get information from a confidant of Ayatollah
Khomeini. His assignment was daunting.

''Describe the organization of Khomeini's headquarters,'' T/1 was told. ''Give
all details possible about the people'' immediately around the Ayatollah.

''What is the state of Khomeini's health? Who would be a likely successor to
Khomeini if he died?''

T/1's notes were to be transferred to the C.I.A. station officer through T/1's
daughter. Since her husband ''might be curious if present when station officer's
call comes in, call best made during working hours when he would presumably be
in office.''

The documents reveal the real name, address and phone number of the daughter, as
well as the identities of T/ 1 and other agents. Their fate since the
publication of the documents is unknown.

After it became apparent that the revolution was secure, State Department
officials, especially Henry Precht, the country director for Iran, believed that
the clerics would fade away and be replaced by moderate nationalists.

The embassy, meanwhile, took the view that the clerics were firmly entrenched in
power and that there was little that could be done to get close to them unless
Ayatollah Khomeini's highly antagonistic feelings about the United States
subsided. ''We need not and should not embrace the current regime; Khomeini is
no friend of the United States,'' L. Bruce Laingen, who was charge d'affaires
when the embassy was seized, wrote.

While the State Department pushed for ''normalization'' of embassy services, the
embassy, at the same time, called for a reduction of personnel.

Memo Urged Reduction

Of Mission Operations

''Mission services should be reduced,'' said a memo of June 14, 1979. ''There
should be gradual reduction in consular services and no issuance of visas of any
kind in Teheran except perhaps diplomatic visas for specific missions.'' Another
memo suggested that the embassy could function with a skeletal staff of eight.

But the State Department prevailed, and the embassy staff grew significantly
beyond what the White House had originally approved.

The embassy was also deeply opposed to the admission of the Shah into the United
States for medical treatment. ''Any decision to allow him or his family to visit
the United States would almost certainly result in an immediate and violent
reaction,'' Mr. Laingen wrote a month before the Shah entered the United States.
''The ability and/or desire of the PGOI to contain such actions is
questionable.'' The letters PGOI stood for Provisional Government of Iran.

Possible reactions included ''assassinations, harassment and kidnappings,'' he
said.

The volumes also indicate the attitudes of United States Embassy and Government
officials toward many of the Iranians they were dealing with.

Abolhassan Bani-Sadr, who was later elected President of Iran and subsequently
went into exile, was said to be ''considered a radical economist and a fool by
many.'' Sadegh Ghotbzadeh, the revolutionary Foreign Minister who was later
executed after being convicted of a plot to overthrow Ayatollah Khomeini,
apparently ''turned up in the U.S. with disgusting (and probably illegal)
regularity'' before the revolution, according to one document.

Secret Reports Kept On International Issues

Because of the security considerations involved, it would appear that most of
the documents should never have been in the embassy. There were, for example,
dozens of routine C.I.A. biographies of key revolutionary figures compiled in
the 1950's and 1960's and secret reports from other embassies on subjects as
wide-ranging as the Havana conference of nations professing nonalignment and the
internal situation in Afhganistan.

Even before the militants made their first attack on the embassy in February
1979, Ambassador William H. Sullivan ordered that all sensitive material be
shipped back to Washington. But when it was thought that the situation in
Teheran was improving, most of the files were gradually sent back, without the
White House's knowledge.

What makes the loss of the documents even more striking is that the order to
destroy classified material was delayed until more than an hour after the
assault on the embassy began, American officials have said. And while some of
the most sensitive documents were destroyed in sophisticated, high-speed
machines that turned them into tiny, unreadable pieces, many others were put
through old-fashioned shredders and then meticulously pieced together by the
militants. Most of the documents were left intact.

Since that time, the State Department, with Congressional support, has begun to
modernize its storage and retrieval system by computerizing sensitive material
and experimenting with various methods for quick destruction.

''It was a tragedy that shouldn't have happened,'' Mr. Laingen said in an
interview. ''We had too damn much stuff. Teheran was a kind of object lesson all
of us should remember in any stressful situation: to think lean and to move
quickly.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of documents being shredded in U.S. Embassy in Teheran; photo of
part of reconstructed page; photo of shredded documents being pieced together
(Page A8)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 18, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN EMBARGOES APPLIED SO AS NOT TO 'SHACKLE THE PRESS'

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 514 words


To the Editor:


I write to correct several errors in your July 6 editorial ''License the Press,
Shackle the Press,'' which complained that Robert Rutka, a Canadian journalist,
had been expelled from the United States by the Treasury Department for his
failure to obtain a license to be a representative of Prensa Latina, Cuba's
press agency.

Mr. Rutka was not ''expelled.'' Rather, he was advised that U.S. law prohibited
persons within the United States from entering into economic transactions with
Cuban nationals. Mr. Rutka was thus prohibited from entering into transactions
with Prensa Latina Canada because that firm is controlled by Prensa Latina, a
Cuban company, and hence is a national of Cuba under the Cuban Assets Control
Regulations.

Mr. Rutka was not required to cease his journalistic activities in the United
States. He was informed only that, without a Treasury license, he could not
enter into transactions with Prensa Latina Canada. He did not choose to apply
for a license.

The advice to Mr. Rutka did not, as you stated, ''require an elastic reading''
of the Trading With the Enemy Act. Since 1963, under every administration since
and including that of President Kennedy, all persons subject to U.S.
jurisdiction have been prohibited from entering into transactions with
Cuban-controlled firms, except as licensed by the Treasury Department.

You also claim that a ''Florida- based airline'' was penalized because copies of
Time and Newsweek were found among its cargoes to Cuba. In fact, American
Airways Charters was prosecuted for entering into numerous transactions in
violation of the same Cuban embargo, including the transportation to Cuba of a
variety of commodities and related transfers of funds. Ultimately, American
Airways Charters was determined to be a ''national'' of Cuba after a finding
that it was substantially owned and controlled by the Cuban Government.  Your
editorial's implication that the comprehensive embargoes on transactions with
Cuba, North Korea, Vietnam, Kampuchea and their nationals amount to a scheme of
press licensing in the U.S. is both unwarranted and unfair. To the contrary,
considerable care has been taken to ensure that the effect of these four
programs on the press is minimal.

For example, transactions related to travel to Cuba by U.S. journalists are
automatically licensed under the Cuban embargo regulations. Similarly licensed
are the importation into the United States of news material from Cuba, the
broadcasting of news programs from Cuba and the importation of Cuban newspapers
and magazines by single-copy subscription.

In sum, the purpose of the embargoes against Cuba and the three other countries
is to deny trade advantages and hard currency to these countries and their
nationals, not to impair First Amendment rights. Your conclusions
notwithstanding, Treasury's sensitivity to these rights is apparent from a
reading of the implementing regulations.

JOHN M. WALKER JR.  Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Enforcement and
Operations Washington, July 10, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 18, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MANILA SEEN AT 'CRITICAL STAGE'

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 314 words

DATELINE: MANILA, July 17


Social and economic pressures in the Philippines are reaching a ''critical
stage'' and unless there is a change of course, the country may turn Communist
within the decade, Representative Stephen J. Solarz, chairman of the House
subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, said here this week.

''If the current trends are not arrested,'' Mr. Solarz said in an interview,
''then by the end of the 1980's we could see a situation here like Vietnam, not
in the sense of a commitment of large numbers of American troops but in that
there may be a Communist takeover of the Government.''

Mr. Solarz's comments come at a time when the Communist insurgency in the
Philippines is gaining strength, the economy is deteriorating and the frequency
of anti-Government demonstrations is increasing.

Mr. Solarz, a Brooklyn Democrat, is a frequent critic of President Ferdinand E.
Marcos, but his concern about the Communist insurgency in the Philippines is
shared by many Western diplomats and defense analysts here and in Washington.

Estimates vary on the current strength of the New People's Army, the armed
guerrillas of the Communist movement, but there is agreement that its numbers
are rising. In May, Mr. Marcos said the size of the New People's Army had
increased 25 percent since 1982, to 6,800 armed insurgents.  Western analysts
place the strength of the force at 9,000 to 10,000 guerrillas, while leaders of
the insurgent group claim as many as 20,000.

Most foreign diplomats say the insurgency is ''manageable'' and should not pose
a genuine threat to the Government, so long as social and economic improvements
are carried out.

''Improve the standard of living of the average Filipino and the problem of the
N.P.A. would take care of itself,'' said Mr. Solarz, who conferred with
Government officials, opposition leaders and Western diplomats during a two-day
visit here.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 18, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Returns Bones Believed of Americans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 134 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, July 17


Vietnam turned over bones believed to be those of eight American servicemen
today.

The bones, packed in separate wooden crates, were checked briefly at Hanoi's Noi
Bai Airport by United States specialists and loaded onto an Air Force cargo
plane for transport to a military identification center in Hawaii.

Officials from both countries said they would soon resume quarterly technical
meetings to discuss Americans listed as missing in action in the Vietnam War.

Richard Stevenson, a public affairs officer with the United States Pacific
Command, said the talks would probably resume by the end of August. They were
interrupted last year by Vietnam, which was angry over American criticism that
Hanoi was dragging its feet on the issue.

Hanoi has previously returned the remains of 88 Americans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 18, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE DEMOCRATS IN SAN FRANCISCO;
Today's Calendar

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 530 words


Caucuses: With debate on the platform over and nomination of the national ticket
assured, only the really persistant Democratic subgroups are still holding
caucuses to get their signals straight. Asian Pacific Caucus, 11 A.M. Eastern (8
A.M. Pacific); Women, noon Eastern (9 A.M. Pacific); Hispanic, 1:30 P.M. Eastern
(10:30 A.M. Pacific).

National Pastime: Although the full game may overlap the afternoon convention
session somewhat, the Oakland A's, the local American League entry, will hold a
lunch for delegates and alternates during their game with the Boston Red Sox at
the Oakland Coliseum. 2 to 6 P.M. Eastern (11 A.M. to 3 P.M. Pacific).

Foreign Visitors:Mayor Dianne Feinstein will hold a reception for members of the
diplomatic corps who are in town to observe an American political convention,
appropriately enough at the California Palace of the Legion of Honor, a
reproduction of its Paris namesake. 1 P.M. Eastern (10 A.M.  Pacific). Many of
the guests are expected to move on to the Olympics in Los Angeles after the
convention closes.

First Lady Designee:Joan Mondale will be keeping busy off the floor,
breakfasting with the Pennsylvania delegation, speaking to the South Carolina
caucus and brunching at the Texas delegation's Fiesta, as well as visiting a
local art gallery. Later, she plans to go to the convention hall to hear the
nominating speeches.

The Hall:Meanwhile, back at the Moscone Center, the delegtes will be called to
order at 4:30 P.M. Eastern (1:30 P.M. Pacific) for an afternoon of miscellaneous
cheerleading and deploring. Early speakers will include Gov. Charles S. Robb of
Virginia and Representatives Gillis W. Long of Louisiana, chairman of the House
Democratic Caucus, and Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, chairman of the House Ways
and Means Committee. As the afternoon progresses and delegates filter in from
their hotels and the ballgame, they will hear from such luminaries as Jim
Hightower, the Texas Commissioner of Agriculture; Joan Growe, the Secretary of
State of Minnesota, who is running for the United States Senate, and Gov. Robert
Kerry of Nebraska, representing Vietnam veterans. 6 to 8:30 P.M. Eastern (3 to
5:30 P.M. Pacific).

Early Highlight: Senator Gary Hart of Colorado, who has the second-largest
number of delegates, will speak, 8:30 P.M. Eastern (5:30 P.M. Pacific. If he
does not pledge undying loyalty to the Mondale-Ferraro ticket, it will be taken
as a sign that he plans a somewhat more prominent role at the 1988 convention.

Real Highlight: The business for which the Democrats came to San Francisco will
begin at 9:25 P.M. Eastern (6:25 Pacific), when nominating speeches for the
three Presidential candidates get under way. As of Tuesday, Senator Bill Bradley
of New Jersey is to nominate Mr. Mondale and Senator Christopher J. Dodd of
Connecticut, Senator Hart. Whether or not some candidates withdraw, there will
be the usual roll-call of the states, with the usual tourism promotions, before
the Democratic Presidential nominee is formally certified and the third
convention session adjourns about 11:30 P.M. Eastern (8:30 P.M. Pacific).
Warren Weaver Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: schedule

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 18, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

OFF-THE-RECORD RULE SOUGHT

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 320 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 17


The Defense Department's top information officer said today that he had
recommended that all remarks senior military officers make at war college
seminars be off the record so officers can speak freely and avoid controversy.

The spokesman, Michael Burch, who is Assistant Secretary of Defense for public
affairs, told reporters today that he had made his recommendations after the
publication of remarks by Vice Adm. James A. Lyons, Deputy Chief of Naval
Operations, and Lieut. Gen. Bernard E. Trainor of the Marines last month at a
Naval War College seminar in Newport, R.I.

At the seminar, Admiral Lyons strongly criticized the War Powers Act as
''insidious'' and called it an impediment that should be removed. The act,
passed in the wake of the Vietnam War, curbs a President's authority to commit
troops to combat without Congressional consent.

General Trainor drew public attention by saying that a limited war with the
Soviet Union is ''almost an inevitable probability.''

Academic Setting Cited


Some reporters were present when the two officers addressed students at the war
college.

Mr. Burch, when asked today about the admiral's criticism of the War Powers Act,
said, ''The remarks were given in an academic environment of the war college.''

''This should be treated as an academic pursuit and should be off the record,''
he said.

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has said he has no intention of
disciplining Admiral Lyons and General Trainor.

''This was a conference at the Naval War College where matters of this kind are
discussed and some of the problems raised,'' Mr. Weinberger said on June 25. He
added that such conferences ''are helped by the feeling that people can talk
freely.''

The Secretary made it clear that he disagreed with General Trainor's view of the
prospects of an armed clash with the Soviet Union. He declined to comment on the
War Powers Act.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 19, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HOSPITAL HELICOPTERS: WIDER USE STIRS DEBATE

BYLINE: By GLENN COLLINS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1886 words

DATELINE: LOUISVILLE, Ky.


Emergency helicopter services operated by hospitals are proliferating around the
nation, setting off a debate on their value and cost.

Proponents say the helicopters save lives by speeding people to hospitals in
emergencies, particularly in rural areas. But critics contend that they are
often dispatched unnecessarily, that their use is driving up the cost of care
for all medical consumers and that they are often employed as image- builders by
hospital administrators.

Lifting off from helipads on hospital roofs and grounds, the helicopters are
able to deliver highly trained medical teams to accident scenes and pick up
patients and land them near hospital operating rooms and emergency facilities.

Nationally, there are close to 100 such hospital-based helicopter services,
according to Dr. Howard R. Champion, chief of the trauma service at the
Washington Hospital Center, which has its own air-ambulance program called
MedStar. ''And the number is growing,'' he said.

On a recent day, one air ambulance, operated by Jewish Hospital in Louisville,
sped south over rural farms and fields and dropped to a landing on the two-lane
blacktop of Route 31E.

A nurse and a paramedic in blue jump suits cracked open the doors, then raced
under the turning rotors to Peter Coyne Jr., who lay critically injured on a
stretcher at the crown of the road. Nearby lay the wreckage of the van he had
been driving when it was hit head on by a pickup truck.

''I felt like the cavalry had arrived,'' the 37-year-old Mr. Coyne said later,
recalling the moment from a hospital bed in Louisville. ''There was no way I
could have survived a two-hour ambulance ride over the back roads of Kentucky.''

Instead, the 100-mile trip took 34 minutes by helicopter to reach a
sophisticated rehabilitation center where Mr. Coyne was treated for internal
injuries and for severe multiple fractures of the hips, knees, legs and ankles.

Although police, fire department and military rescue helicopters have long been
used to transport accident victims to medical facilities, the hospital-operated
air ambulances rely on a new generation of light, fast turbine-jet helicopters
that have an extended cruising range.

The hospital helicopters carry registered nurses, paramedics and, in some cases,
physicians, as well as specialized medical equipment. This, their advocates
contend, makes them superior to police and military air services primarily
intended for other uses.

In a small but growing number of cities, competitive hospitals have engaged in
battles that have been termed ''helicopter wars'' by critics, who charge that an
important function of the helicopters is to fill empty hospital beds in the
medical centers that run the air ambulances.

There are no hospital-based helicopters in New York City, where the Emergency
Medical Service established its Medivac program in 1982. It uses police
helicopters staffed with paramedics to take accident and burn victims to
hospitals.

Thus far, the only hospital helicopter ambulance in New York State is shared by
Children's Hospital and Mercy Hospital in Buffalo, although a number of
hospitals in the state have constructed helipads that enable police and military
helicopters to land.

In New Jersey or Connecticut there are no hospital-based helicopters, but
several institutions are waiting for state health departments to approve their
applications to start such services, including University Hospital in Newark and
Hartford Hospital in Connecticut.

In size, the hospital helicopter operations range from the nation's busiest at
the Hermann Hospital in Houston, which has five helicopters in a program that
runs 3,200 missions a year and costs more than $2 million, to more modest
operations like the one-helicopter, 500-mission-a-year program at Jewish
Hospital in Louisville.

Decision to Buy or Lease


Some institutions buy helicopters outright for $1 million to $2 million, but
most hospitals lease them, as well as the services of pilots and mechanics.
Vendors like Rocky Mountain Helicopters in Utah and Omniflight in Wisconsin have
done much to persuade hospital administrators to begin helicopter programs.

Dr. Champion said that several studies had established the benefit of such
services in delivering patients to hospitals quickly and in better condition
than they might have been after a long ground-ambulance ride. ''The recent data
from a number of centers show a substantial savings in life,'' he said. ''There
is absolutely no doubt that they have a place in regional health care systems.''
A study in The Journal of the American Medical Association last year compared
the survival rates of 150 trauma patients transported by helicopter in southern
California with 150 transported by ground ambulance. The research found that
there were 52 percent fewer deaths among those transported by helicopter.

Seeks to Establish Guidelines


But Dr. Champion said, ''There is no doubt that there is abuse, most generally
characterized by flying patients to megabuck trauma centers, when those patients
do not need to be there.'' Through medical professional groups, he is seeking to
establish stringent guidelines for the helicopters' use.

The patients who most benefit from helicopter ambulances are those suffering
from multiple trauma injuries, cervical spinal injuries, obstetrical
emergencies, heart attacks, severe burns, poisoning or drug overdoses.

According to the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association's national coordinating
office in Chicago, most of its 96 regional health plans provide reimbursement
for helicopter air-ambulance service. The cost of a flight can range from $500
to more than $2,000.

The majority of commercial insurance carriers also reimburse such helicopter
services, according to a spokesman for the Health Insurance Institute, the
insurers' coordinating group in Washington.

Matter of Increased Costs


However, Dr. Kenneth L. Mattox, professor of surgery at the Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston, said, ''Ultimately you and I pay for these expensive
gadgets, in the form of increased medical insurance costs when the services are
reimbursed by third-party carriers.''

An expert on emergency medicine who served as a physician in Vietnam, Dr. Mattox
has trained dozens of Army helicopter pilots in safety techniques. His
observation of hospital helicopter services around the country has led him to
conclude that they can be beneficial in rural and wilderness areas but that in
more urban areas they are often ''used as a public relations gimmick.''

A number of patients interviewed said they believed the expense was justified.
Mr. Coyne said, ''I'd have lost a leg at minimum, and probably I'd be dead if
the helicopter hadn't arrived.''

Praise From Patients


He is knowledgeable in such matters. An experienced emergency medical
technician, he has extricated many critically injured victims from wrecks as a
fireman in Newport, R.I. Because of the severity of his injuries, Mr. Coyne, who
was in Kentucky for a family reunion, has undergone four operations; he is
expected to be able to walk again.

The helicopter service was also praised by another patient, Trey Settles of
Elizabethtown, Ky., whose neck was broken in a car accident.

''I could have become a quadriplegic if it weren't for that helicopter,'' he
said. ''It was an hour's drive to the spinal cord injury center, and if we hit a
crater in the road, the doctors said, that might have been it.''

He was flown 57 miles by helicopter to Louisville in 14 minutes, and after
rehabilitation at Jewish Hospital, he has regained complete use of his arms and
legs.

Ambitious Program in Maryland


A publicly run system similar to New York City's Medivac exists on a more
ambitious statewide basis in Maryland, and in some areas public systems compete
with hospital-based helicopters.

Competition has also developed between hospitals themselves in a growing number
of cities, including Cleveland, Phoenix, Los Angeles, Omaha, Pittsburgh and
Louisville. ''Hospitals use these services for both altruistic reasons and for
reasons that involve billing,'' said Dr. Champion.

In some competitive situations, Dr. Mattox said, ''it's a throwback to the same
pattern of car-wreck chasing that we had in the 1950's.''

''The abuses of the proprietary ambulance systems led to the creation of
coordinating emergency medical systems,'' he said. ''Now, they're chasing
accidents with helicopters so the hospitals can get paying customers.''

Competition for Patients


''We certainly don't do any ambulance chasing,'' said Dr. Donald M. Thomas,
medical director of the Stat Flight helicopter service operated by Humana
Hospital University in Louisville.

Humana's red and white Aerospatiale Alouette III helicopter waits at its
Chestnut Street helipad, just four blocks away from Jewish Hospital's blue and
white Skycare helicopter, an Aerospatiale SD 350D Astar.

Both facilities have mounted public- relations and educational campaigns to
influence urban and rural emergency- service dispatchers. ''We've doubled the
number of hospitals making referrals to us,'' Dr. Thomas said.

Humana has the only top-level trauma center in the state, and Dr. Thomas said
the hospital looked upon the helicopter service ''as a plus, due to the extra
patients and extra public relations it generates.'' His hospital inaugurated its
service three months after Jewish Hospital began its Skycare program on July 1,
1982.

Henry C. Wagner, president of Jewish Hospital, de-emphasized the competition,
stressing that the helicopters landed on one another's helipads and cover for
one another in emergencies.

Cost Savings Are Predicted


''This healthy competition will bring down medical costs for everyone,'' Mr.
Wagner said. He asserted that the Skycare helicopter had lowered medical costs
in Kentucky ''because it prevented isolated hospitals from thinking that they
needed to duplicate services'' already available at Jewish Hospital.

Financially, both the Skycare and Stat Flight programs are now breaking even,
said Dr. Thomas. Reimbursement from insurance carriers and other sources only
partly covers the expense of the services.

''We justify Skycare as a business transaction,'' said Mr. Wagner, ''through the
net added revenues the hospital enjoys from hospitalization expenses of the
extra patients brought here.''

Federal Intervention Opposed


The proliferation of helicopter ambulance services is so new that they have not
come under Government regulation. All those in the medical community interviewed
said they were opposed to Federal intervention. ''The medical professional
societies should take charge here, and not the Federal Government,'' said Dr.
Mattox.

Whatever their value, the number of such services ''is multiplying,'' said Karl
Gills. He is president of Ashbeams, the American Society of Hospital-Based
Emergency Air Medical Services, a national organization that began in 1980 with
13 member hospitals. The membership is now 62.

''I think we'll see from four to five additional services by the end of this
year,'' said Mr. Gills, ''and I wouldn't be surprised to see 10 more in the
following year.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of member of rescue team (page B22)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 19, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
POLITICIAN IN THE MINNESOTA TRADITION

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1756 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, July 18


Two days before Walter F. Mondale became the Democratic Party's 28th
Presidential nominee, the Minnesotan spoke of his childhood dreams to a group of
schoolchildren here.  ''I used to dream that maybe I could be an alderman,'' he
said quietly. ''I grew up a poor kid in southern Minnesota, and here I am with a
good shot at the Presidency.''

Tonight his nomination at the party convention ended a fierce primary campaign
in which the former Vice President staged a dramatic political comeback after
unexpectedly losing early contests to Senator Gary Hart of Colorado. Mr. Mondale
finally gathered enough delegates to claim the nomination, and in the process
surprised even his own staff with a bluntness, a scrappiness and a physical
stamina that had not been seen earlier.

''I had to demonstrate to the American people that my case had merit,'' Mr.
Mondale said several weeks ago. ''I wanted my family to know that their Dad had
some beliefs and some values and was willing to fight for those beliefs and
values, and that I wasn't a quitter.''



Shoeless and Ashamed


On a personal level, Mr. Mondale's career embodies a classic American dream. One
of seven children of an impoverished minister, Mr. Mondale grew up in the Middle
Western flatlands and first visited the Senate when he was 10 years old, ashamed
because his feet were bare.

On a public level, Mr. Mondale's career embodies another classic American
strain. Ambitious, shrewd and hard-working, Mr. Mondale was, and is, a
Democratic liberal whose social commitment and zeal have been tempered by
political caution and restraint and compromise.

''I think that when a person goes into public life, he should try to be
effective,'' Mr. Mondale remarked in 1978, in the midst of his Vice Presidency
under Jimmy Carter. ''He should try to figure out how to make progress, bring
people along, unify, calm people, try to keep a rational dialogue. I think you
have to ration the number of disputes that you can get involved in.

''I don't like to shout, and I don't like to lose.''



More Formal in Public


Geri Joseph, a longtime friend from Minnesota, said recently, ''Fritz will do
things that put him in a controversial position, but he's not a daring person,
he's not impulsive, he's not a risk-taker.''

Personally and privately, Mr. Mondale is funny and blunt, a man who enjoys
loosening his shirt collar and smoking an expensive Macanudo cigar and sipping
Scotch. Publicly, however, he cloaks himself in buttoned-down formality, even
stiffness. His speaking style is often desultory, and his speeches ramble.

Even his friends have conceded that Mr. Mondale is a complex figure to
characterize, a politician whose determination to win the Presidency is blurred
by a natural reticence that somehow makes him far less formidable on television
than in person. Aides say that he rarely watches television and, unlike
President Reagan, is very uneasy with the medium.  ''I think there's something
about his upbringing, his Norwegian heritage, that says to be formal in public
is to have good manners, to be a political figure you must wear a white shirt,
you must dress nicely and you must comport yourself with respect,'' said Maxine
Isaacs, Mr. Mondale's press secretary. ''The concept of dignity is very
important to him. You won't see him in funny hats.''

Mr. Mondale himself has said that as a child he ''always got spanked for
bragging.'' ''You were always taught that who you were must speak for
yourself,'' he said.

Finlay Lewis, Mr. Mondale's biographer, said: ''Mondale has a wall of reserve
around him that's very hard to penetrate. Of course, there's a charming side,
but it's not the same as real openness. There's a guarded quality, a line which
very few people are allowed to cross.''

A Record of Loyalty


Mr. Mondale's political rise has been marked by traditional liberal views
tempered by an unflamboyant record and loyalty to political patrons, notably
Hubert H. Humphrey, a fellow Minnesotan, and, later, Jimmy Carter. In the late
1960's Mr. Mondale was one of the few liberals to defend President Johnson's
conduct of the Vietnam War, largely because Mr. Humphrey was Vice President. Mr.
Mondale changed his views only in 1969, when Richard M. Nixon was in the White
House. Mr. Mondale has since called his failure to oppose the war earlier ''the
biggest mistake of my public career.''

In the Senate, Mr. Mondale's yearly approval ratings from the labor movement and
the liberal Americans for Democratic Action consistently hovered around 90
percent. Yet he won an important seat on the Finance Committee with the help of
Senator James O. Eastland of Mississippi, not a liberal favorite, and became a
supporter, rather than a foe, of the chairman, Russell Long of Louisiana.

Senate critics said Mr. Mondale's 12-year career in the Senate was relatively
modest, although others said he played key roles on such issues as open housing
and busing to achieve racial integration. Nonetheless, no major legislation bore
the Mondale name.

'Values Go Back to Minnesota'


Michael Berman, another Minnesotan, a longtime aide, said: ''There is a basic
belief system in Mondale. He doesn't wake up in the morning and decide which
issues are important today. He's basically a very decent human being whose
values and standards and approach to most problems are guided by values that go
back to Minnesota.''

Walter Frederick Mondale was born to a family of Norwegian ancestry in the tiny
village of Ceylon in southern Minnesota on Jan. 5, 1928. His father, Theodore
Sigvaard Mondale, was an impoverished farmer turned Methodist minister, who
spoke in a stammer and with a pronounced Norwegian accent. After his first wife,
Jessie, died of encephalitis, Theodore Mondale married Claribel Hope Cowan, a
former neighbor and part-time music teacher. Their second child was Walter, who
was known as Fritz from infancy.

The candidate often speaks warmly and emotionally in campaign speeches about his
mother and her battle against cancer. He rarely mentions his father, who was
apparently a stern and formidable figure.

''My father strongly adhered to what is called the 'social gospel','' Mr.
Mondale recalled. ''The notion that there are things that impose a social
responsibility on us, to be concerned about the problems of others, to help them
in any way we can. And I had that drilled into me from my first days.''

To the chagrin of his father, Fritz was known as a prankster who also used his
fists to fight the stereotype of a preacher's son. The Monddales moved from one
small pastorate to another in southwestern Minnesota until 1937, when they
settled in Elmore. In high school, Fritz used athletics as a passport to
popularity. He gained the nickname Crazy Legs, and was a star on the football,
basketball and track teams. He was also a talented enough singer to earn money,
''in a screeching baritone,'' as he later said, at weddings and funerals.

Two Colleges in Minnesota


After graduating from high school in 1946, Mr. Mondale enrolled at Macalaster
College, a small liberal arts school in St. Paul. To pay his tuition he took odd
jobs and spent summers working on farms. He dropped out for a year after his
father died in 1949, and then attended the University of Minnesota as soon as he
had saved enough money. In 1951 he graduated cum laude with a B.A. degree.

In his teen-age years Mr. Mondale considered social work or teaching his career,
but late in 1946 he witnessed a speech by Mr. Humphrey, then Mayor of
Minneapolis, about the need to merge the Democratic and Farmer-Labor Parties.

The college student ''had never heard anything quite like it,'' wrote Finlay
Lewis, in his biography, ''Mondale.'' Mr. Mondale shook hands with Mr. Humphrey,
who introduced the young man to Orville L. Freeman, Mr. Humphrey's campaign
manager.

Soon Mr. Mondale was organizing student volunteers, popularly known as the
''diaper brigade,'' who helped Mr. Humphrey; Mr. Freeman, later Secretary of
Agriculture in the Kennedy Administration; Karl F. Rolvaag, and others in the
struggle to oust ultraleftists from the Democratic- Farmer-Labor party.

Worked in Washington


In the following years, Mr. Mondale's political activism grew. He worked in Mr.
Humphrey's campaign for the United States Senate and, in 1949, went to
Washington with Mr. Humphrey to serve as executive secretary of Students for
Democratic Action, the campus affiliate of the A.D.A. In 1950 Mr. Mondale
managed Mr. Freeman's unsuccessful bid for State Attorney General.

Mr. Mondale served as an Army enlisted man from 1951 to 1953 at Fort Knox, Ky.
Upon his discharge he enrolled at the University of Minnesota Law School under
the G.I. bill.

On a blind date, he met Joan Adams, the daughter of a Presbyterian minister, who
was working at a Minneapolis museum. After a brief courtship, in which Miss
Adams's mother voiced doubts about the match because the young couple seemed
intent only on attending political meetings, the two were married. They have
three children, Ted, 26, a Mondale campaign worker; Eleanor, 24, an actress in
Hollywood, and William, 22, a sophomore at Brown University.

Mr. Mondale practiced law from 1956 to 1960 before Mr. Freeman, then Minnesota's
Governor, appointed him state Attorney General to fill an unexpired term. In
1964 he was appointed to the United States Senate to fill Mr. Humphrey's seat
when Mr. Humphrey became Vice President.

Mr. Mondale's reputation for caution, and perhaps lack of zeal, marked his
Senate career, a reputation that became harder to shed after he dropped out of
the 1976 Presidential race in 1974 because he said he did not have ''the
overwhelming desire to be President.''

Influential With Carter


As Vice President, Mr. Mondale emerged as an influential adviser to Mr. Carter,
who still refers to the Minnesotan as ''my partner.''

Mr. Mondale found himself out of public office for the first time in 20 years
when Mr. Carter lost his bid for re-election in 1980. He joined the Washington
office of the Chicago- based law firm, Winston & Strawn, and delivered lectures
as a visiting professor at three universities in Minnesota. Almost immediately,
he began planning his 1984 Presidential campaign, and on Feb. 21, 1983,
announced his candidacy for the Presidency in St. Paul.

''I know myself,'' said Mr. Mondale. ''I am ready. I am ready to be President of
the United States.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of New Jersey delegates (page A20)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 19, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

COAST MAN KILLS 20 IN RAMPAGE AT A RESTAURANT

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1096 words

DATELINE: SAN YSIDRO, Calif., July 18


An unemployed security guard armed with three guns strode into a McDonald's
restaurant in this town on the Mexican border today and killed 20 people and
wounded 16 others before a police sharpshooter shot him dead.

The dead included customers at the McDonald's, several of them children, and a
number of employees.

Sgt. Robert Nunley of the police said the gunman, carrying a bag of ammunition,
had ordered those in the restaurant to lie prone. When an employee picked up a
telephone to call the police, the gunman began firing at those on the floor.
Later, he fired indiscriminately at adults and children outside the restaurant.

''It's an absolute massacre,'' said Comdr. Larry K. Gore. ''It's a total
disaster inside the facility.''



He Had Recently Lost a Job

The gunman was identified by the San Diego police as James Oliver Huberty, 41
years old, of San Ysidro. Sergeant Nunley said Mr. Huberty was married, with two
children, and had moved to San Ysidro from Ohio seven months ago. The San Diego
Police Chief, Bill Kolender, said Mr. Huberty was dismissed from a job as a
security guard at a condominium a few days ago.

Mr. Kolender said Mr. Huberty was wearing fatigue trousers and a dark shirt at
the time of the shootings.

Mr. Huberty's wife, who was not immediately identified, was being questioned by
the police tonight.



Toll May Be Largest for a Day

United Press International said an initial check of its records showed that the
killings were the largest toll by a single gunman in a single day in the
nation's history. In 1966, Charles J. Whitman killed 16 people and wounded 31
when he fired from atop a tower on the campus of the University of Texas in
Austin.

The gunman apparently opened fire inside the restaurant about 4 P.M. The police
said he was armed with a semi-automatic rifle, a shotgun and a pistol and
withstood a police siege for more than an hour.

One unidentified witness said: ''Even people on the floor were moaning. He would
go through the crowd picking them off one by one. Even children on bicycles were
gunned down as they tried to ride to safety.'' The gunman's motive was not
immediately known. A San Diego police officer, Arthur Velasquez, one of the
first at the scene, said an injured person had told him the gunman yelled ''that
he had killed many in Vietnam and he wanted to kill more.''

However, Sergeant Nunley said there was no confirmation of that report.

The restaurant, on a two-lane road parallel to Interstate 5, is just north of
the Mexican border and 16 miles south of downtown San Diego. It is surrounded by
small businesses, a post office, a bank and several houses.

Officer Velasquez said that when he arrived, ''the suspect was firing
everywhere, at anything that moved.'' He added: ''I saw bodies lying outside,
adults and children. Some were still alive. I sadly witnessed him killing a man
laying next to his wife who had already been shot.''

Some of the dead and wounded were said to be children in a McDonald's playground
next to the restaurant.

Seventeen of the bodies, including the assailant's, were inside the restaurant
and four were outside.

Commander Gore said the gunman ''was shooting everything that was in sight,
including a victim on the freeway, several people outside the restaurant, 10 or
11 inside the facility.''

''I'm told that he came into the restaurant carrying rifles and just began
shooting - everything he could shoot. It's just a tragic, tragic scene here.''

3 Hospitals Treat Wounded


The wounded were taken to at least three hospitals. Stacy Rosebrough, a
spokesman for Bay Hospital Medical Center in nearby Chula Vista, said seven of
the wounded were at Bay Hospital, all in fair condition or better.

Two of the wounded there were identified. Juan Acosta, 33, of Tijuana, Mexico,
suffered gunshot wounds in the left knee and arms and was said to be in fair
condition. Felix Astalfo, 26, of San Diego, sustained minor injuries of the
chest and neck.

Vera Brewer, nursing supervisor at University of California San Diego Hospital,
said three persons were admitted at that hospital. Maricela Flores, 23, of San
Diego, was in critical condition with wounds of the face, chest and pelvis.
Ronald Herrera, 25, of Orange, Calif., was in critical condition with neck and
chest wounds. An unidientified woman was in critical condition with a wound in
the head.

Miss Brewer said the hospital was receiving many calls from people who believed
their friends or relatives were at the restaurant at the time of the shooting.

Robert Boland, a spokesman for Community Hospital in Chula Vista, said his
hospital had received five of the wounded. Francisco Lopez, 22, of San Ysidro,
and Guadalupe del Rio, 24, of Tijuana, suffered gunshot wounds and were treated
and released.

An 11-year-old boy and an 11-year-old girl, whose names were withheld, also
suffered gunshot wounds and were admitted at the hospital. An unidientified baby
of 4 to 6 months old who was reportedly passed to a bystander by her wounded
mother was taken to the hospital with scattered gunshot wounds and was listed in
stable condition.

The police went to the scene after getting a report that a child had been killed
outside the restaurant. Mike Rosario, the first officer on the scene, summoned
help and several police cars quickly arrived.

More than 10 police officers crouched behind their cars as the gunman kept
picking out targets.

''I could see the suspect walking back and forth,'' said Officer Velasquez.
''He'd been shooting several rounds off at a time.''

Slain by Special Police Team


The siege did not end until a police special weapons and tactics team arrived.
The team was immediately given a ''green light'' to shoot the gunman, Officer
Velasquez said. A police sharpshooter, firing a rifle from the roof of the post
office next door to the restaurant, fired the shot that killed the gunman.

Chief Kolender described the scene as a ''sickening massacre,'' adding, ''It's
the most terrible thing I've ever seen in my life, and I've been in the business
28 years.''

The gunman evidently spared some of the customers inside the restauarnt. Officer
Velasquez estimated that 30 people were inside the restaurant when the shooting
began.

''It was terrible,'' said one of the survivors, a McDonald's employee. ''If
anybody moved, he just shot them.''

All the windows in the restaurant were shot out. Emergency workers removed
several bodies from inside the restaurant and took survivors to a nearby
building for emergency treatment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 7, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
EDITORS' NOTE

Under this heading, The Times amplifies articles or rectifies what the editors
consider significant lapses of fairness, balance or perspective.

Dispatches on July 19 carried first details of the mass slaying at a fast-food
restaurant in San Ysidro, Calif.

An article in some early editions said a heavily armed man had killed at least
15 people before being slain by a police sharpshooter. A police spokesman was
quoted as saying that the gunman, still unidentified, was believed to be a
Hispanic man.

As the situation became clearer, the police reported that 20 people had been
killed and 16 wounded, and identified the killer as James Oliver Huberty. The
ethnic identification proved incorrect.

Even if the ethnic identification had been accurate, however, the comment should
not have been published. Like many other newspapers, The Times has a policy of
omitting racial, religious or ethnic identifications unless they are shown by
the article to be pertinent to the news - as a cause of conflict, for example,
or as part of the description of a fugitive. In this case, ethnic identity never
became pertinent.  Page D1

GRAPHIC: photo of destruction (page A24); photo of police officer and victim

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 19, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE BENEFITS OF A U.S. PRESENCE IN HANOI

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 401 words


To the Editor:


Your July 6 news story ''Shultz Seeks to Assure Asians on China Arms'' erred in
stating that the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean)
and the United States have agreed not to establish diplomatic relations or
provide assistance to Vietnam until it accepts a plan for pulling its troops out
of Cambodia and having internationally supervised elections.''

Of the six Asean members, five (Indochina, Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines
and Singapore) maintain diplomatic relations with Vietnam and, except for
Singapore, have embassies in Hanoi. They maintain a dialogue (however erratic)
on the Cambodian problem with Hanoi's leaders.

After almost six years of unyielding Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia, the case
has not been convincingly made that freezing the United States out of a
diplomatic relationship with Vietnam will further Asean's (and Washington's)
goal of an independent Cambodia.

Why can't the United States be a strong advocate where it counts - in Hanoi -
and, at the same time, drive a wedge into the Soviets' threatening military
buildup in Vietnam by offering Hanoi an alternative? With a presence in Hanoi,
U.S. officials also would be in a better position to gather information about
the almost 2,500 American servicemen still listed as missing in action.  You
also reported that some Asean countries ''have urged Washington to provide the
Sihanouk and Son Sann forces with military equipment or cash to buy arms.''
Washington's public position is that it will provide only humanitarian aid to
the Cambodian refugees inside Thailand and political support for Cambodia's
resistance coalition government seated at the United Nations.  However, reports
are beginning to surface that the United States already may be funneling direct
covert aid (probably cash payments) to the Sihanouk and Son Sann forces (see Far
Eastern Economic Review, June 28, p.16). If such reports prove accurate, and if
Asean prevails upon Secretary Shultz during their consultations in Jakarta this
month, there is a danger that the United States will increasingly resort to
covert military assistance instead of diplomatic initiatives ( a la Nicaragua)
to underpin its foreign policy in Indochina.

DAVID J. SCHEFFER Cambridge, Mass., July 7, 1984

The writer is an associate at Harvard University's Center for International
Affairs.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 19, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI TO TALK ANEW ON LOST AMERICANS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 699 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, July 18


Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that the Hanoi Government had
agreed to meet again next month on the issue of the nearly 2,500 Americans
unaccounted for from the Vietnam War.

He made the disclosure in a speech to the Honolulu Council on Foreign Relations.
Mr. Shultz arrived on Tuesday at the end of a 10-day trip to Hong Kong,
Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Australia and New Zealand.

On Tuesday, Vietnam handed over the remains of what it believed to be eight
Americans, and they arrived today at Hickam Air Force Base here from Manila. A
special armed forces center here will try to confirm the tentative
identifications.

The technical talks with Vietnam on the possible whereabouts of the 2,490 still
listed as missing, most of them now believed dead, began in mid-1982 and were to
be held every three months.

Talks Were Suspended in '83

But after a session in June 1983, the Vietnamese canceled further meetings after
being criticized by the United States Government and by the National League of
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Families, which will hold its annual meeting in Washington this
weekend to discuss the issue of possible remaining prisoners of war and missing
in action.

Aides to Mr. Shultz said about half the missing were believed to have been
killed in action. In those cases, where planes were seen crashing, a military
aide said, there is no expectation of anything more than receiving the remains
if the Vietnamese were to cooperate by sending search teams to areas where the
United States knows the planes crashed.

The aide said there were 400 to 500 Americans on which ''a reasonable effort by
the Vietnamese ought to come up with positive results.''

An area of particular concern involves 50 to 60 Americans who were photographed
alive in Vietnam after being captured or were seen alive soon after falling into
Vietnamese hands. The Vietnamese have provided no information on them.

150 'Live Sightings' Reported

In addition, aides said, there have been 150 ''live sightings.'' These
sightings, often reported by Vietnamese refugees, are unverified accounts of
Vietnamese seeing unidentified whites in remote areas. These purported sightings
have generated periodic rumors that some Americans might still be alive in
Vietnam.

Aides to Mr. Shultz said that, while it could not be definitively ruled out that
some Americans might be alive, there was no supporting evidence to indicate that
there were any.

By 1979, the Vietnamese said every living American had been returned. But then
came the repatriation of Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marines, who had stayed
behind, and his case cast doubt on Vietnam's assurances.

An aide said 17 full-time analysts in the Defense Intelligence Agency keep track
of the missing-in-action category and of reports of possible sightings.

Two Criteria for Hanoi Ties

The United States has said that it will not establish diplomatic relations with
Vietnam until two criteria are met: All the missing in action must be accounted
for, and Vietnam must agree to an acceptable formula for removing its 160,000
troops from Cambodia.

In the Honolulu speech, Mr. Shultz reflected the Reagan Administration's view
that Asia was the area offering the most opportunity in the future for American
policy makers.

Noting American economic interests and diplomatic efforts in the region, he put
particular stress on the need for a strong United States military presence. He
said there was ''an enormous concentration of military power'' by nations
unfriendly to the United States and its allies. He mentioned Vietnam, North
Korea and the Soviet Union.

As to the question of military cooperation with China, an issue he found to be
sensitive to Southeast Asian countries like Malaysia and Indonesia that are
concerned about possible Chinese expansionism, Mr. Shultz said:

''Careful discussions have begun on ways in which American technology and
equipment might better enable China to counter Soviet military intimidation.
This is an important development, but it is also an area where we give careful
consideration to the concerns of our allies and other friends in the region.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 19, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM HART SPEECH TO CONVENTION EXHORTING PARTY FOR CAMPAIGN

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2064 words


Following are excerpts from a transcript of the address by Senator Gary Hart,
Democrat of Colorado, to the Democratic National Convention last night, as
recorded by The New York Times:

Five hundred days ago, I began a quest for the Presidency, a quest with many
ideas but with one driving theme - that our party and our nation need new
leadership, new directionand new hope.

Since that day, during months of struggle and against great odds, millions of
Americans have joined this cause, and together we stand tonight at the gateof
change.

Since my earliest student volunteer days 24 years ago, I have shared the ideal
that one person can make a difference, and that every person should try.
Together, you and I have tried - and together, we have made a difference.

Whatever this convention's judgment, Lee, Andrea, John and I are eternally
grateful to all of you who helped make our dream come true.

To our delegates who have given the word ''loyalty'' new meaning, to the
thousands of Americans across this land who opened your homes to us, to the tens
of thousands who have distributed leaflets and contributed dollars, to the
millions who voted for us, you have our deepest gratitude and our affection. By
your acts of dedication and faith you have created a new legacy of hope - the
hope that people, far more than politicians and pundits, still make the
difference.

To all of you have joined our cause to make this a better nation and a better
world, I say with the poet: ''Think where man's glory most begins and ends, and
say my glory was I had such friends.''

Praise for Outstanding Competitors


To my outstanding competitors - John Glenn, Fritz Hollings and Reubin Askew, to
George McGovern and to Alan Cranston - your contribution to the revival of our
party was enormous. You make us proud to be Democrats.

To Jesse Jackson, you have been this party's voice for the voiceless, the
shut-out and the let-down. And I am proud to be a member of a party that
encourages Shirley Chisolm and Jesse Jackson to run for President.

To Fritz Mondale, my friend and colleague, you have honored me by being an
opponent of unsurpassed grit, perserverance and determination.

To Geraldine Ferraro, a true political pioneer, I only regret that I did not
pick you first. Since she was a child I told my daughter Andrea that she could
achieve anything within the limits of her energy and ambition.

To the Republicans, I say this: Take no comfort from this Democratic family
tussle. Ronald Reagan has provided all the unity we need. Not one of us is going
to sit this campaign out. You have made the stakes too high.

And to the Democrats in this hall, in a few moments you will make one of the
most important decisions of your lives. You will decide which candidate has the
best chance to defeat Ronald Reagan and become the next President of the United
States.

A Referendum on Our Future


Whatever the outcome of your decision, I make to you two pledges: First, that I
will devote every waking hour and every ounce of energy to the defeat of Ronald
Reagan; and second, that our party and our country will continue to hear from
us.

This is one Hart you will not leave in San Francisco.

This is not simply another national election, a choice between parties or even a
contest of ideologies. This election is a referendum on our future - perhaps
even whether our children will have a future.

For this election, this election is more than a popularity contest. There is
something more important than the polls and all the short-term numbers that
quickly become yesterday's headlines. At issue is the fate of a little girl in
New Hampshsire whose family lives next to a toxic waste dump. That little girl
suffers from respiratory illness, and every night her parents lay awake in dread
because twice before this child has literally stopped breathing, surrounded by
the silent poison.

At issue in this campaign is the farmer in West Texas who's losing his land and
his way of life. At issue in this campaign is the Hispanic child in East Los
Angeles who may be doomed to a second-class life because of a second-class
education.

At issue in this campaign is the fate of millions of children in Central America
who don't even have a knowledge of this country, much less a vote, but for whom
will be decided whether the hand of America will come bearing the gifts of
peace, food and medicine, or come brandishing the instruments of death, guns and
bombs.

At issue in this campaign is the fate of all of us living in the world and all
of those yet unborn whose promise of life is held hostage to the growing
arsenals of nuclear megadeath.




We must defeat Ronald Reagan. And, we must replace his economic royalists. But
we must also offer a new generation of ideas to a new generation of voters.

Adlai Stevenson said it best: ''What counts is not so much what we are against,
as what we are for.''

We Democrats are for an opportunity economy, with women as equal partners; We
are so much for equality and justice that our sense of urgency demands immediate
ratification of the equal rights amendment; for school lunches for our children
and health care for the elderly, paid for by canceled unnecessary weapons
contracts; we are for a clean environment, without toxic terrorism; we are for
campaigns free of the influence of political action committee money; we
Democrats are for reformed and ready conventional defenses, but we are also for
an end to the folly that nuclear weapons create security.

These are things our party is for. This is what we as Democrats believe in to
achieve our goals. Our party and our nation must disenthrall themselves from the
policies of the comfortable past that do not answer the challenges of tomorrow.
The times change, and we must change with them. For the worst sin in political
affairs is not to be mistaken, but to be irrelevant.


Our party's greatest heritage is its willingness to change. We have failed when
we became cautious and complacent. We have won America's confidence when we were
bold and innovative.

The Party of Expermentation


Our party's great experimenter, Franklin Roosevelt, said it best at a critical
hour at the dawn of his Presidency. He said: ''We will try something, and if it
works we will keep it. If it doesn't, we'll try some thing else.''

The Democratic Party must continue to be the party of experiment ation, the
party of hope, and not the party of memory.

To honor this tradition, this tradition of chan ge in the 1980's and 90's, this
party must propose new solutions for new times . We need nothing less than a
blueprint for a new democracy .

We must rebuild the foundation of this nation's economy, not merely patch over
its wideing cracks.

We must adopt an industrial policy to modernize our manufacturing base. We must
re- employ dislocated workers to rebuild our urban infrastructure, our cities
and our public facilities.

And especially, we must invest in the education and training of our workers and
our young people and in research that will guarantee American leadership in
trade and technology.

A New Environmental Decade


But we must remember that a healthy economy cannot grow in a poisoned
environment. So I challenge this party and this nation to dedicate itself to a
new environmental decade - a decade in which we end contamination by acid rain,
clean up every toxic waste dump and become the faithful stewards of this
nation's national heritage.

Ronald Reagan and his gang of greedy polluters can no longer piously sing
''America the Beautiful'' while they scar her face, poison her air and corrupt
her waters. Let them remember that, while we inherit this land from our parents,
we merely borrow it from our children.

And it is for those children that we must learn to trade ideas and not insults
with our foreign adversaries. For we can create a world where conflict and
crisis between East and West are resolved not on the battlefield, but at the
bargaining table.

What possible greater gift can we offer our children than a more safe, and sane
and secure world?

What could more insure that world than a President committed to a negotiated
freeze on all nuclear weapons and the materials used to make them?

Remember this: A nuclear freeze today can prevent a nuclear winter tomorrow.

And let us abolish not only the threat of nuclear holocaust, but let us abolish
the blight of human hunger as well.

This Administration cannot cure a problem that it will not see. But the next
Administration must set two achievable goals: to end hunger in America in this
decade, and to challenge the Soviet Union to join us in a crusade to end hunger
in the world in this century.

A New Generation Is Coming of Age


These are the great challenges that we must be ready to meet and conquer. So
many of my generation faced our own personal challenges that bring us to this
moment of history. I was raised in a Kansas family that was poor on resources -
a family that was poor in resources but rich with confidence and with love. I
received my best education working with railroad crews of black and brown and
Asian laborers who also had little in their pockets, but a lot in their hearts.
What they had and what my parents had and what our campaign has had and what
characterizes all of us as Americans is one and the same thing - and that is
hope.

And now today a new generation of Americans is coming of age - a generation that
has a unique bond of tragedy and triumph. Our generation wept at the deaths of
John and Robert Kennedy and of Martin Luther King. We grieved at the tragedies
of Vietnam and we were dismayed at the travesty of Watergate.

But this generation also marched together in movements that altered the face of
American history: the civil rights movement, the women's movement, the
environmental movement, the peace movement - and we will make history yet again.

This generation was drawn to public service by the most inspiring President of
our time. ''Let the word go forth from this time and place,'' that President
said, ''that the torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans.''

Today the torch has been taken down from the Statue of Liberty. And if our
Government continues to replace the words ''Give me your tired, your poor, your
huddled masses yearning to breathe free,'' with, ''What's in it for me, tighten
your belt and show us your identification card,'' then they may as well leave
that torch on the ground.

Lighting a Torch of Hope


Our campaign has tried to lift and light that torch - a torch of hope beyond the
mundane politics of the moment, a torch of hope beyond the old arrangements and
the favored alliances, a torch of hope, in this urgent hour, that parties can
change, that leaders can change, that this nation can change.

This campaign has sought to touch that unique idealism that identifies us as
Americans, to keep alive the belief that each person can make a difference.

For I see an America where greed, self-interest and division are conquered by
idealism, by the common good and by the national interest.

I see an America too young to quit, too courageous to turn back, with a passion
for justice and a program for opportunity, an America with unmet dreams that
will not die.

Tonight the torch of idealism is lit in thousands of homes and tens of thousands
of towns and hundreds of thousands of lives, among the young in spirit and the
young in age. It cannot go out. It will not go out. It will continue to burn.

And because of that fire of commitment and hope, we will change the world. Many
who before had said, ''It doesn't matter, there's nothing I can do,'' will now
say, ''One person can make a difference, and every person should try.''

So we will never give up. Beyond the greed and the selfishness of the present
day and the reluctant hand of the past lies the promise and the hope of change.

For somewhere out there, in some small town, in some young life, the torch is
lit. And someday that young person - that young person, perhaps as President,
will change the world. But even if not - even if not, that young person will see
that the torch is passed to yet another generation.

And, if not now, some day, we must prevail.

If not now, some day, we will prevail.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gary Hart and family

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

NEIGHBORS TERM MASS SLAYER A QUIET BUT HOTHEADED LONER

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1663 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, July 19


The first inkling Wanda Hasely had that her quiet, unemotional neighbor
sometimes turned violent was about a week ago when his 13-year-old daughter came
to her apartment with welts on her face and said ''her daddy had slapped her
around.''

Today, the day after the neighbor, James Oliver Huberty, opened fire in a
McDonald's restaurant, killing 21 people and wounding 19 before being slain
himself, Mrs. Hasely and others who were acquainted with him - no neighbors or
co-workers seem to have known him well - painted the picture of a hotheaded
loner who had accumulated an arsenal of weapons.

In the days before and hours after the rampage, Mrs. Hasely said, she learned
that Mr. Huberty was an obsessive man who had already developed his 13-year-old
girl, Zelia, into a black- belt karate fighter, and slept, according to Mrs.
Hasely's daughter, with a gun under his pillow.

Bitterness Remembered


The police said today that there was ''no known motive'' for the massacre. but
that the 41-year-old gunman had ''seemed somewhat despondent over the loss of
his job.'' Today, Mr. Huberty was quoted by his wife, Etna, as saying ''I'm
going to hunt humans'' as he left their apartment Wednesday. In a television
interview, Mrs. Huberty said her husband was calm at the time and she did not
know what his words meant.

Until a few months ago, the Hubertys lived in Ohio.  A former co-worker there
said Mr. Huberty was particularly bitter about losing a welding job in 1982.

''He felt the country wasn't treating him right, that everything was being done
against working people,'' said James Aslanes, an acquaintance from the plant
there. Another co-worker, Terry Kelly, told The Akron Beacon Journal that at
that time Mr. Huberty ''was always talking about shooting somebody.''

Mr. Huberty was dismissed from a job as a security guard here a few days ago,
according to the police.

As the officials pondered the killer's motives, the community surrounding the
bullet-ridden hamburger restaurant was grappling this morning with what
officials were calling the worst mass slaying in United States history. Scores
of curious people crowded streets near the scene of the crime in the San Ysidro
community.

Neighbors said Mr. Huberty's wife packed up Zelia and the couple's 10-year-old
daughter, Cassandra, at dawn and left the apartment complex that struggled to
maintain a middle- class air in a down-at-the-heels neighborhood near the
Mexican border. A number of residents, fearing reprisal by what one called
''another crazy,'' had moved to motels.

Contributions to a Fund


Jean Kroc, the widow of the McDonald's founder, Ray Kroc, today contributed
$100,000 to set up a fund to provide burial expenses for the dead and counseling
for the families and survivors. At least 12 other people had contributed to the
fund by this afternoon, according to the police.  At the restaurant, victims
were cut down without warning by a relentless stream of gunfire from what the
police identified today as a 9-millimeter Uzi semiautomatic rifle, a 12-gauge
pump- action shotgun, and a 9-millimeter Browning semiautomatic pistol. .

Commander Larry K. Gore said the crumpled and bloody bodies lay everywhere -
across the counter, slumped at tables, sprawled on the floor. The toll rose to
21 today with the death of a woman who had been shot in the head.

The police said Mr. Huberty entered the restaurant dressed in trousers made of
camouflage cloth and a dark shirt, with no insignia or other unusual markings.
The guns were strapped around his body in plain view.

''He turned around and started shooting everything in sight,'' said Police Chief
Bill Kolender. ''The guy fired just eight million times.'' Mr. Huberty set a bag
containing a radio down on the restaurant counter, the police said today, and
used it to listen to news accounts of his actions.

No Military Record


Commander Gore said Mr. Huberty reloaded ''many times.'' He said that there was
evidence he was using armor-piercing ammunition and that the police were sure
some shots entered neighboring houses. Mr. Huberty continued to fire right up
until he was shot, the commander said.

One witness was reported to have said the gunman yelled that he had ''killed
many in Vietnam and he wanted to kill more,'' but Pentagon and Veterans
Administration officials in Washington said today that there was no record of a
James Oliver Huberty having served in the military.

The killer was depicted by neighbors as closed-mouthed and obsessive, but a man
who also sometimes pedaled contentedly with his family on bicycle outings and
saved his infrequent smiles for old people.

Although he recently lost his job, Mr. Huberty did not fit the classic profile
of the unemployed, according to neighbors. They described the family as
well-clothed and Mr. Huberty as a clean-cut dresser, ''like an executive.'' His
wife, they said, spoke vaguely of property and income elsewhere.

Hatred for Children


But the picture was edged in darkness in the observation of some neighbors that
he hated both children and people of Mexican descent, who are predominant in
this area. The massacre at the restaurant, a neighborhood gathering spot in the
heat of a sunny summer afternoon, took a heavy toll of both groups.

And in Ohio, some former co-workers described Mr. Huberty as ''a fanatic'' who
had negative feelings about the United States. Kenneth Schuler, who was his
foreman at the plant, told The Canton Repository: ''He had a lot of guns in the
house, and he always said that he wanted to kill a lot of people. We believed
him. It was just a question of when.''

Mrs. Hasely, who employed the two Huberty girls as babysitters in San Ysidro,
said Mr. Huberty and his wife ''had a terrible argument before he went to
McDonald's'' and speculated that may have precipitated the rampage.

Mrs. Hasely said her older daughter told her that Mr. Huberty appeared to
terrorize his wife and daughters and often screamed at them. But Vicente Zamora,
a 31-year-old unemployed clerk who lived in the apartment next door to the
Hubertys, said he never heard any yelling or other sounds of domestic trouble.

'Investments' Elsewhere


Mrs. Hasely said the Hubertys lived in a two-bedroom apartment at $475 a month.
She said Mr. Huberty had worked the 8 P.M.-to-2 A.M. shift as a security guard
but that Mrs. Huberty implied that he had taken the job only to get the
apartment. The neighbor said Mrs. Huberty had told her that the family had owned
an apartment elsewhere, had ''investments,'' had lived in Mexico, and had told
her ''I don't know why you have to have a job to prove you have income.''

Gun Under the Pillow


Mrs. Hasely, who said she knew the Hubertys better than anyone else in the
complex because Mrs. Huberty often accompanied her daughters when they came to
babysit, said Mrs. Huberty had told her that her husband had made Zelia learn
karate and that the girl had earned a black belt. She said he sought the lessons
after Zelia was beaten once by other children.

Just this morning, Mrs. Hasely said, her daughter Tamara told her Mr. Huberty
kept guns lying around in an upstairs bedroom, and that she had seen a revolver
under his pillow. She said Tamara, although 6 years old, ''knows what a gun is''
because there were hunters in the family.

In the television interview broadcast today on KFMB-TV, Mrs. Huberty said she
''felt sick'' when she learned of the slayings. She said she would take the
children back to Ohio. ''I don't want them pointed at,'' she said of the girls.
''I am extremely sorry for what happened. I wish I could undo what happened.''

Once an Undertaker


Mr. Huberty worked as a welder for 13 years at the Babcock & Wilcox Corportion
plant in Canton, Ohio, until it was closed in December 1982 because of slumping
demand for the electrical generating equipment produced there.

According to Mr. Aslanes, Mr. Huberty decided to leave the United States and
emigrate to Mexico with his wife and daughters after being laid off again in
1983, having worked for a month at the only job he had been able to find since
the Babcock & Wilcox closing.

Mr. Huberty originally set out to be an undertaker after spending several years
at Malone College, a small Quaker Institution in Canton. He worked as an
apprentice in a local funeral home for two years in 1964 and 1965 and was
licensed to work as an embalmer and funeral director. But he dropped out of the
business and went to work in industrial plants after completing the
apprenticeship.

''I told him he was in the wrong business,'' said Don Williams, owner of the
funeral home in Canton where Mr. Huberty worked. ''He was a good embalmer but he
just didn't relate to people. That's why he was better as a welder. He could
just pull that mask down and be by himself.''

Dislike for Mexicans


Jose Luis Palacio, a resident of the apartment complex where the Hubertys lived
here, said in an interview that the strongest impression Mr. Huberty had made
was that ''he didn't like kids.''

''Everybody talks about that here,'' Mr. Palacio said. ''He was always yelling
at kids.''

Mr. Huberty was ''never outside with his kids,'' said Mr. Zamora, the next- door
neighbor, adding that he doubted ''they had any friends because he was always
quiet.'' Mr. Palacio said that Mr. Huberty also did not like Mexicans, and that
nearly everybody in the building was of Mexican or Puerto Rican heritage.

Mr. Palacio, who is a professional bounty hunter, said that a day before the
massacre he encountered Mr. Huberty at the building's trash bin and was telling
him of trying to hunt down ''two Mexicans who jumped bail.''

''He got real upset,'' Mr. Palacio said. ''I was just telling him why I was
looking for them, and he got real mad about it. ''He said, 'Those Mexicans,
they're always getting into somebody else's business.' I didn't want to continue
the conversation. I'm Mexican.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 3, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Articles on July 20 and 22, about the killing of 21 people by a gunman in a
California restaurant, incorrectly described the event's place in history. The
worst American mass slaying on a single day occurred in 1955, when an explosion
on a passenger plane killed 44 people; John Gilbert Graham was executed for
having planted the bomb to collect his mother's life insurance.

GRAPHIC: photo of police (page B5); photo of James Oliver Huberty

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOR FUTURE STARS, CONVENTION IS AN AUDITION HALL

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, July 19


Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey has been circulating through this convention
city, speaking to state delegations about his plan for a revised tax structure.
After his talk, aides hand out paperback copies of his new book outlining the
plan.

The main purpose of this exercise is not literary enlightment.

In the back of the book is a printed form, and readers who agree with the New
Jersey Democrat are urged to send their names and addresses to the Senator's
office. These names could then form the core of a mailing list if the Senator
does in the future what many analysts expect him to do: run for President.

Any political convention is a showcase and an audition stage for the party's
rising stars, and Mr. Bradley's book is one of the more ingenious ways being
used by aspirants this week to promote their ambitions.

They Gaze Into Future


They give parties and go to parties. They shake as many hands, and address as
many microphones, and remember as many names, as they can. And they gaze at the
rostrum, where Walter F. Mondale greeted the delegates after winning the
nomination Wednesday night, and fancy that they see themselves.

The best way for a rising star to make a stir is to deliver a smashing speech to
the convention, and to the television audience back home. And there is little
doubt that Governor Cuomo has done more to burnish his reputation than any other
politician.

After the New Yorker's keynote speech there was even a brief flurry of ''draft
Cuomo'' talk among delegates unhappy with Mr. Mondale. That balloon never got
off the ground, but the Governor has, virtually overnight, made himself a
leading contender for four years from now, should the Republicans keep the White
House this year.

''People like me knew how good he was,'' said Martin D. Franks, director of the
Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. ''Now 80 million Americans know,
too.''

Hart Speech Well-Received


Senator Gary Hart, this year's runner-up, irritated many party leaders by not
accepting his inevitable defeat earlier in the process. They point out that the
Hart campaign disclosed many of the candidate's weaknesses, as well as his
strengths.

But Mr. Hart, while not rising to Mr. Cuomo's level of eloquence, gave a
well-received speech Wednesday night. And he made no secret of his future plans
when he told the convention, ''Some day, we will prevail.''

Many Democrats agree with Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the Speaker of
the House, when he said that the Rev. Jesse Jackson had secured ''a place in
history'' by his campaign, and his speech to the convention.

Mr. Jackson's role in future Presidential campaigns remains a question mark. But
he told the delegates, ''God is not through with me yet'' and many heard that as
a message he, too, would be back.

Kennedy in Private Role


Four years ago, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts sent a message when
he concluded his speech to the convention in New York by saying, ''The dream
shall never die.'' Mr. Kennedy stayed out of this year's race, and out of the
convention spotlight. But he played an active private role here, holding small
dinners every night for 15 or 20 influential Democrats.

As Representative Patricia Schroeder of Colorado noted, ''four years can be a
whole generation in politics,'' and handicapping the field for 1988 is highly
risky. Moreover, the choice of Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro for Vice
President has scrambled the calculations and sent fantasies soaring among young
Democrats.

''They all think they can move quickly now, that you don't have to wait the way
you did in the past,'' said one senior Democratic strategist. ''All the younger
members of Congress are jealous of her, and many of them are saying, if she can
do it, why can't I?''

Among these younger Democrats, one receiving a lot of notice is Bob Kerrey, the
40-year-old Governor of Nebraska, a disabled Vietnam veteran who introduced
Senator Hart.

''The guy went to war, he did the right thing, and he just leaps across on TV,''
said one party official.

Other Governors Prominent


Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who is only 37, received good reviews for his
platform appearance on the first night of the convention. And Gov. Martha Layne
Collins of Kentucky, the chairman of the convention, won praise for handling a
sometimes unruly crowd.

When Representative Ferraro was tabbed for bigger things, she gave up her role
as chairman of the platform committee. That gave Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of
Massachusetts, who was briefly mentioned for the Vice Presidency, a chance to
pinch-hit and boast about his state's economic recovery.

By many accounts, Mayor Henry G. Cisneros of San Antonio also used his spot in
the Vice-Presidential derby to increase his visibility at the convention.

Missourian Has an Ambition


Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri pursued his campaign for the
chairmanship of the House Democratic caucus by holding a reception for his
Congressional colleagues.

Many worked the party scene tirelessly, and one legislator said, ''Joe Biden is
at everything.'' Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware makes little secret of
his higher ambitions.

One major coup was pulled off by John D. Rockefeller 4th, the Governor of West
Virginia, a candidate for the Senate. He will be the honored guest Saturday at a
small dinner of influential Californians convened by Walter Shorenstein, a
leading fund-raiser.

''This is a get-acquainted sort of time,'' Mr. Shorenstein said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John D. Rockefeller 4th; photo of Richard A. Gephardt; photo
of Henry G. Cisneros; photo of Martha Layne Collins; photo of Bill Bradley

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF SPEECH BY REP. FERRARO ACCEPTING NOMINATION

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1736 words


Following is a transcript of Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro's speech last
night accepting the Democratic Vice-Presidential nomination at the national
convention, as recorded by The New York Times:

Ladies and gentlemen of the convention - ladies and gentlemen of the convention
- ladies and gentlemen of the convention, my name is Geraldine Ferraro, I stand
before you to proclaim tonight: America is a land where dreams can come true for
all of us.

As I stand before the American people and think of the honor this great
convention has bestowed upon me, I recall the words of Dr. Martin Luther King
Jr., who made America stronger by making America more free.

He said: ''Occasionally in life there are moments which cannot be completely
explained by words. Their meaning can only be articulated by the inaudible
language of the heart.''

Tonight is such a moment for me. My heart is filled with pride.

My fellow citizens, I proudly accept your nomination for Vice President of the
United States.

And - you're wonderful. And - And - And I am proud to run with a man who will be
one of the great Presidents of this century, Walter F. Mondale.

Tonight the daughter of a woman whose highest goal was a future for her children
talks to our nation's oldest party about a future for us all.

Tonight, the daughter of working Americans tells all Americans that the future
is within our reach - if we're willing to reach for it.

Tonight, the daughter of an immigrant from Italy has been chosen - has been
chosen to run for President in the new land my father came to love.

The Dream and the Promise


Our faith that we can shape a better future is what the American dream is all
about. The promise of our country is that the rules are fair. If you work hard
and play by the rules, you can earn your share of America's blessings.

Those are the beliefs I learned from my parents. And those are the values I
taught my students as a teacher in the public schools of New York City.

At night, I went to law school. I became an Assistant District Attorney, and I
put my share of criminals behind bars. I believe: If you obey the law, you
should be protected. But if you break the law, you must pay for your crime.

When I first ran for Congress, all the political experts said a Democrat could
not win in my home district in Queens. I put my faith in the people and the
values that we shared. Together, we proved the political experts wrong.

In this campaign, Fritz Mondale and I have put our faith in the people. And we
are going to prove the experts wrong again.

We are going to win. We are going to win, because Americans across this country
believe in the same basic dream.

Last week, I visited Elmore, Minn., the small town where - Yay Elmore! - The
small town where Fritz Mondale was raised. And soon Fritz and Joan will visit
our family in Queens.

Nine hundred people live in Elmore. In Queens there are 2,000 people on one
block. You would think we'd be different, but we're not.

Pride and the American Family


Children walk to school in Elmore past grain elevators; in Queens, they pass by
subways stops. But, no matter where they live, their future depends on education
- and their parents are willing to do their part to make those schools as good
as they can be.  In Elmore, there are family farms; in Queens, small businesses.
But the men and women who run them all take pride in supporting their families
through hard work and initiative.

On the Fourth of July in Elmore, they hang flags out on Main Street; in Queens,
they fly them over Grand Avenue. But all of us love our country, and stand ready
to defend the freedom that it represents.

Americans want to live by the same set of rules. But under this Administration,
the rules are rigged against too many of our people.

It isn't right that every year, the share of taxes paid by individual citizens
is going up, while the share paid by large corporations is getting smaller and
smaller. The rules say: Everyone in our society should contribute their fair
share.

It isn't right that this year Ronald Reagan will hand the American people a bill
for interest on the national debt larger than the entire cost of the Federal
Government under John F. Kennedy.

Our parents left us a growing economy. The rules say: We must not leave our kids
a mountain of debt.

It isn't right that a woman should get paid 59 cents on the dollar for the same
work as a man. If you play by the rules, you deserve a fair day's pay for a fair
day's work.

It isn't right that if trends continue, by the year 2000 nearly all of the poor
people in America will be women and children. The rules - the rules of a decent
society say, when you distribute sacrifice in times of austerity, you don't put
women and children first.





Keeping Faith With the Elderly


It isn't right that young people today fear they won't get the Social Security
they paid for, and that older Americans fear they will lose what they have
already earned. Social Security is a contract between the last generation and
the next, and the rules say: You don't break contracts. We are going to keep
faith with older Americans.

We hammered out a fair compromise in the Congress to save Social Security. Every
group sacrificed to keep the system sound. It is time Ronald Reagan stopped
scaring our senior citizens.

It isn't right that young couples question whether to bring children into a
world of 50,000 nuclear warheads.

That isn't the vision for which Americans have struggled for more than two
centuries. And our future doesn't have to be that way. Change is in the air,
just as surely as when John Kennedy beckoned America to a New Frontier; when
Sally Ride rocketed into space; and when Reverend Jesse Jackson, ran for the
office of President of the United States.

By choosing a woman to run for our nation's second highest office, you send a
powerful signal to all Americans. There are no doors we cannot unlock. We will
place no limit on achievement.

If we can do this, we can do anything.

Tonight, we reclaim our dream. We're going to make the rules of American life
work fairly for all Americans again.

To an Administration that would have us debate all over again whether the Voting
Rights Act should be renewed and whether segregated schools should be tax
exempt, we say, Mr. President: Those debates are over. On the issue of civil
rights voting rights and affirmative action for minorities, we must not go
backwards. We must and we will move forward to open the doors of opportunity.

Women's Role and Their Rights


To those who understand that our countrycannot prosper unless we draw on the
talentsof all Americans, we say: We will pass theequal rights amendment. The
issue is not what America can do for women, but what women can do for America.

To the Americans who will lead our country into the 21st century, we say: We
will not have a Supreme Court that turns the clock back to the 19th century. To
those concerned about the strength of American and family values as I am I say
we are going to restore those values; love, caring, partnership by including and
not excluding those whose beliefs differ from our own because our own faith is
strong we will fight to preserve the freedom of faith for others.

To those working Americans who fear that banks, utilities, and large special
interests have a lock on the White House we say: Join us; let's elect a people's
President; and let's have a government by and for the American people again.

To an Administration that would savage student loans in education at the dawn of
a new technological age, we say: You fit the classic definition of a cynic: You
know the price of everything, but the value of nothing.

To our students and their parents, we say: We will insist on the highest
standards of excellence because the jobs of the future require skilled minds.

To young Americans who may be called to our country's service, we say: We know
your generation will proudly answer our country's call, as each generation
before you.

This past year we remembered the bravery and sacrifice of Americans at Normandy.
And we finally paid tribute, as we should have done years ago, to that unknown
soldier who represents all the brave young Americans who died in Vietnam.

A Profile of a President


Let no one doubt we will defend America's security and the cause of freedom
around the world. But we want a President who tells us what America is fighting
for, not just what we are fighting against. We want a President who will defend
human rights - not just where it is convenient - but wherever freedom is at risk
- from Chile to Afghanistan from Poland to South Africa. To those who would want
this Administration's confusion in the Middle-East as it is tilted first toward
one and then another of Israel's long-time enemies and wonder will America stand
by her friends and sister democracies? We say America knows who her friends are
in the Middle-East and around the world. America will stand with Israel always.

Finally, we want a President who will keep America strong, but use that strength
to keep America, and the world, at peace. A nuclear freeze is not a slogan: it
is a tool for survival in the nuclear age. If we leave our children nothing
else, let us leave them this earth as we found it - whole and green and full of
life.

I know in my heart that Walter Mondale will be that President.

Cherishing 'the Gift of Life'


A wise man once said, ''Every one of us is given the gift of life, and what a
strange gift it is. If it is preserved jealously and selfishly, it impoverishes
and saddens. But if it is spent for others, it enriches and beautifies.''

My fellow Americans: We can debate policies and programs. But in the end what
separates the two parties in this election campaign is whether we use the gift
of life - for others or only ourselves.

Tonight, my husband, John, and our three children are in this hall with me. To
my daughters, Donna and Laura, and my son, John Jr., I say: My mother did not
break faith with me and I will not break faith with you. To all the children of
America, I say: The generation before ours kept faith with us, and like them, we
will pass on to you a stronger, more just America.

Thank you very much.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Geraldine A. Ferraro

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE FERRARO FACTOR

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1101 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, July 19


A Democratic Party that came into its national convention uncertain about its
ability to mount an effective challenge to President Reagan gained a new sense
of hope tonight with the nomination of Geraldine A. Ferraro to the ticket headed
by Walter F. Mondale.  Party leaders from all regions of the country hailed
''the Ferraro factor,'' coming on the heels of unity declarations from Mr.
Mondale's vanquished rivals, as a new trump card that had incalculably altered
the prospects for the fall campaign despite the President's sizable lead in
recent opinion polls.

''There was a sense of invincibility about Ronald Reagan coming into this
convention among many Democrats,'' said Peter Kelly, the California Democratic
chairman. ''But I think the nomination of Mrs. Ferraro changes that. Now there's
hope and optimism that this ticket can win.''

''There's no question the ticket is behind but it's certainly within reaching
distance, whereas before we got here there was concern that this was a lost
cause,'' added Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut.

Exhuberance About Campaign


''Now, there's new life breathed into this campaign. Democrats are feeling good
about it.''

The convention, carefully orchestrated by the Mondale camp, has given the
Democratic legions a lift. It ended without a walkout or any rancorous, wounding
floor fights.

Some party leaders asserted that the public pledges of support for the
Mondale-Ferraro ticket from Senator Gary Hart and the Rev. Jesse Jackson had
helped heal the wounds of a long, hard- fought primary campaign. Moreoever, they
pointed out that the primary campaign had not produced the animosities or
ideological cleavages of the Vietnam era or even the battle four years ago
between President Carter and Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts.

Even in the charged atmosphere of their convention, however, some Democratic
leaders acknowledge the daunting task they faced against Mr. Reagan with the
economy growing so well and unemployment falling.

On the economy, House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. commented that it was hard
for Democrats to make headway as long as people were focused on the present
situation. He said Democrats had to force voters to focus on the future
consequences of the Reagan program.

Message on the Economy


''It's hard for us to deal with that,'' echoed Charles Whitehead, the Florida
party chairman. ''If we can get the message across that this is a false economy,
that we're living on borrowed money, I think that'll give us a shot at it.''

''There's got to be some sort of chink in the Administration's economic armor or
the other issues aren't going to stick,'' said Senator Dodd. ''Foreign policy
issues alone don't galvanize people.''

And though the large majority of delegates demonstrated boisterously for the
Mondale-Ferraro ticket in the convention hall, some Hart and Jackson supporters
struck a dissonant tone and some Western party leaders complained of being left
out of the Mondale strategy for the fall campaign.

''The Democratic Party is not selecting a ticket that will be a good ticket in
New Mexico,'' asserted Gene Gallegos, the Hart chairman from that state. ''The
liberal themes, the traditional themes are not the themes that are listened to
in our state.''

''I don't see the ticket placing the Western states in the loop,'' asserted Gov.
Scott M. Mathieson of Utah. ''We want to play a role and we haven't seen the
campaign include the West. If the Democratic ticket is not interested in getting
us into their loop, it will hurt the Democratic parties in the West. And I don't
want to write off the West to the Republicans.''

Jarred by Bid to Oust Manatt


Other Western delegates said they were jarred by the effort of the Mondale camp
last week to remove Charles T. Manatt, a Californian, as party chairman last
week. They read it as a sign that Mondale strategists did not intend to pay
great attention to the West this fall.

Some black delegates also qualified their optimism, saying they were waiting to
see whether blacks would be given prominent posts in the Mondale- Ferraro
campaign structure.

''We do have different factions, including factions that see more black
involvement in the campaign as a must for full participation in the Mondale
campaign,'' said Dr. Leslie McLemore, a Jackson delegate from Mississippi.

But the prevalent feeling was that the partisan mood of the convention and the
nomination of a woman on the ticket had generated new enthusiasm.

Impact of Woman on Ticket


Some regional leaders said the unity efforts would not only help the national
ticket but also their local campaigns, which had been hurt by bitter party
splits in 1968, 1972 and 1980.

Speaker O'Neill forecast that Democrats would increase their 98-seat margin in
the House of Representatives.

In Iowa, Representative Tom Harkin, who is seeking to take a Republican Senate
seat from Roger Jepsen, said the ticket would help him.

In North Carolina, too, an aide to Gov. James B. Hunt Jr. said the Governor
would be helped in his race against Senator Jesse Helms if Mrs. Ferraro's
presence on the ticket could narrow President Reagan's lead in that state to 10
percentage points. Senator Lawton Chiles of Florida said alone Mr. Mondale
''already lost the South'' but his running mate gave him a chance.

'Living Symbol of Change'


Again and again, Mrs. Ferraro was mentioned as the dynamic new ingredient, ''a
living symbol of change,'' one of her nominators said. Even among leaders in the
South, where there had been grumbling about a woman on the ticket, she was
warmly praised.

''She's Archie Bunker, she's a religious woman in the Bible Belt, she's a mother
and gets down and talks plan about kids, she's a wife and supportive, she's
worked hard to get where she is, she's law and order, she's tough,'' said Jimmy
Knight, the Alabama chairman. ''You betcha she'll sell in Alabama.''

Other leaders predicted that as a Congresswoman from a conservative blue-collar
district, she would not only help Democrats attract blue-collar voters who have
deserted them in recent years and but also win support among the new generation
of affluent, well-educated suburban voters - known among politicians as
''yuppies'' - who went heavily for Senator Hart.

But with Mrs. Ferraro untested in the pressure of a national campaign, some
Democrats sounded a cautionary note. Bill Hamilton, a well-known Democratic poll
taker, suggested that too much was being expected from her.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CHINE TO BROADCAST CBS SELECTIONS

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 723 words


The Chinese national television network has signed an agreement with CBS to
broadcast 64 hours of CBS television programming in China, beginning Dec. 1.
These will be the first regularly scheduled broadcasts of American television
ever seen in China.

The programs will range from selected segments of ''60 Minutes'' to four
animated ''Dr. Seuss'' specials to football, hockey and basketball games. Most
will be broadcast in prime time. Included will be commercials from 10 major
corporate sponsors, probably large international companies with an interest in
the Chinese market, according to CBS spokesmen.

The agreement was described as a one-year arrangement, and not necessarily an
exclusive one that would preclude the Chinese from negotiating with other
networks as well. However, representatives of CBS and of China Central
Television, the Chinese television network, said they expected an expanded
American presence on Chinese television to evolve from this arrangement, which
they consider only the first step in a long- term relationship with CBS.



'To Promote Understanding'

The agreement was signed yesterday at the CBS building, on 52d Street and Avenue
of the Americas, in a news conference attended by a delegation from China
Central Television.

''Our purpose in signing the agreement with CBS is to promote understanding
between the Chinese and American people,'' Wang Feng, the director of China
Central, said through a translator.

CBS officials said negotiations began more than two years ago, at the invitation
of the Chinese. The agreement involves no exchange of payments; the only money
involved will be that generated by the sale of advertising time, which CBS and
China Central will share.

The China Central officials said that there were more than 45 million television
sets in China, but that the number of viewers was much higher because so many
people watch the programming on each set.



Reasoning Behind Choices

Chinese television, which is government-controlled, is run according to the
Communist concept of television as a medium for ideological enlightenment rather
than entertainment, and has heretofore resisted what is regarded as the
corrosive influence of bourgeois values and trends.

''If you look at the programs they have chosen, they are really not
controversial,'' said Joseph DiCerto, the director of communications for CBS/
Broadcast Group Worldwide Enterprises. ''They were chosen because CCTV wants to
provide additional programming that is informational and cultural rather than
controversial.'' Many Communist countries buy Western programming to supplement
their own government-controlled content.

Representatives of the Chinese station had screened hundreds of programs to make
their choices. Selections from news programming include episodes from a series
on aviation history called ''Air Power,'' Walter Cronkite's science magazine
series, ''Universe,'' ''21st Century,'' a science documentary series, and
''World War II,'' a 12-part series.



Vietnam and Gardening

The ''60 Minutes'' segments are one on economic and social conditions in
Vietnam, one on Chinese people living in Singapore, one on American gangsters,
and one on English gardening.

Sports programming includes segments of New York Rangers ice hockey games,
National Basketball Association games, probably from the 1985 N.B.A. playoff
series; an ice skating special called ''Superskates'' and National Collegiate
Athletic Association football, probably a Bowl game. Chinese officials said this
would be the first football game ever broadcast on Chinese television.

However, some of CBS's most popular programs, such as ''Dallas'' and ''Falcon
Crest,'' were absent from the list. CBS officials said that much of the
network's prime-time programming had not been offered to the Chinese because CBS
does not own the rights to many of those series. However, Chinese officials
acknowledged that their choices had also been governed by their own sense of
what would be appropriate for Chinese audiences.

The Chinese officials said that while individual programs from other nations had
been seen on Chinese television, including some from Britain and Japan as well
as the United States, the CBS programs would constitute the first extensive,
regularly scheduled American programming.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN SAYS LAOS WILL LET U.S. TEAM SEARCH CRASH SITE

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 796 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 20


President Reagan said today that Laos had agreed to allow United States
officials to excavate a site to search for the remains of 13 American servicemen
whose plane crashed there nearly 12 years ago.

Mr. Reagan made the disclosure during a ceremony at the White House in honor of
National P.O.W./M.I.A. Recognition Day. At the ceremony, the President said the
Administration was determined to recover the remains and press for information
on 2,489 Americans unaccounted for from the Vietnam War, as well as 8,177 from
the Korean War.

About 600 of the 2,489 were reported dead or missing in Laos. The Vientiane
Government met with American officials last year and allowed a technical team to
visit the crash site, near the city of Pakse.



Maintained Diplomatic Ties

The United States, which severed diplomatic relations with Vietnam and Cambodia
after the Communist takeovers there in 1975, has maintained diplomatic relations
with Laos, but has said ties could not be improved until the missing-in-action
issue was resolved.

Today, Mr. Reagan said Laos ''seems to have gained a greater understanding of
the importance to us of the P.O.W./M.I.A. issue.''

''We, in return, have gained a greater understanding of their feelings and
problems,'' he said. ''This process has led us to discussions of joint crash
site searches.''



'Working Out the Details'

''And in this regard, I want to pass on some good news to you,'' he said. ''Late
last night, we were informed by the Government of Laos of official agreement in
principle to excavation of a U.S. crash site. We're working out the details now.
We welcome this cooperative gesture.''

A Defense Department spokesman said Mr. Reagan was referring to an Air Force
gunship that exploded in midair on Dec. 21, 1972, near Pakse, with 16 men
aboard. Two parachuted to safety, and one body was found the next day.

At the ceremony today, with many former prisoners of war and families of missing
in action in the audience, Mr. Reagan said the prisoners of war ''have been, and
are, the bravest of the brave.''

''They kept a trusting heart, they retained their spirit and their will, and
they kept the faith,'' he said. ''They trusted us, and that trust did us great
honor.''

He pledged that the Administration would make a major effort on behalf of the
missing in action, or those who are assumed to be killed, but whose remains have
not been recovered. Mr. Reagan, implicitly seeming to criticize past
Administrations, said the families of the missing had for many years ''stood
alone in your quest for answers.''

''Well, today, you're not alone,'' he said. ''And I tell you from my heart, you
will never be alone again.''

'Sightings' by Refugees

Of the 2,489 Americans listed as unaccounted for, about 1,150 have been reported
killed in action, but their remains have not been recovered. Of the others,
American officials have said there is no verified evidence that any are alive,
although there have been ''sightings.'' Most such sightings have been by
Vietnamese refugees, who say they have seen people they assumed to be Americans.

On Wednesday Secretary of State George P. Shultz said that Vietnam had agreed to
resume talks in mid-August on locating the remains and providing information on
those unaccounted for in Vietnam.

Mr. Reagan, noting that today was the 30th anniversary of the signing of
agreements in Geneva on Indochina, said the hoped-for peace had never come to
that part of the world. He said Vietnam and the United States ''still have major
differences.''

But he said he was ''encouraged'' by Vietnam's willingness to cooperate on the
missing-in-action question.

8,177 Missing in Korea

Mr. Reagan said resolution of that issue, as well as Vietnam's agreement to
negotiations on Cambodia with other countries in the area, ''provide the key for
ending Vietnam's isolation.''

''Normal relations with the international community can bring an end to the long
suffering of the people of Vietnam,'' he said. ''And I believe it to be in
Vietnam's own interest to choose this path. It's a decision that we would
welcome.''

Mr. Reagan also addressed the less publicized situation in Korea, where 8,177
Americans are officially listed as unaccounted for. He said the United States
had pressed North Korea for an accounting of any missing from that war. He also
said some Korean War veterans recently provided information on possible grave
locations.

A White House official said the information was on possible sites in South
Korea, and talks were going on with the South Korean Government. But neither
State Department nor Pentagon officials were able to shed light on why it had
taken so long to find sites in South Korea, a United States ally.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Laos (page 6)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
 SATURDAY, JULY 21, 1984 International

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 846 words


Laos agreed to allow U.S. officials to excavate a site to search for the remains
of 13 American servicemen whose plane crashed there nearly 12 years ago,
President Reagan said. Mr. Reagan made the announcement at a White House
ceremony observing National P.O.W./M.I.A. Recognition Day. He affirmed his
Administration's determination to recover the remains and press for information
on 2,489 Americans unaccounted for from the Vietnam War and 8,177 from the
Korean War. (Page 1, Column 4.)

Relatives of missing Guatamalans have started to band together in an effort to
find their relatives and end the many unsolved disappearances. Such
organizations have long been active in other Latin American countries where
kidnapping has beome a favorite way of disposing of real or imagined enemies.
(2:1.)

120 Poles defected in Austria, authorities at the Traiskirchen refugee camp
said. They said four tour buses carrying 180 Poles of Ukrainian descent made a
detour Thursday to Austria's main refugee camp, 25 miles south of Vienna. A camp
official said the remaining 60 Poles went on to Rome in two buses, and that most
of the refugees were members of the Greek Catholic Church who wanted to emigrate
to Canada. (3:5.)

West Germany detained a truck from the Soviet Union with a mysterious nine-ton
cargo as it was about to cross the East German frontier, officials said. The
truck's two-member crew had previously been prevented from unloading the cargo
at the Soviet Mission in Geneva by Swiss officials who refused to recognize a
Soviet claim of diplomatic immunity. West German officials said they would hold
the truck until they could determine whether its contents corresponded to its
diplomatic manifest. (3:1.)

An end to Britain's dock strike seemed near. Some longshoremen returned to work
after a tentative agreement was reached to end the 11- day nationwide strike.
(6:1.) National

Debates with President Reagan would be a key part of Walter F. Mondale's
campaign. He opened his national campaign against the Republicans by challenging
Mr. Reagan to a series of six debates on topics ranging from arms control to the
environment. Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro, Mr. Mondale's running mate,
also reiterated her call for a debate with Vice President Bush and said she
would accept any format he proposed. (1:6.)

The White House scoffed at Walter F. Mondale's contention that President Reagan
would raise taxes next year, but a White House spokesman would not disclose any
details about Mr. Reagan's plans for tax simplification if he is re-elected.
(12:1.)

A 90 percent cut in gasoline lead in the next four years will be the aim of new
rules soon to be proposed by the Environmental Protection Agency. Lead would be
removed entirely from gasoline by 1995, under the agency's proposals. (1:2.)

A severe drought in Texas has reduced water supplies so drastically that 67
cities have imposed voluntary or mandatory restrictions on the use of municipal
water. (1:1.)

A Mexican bridge champion was feared abducted from her hotel in Washington.
Edith Rosenkranz, 60 years old, of Mexico City, was led away at gunpoint by a
black male in his 20's. Mrs. Rosenkranz was attending the Summer National of the
American Contract Bridge League. Her husband, George Rosenkranz, helped develop
the first birth-control pill. (1:1.)

Pharmacists are using computers to prevent dangerous interactions among
prescription drugs patients take, the foods they eat, their allergies and the
over-the-counter medicines they use. Such interactions cause over 100 deaths
annually and are responsible for $4.5 billion in hospital bills, according to
the Boston Collaborative Drug Surveillance Program at Boston University, a
clearinghouse for information on the side effects of drugs. (1:3.)

Two steel contractors were sentenced in Washington to 10 years in prison or
sellng the Navy inferior steel for the renovation of warships including the
battleship New Jersey, and for the space-shuttle project. Jerald R. Hedden and
Russell D. Roper received 10- year terms. (18:1.) Metropolitan

Vanessa Williams should relinquish her crown and the title of Miss America 1984,
the executive committee of the Miss America Pageant voted unanimously. The vote
followed Penthouse magazine's announcement that it planned to publish in its
September issue a 10-page layout of nude photographs posed for by Miss Williams,
some of them in intimate scenes with another woman. (1:6.)

Three men accused of posing as utility workers and burglarizing the homes of
elderly people in Queens and Brooklyn have been arrested. The police said the
men may have committed as many as 60 such crimes since January. (31:6.)

Robberies of ambulance crews responding to false 911 emergency calls were
reported by city officials. They said the crews of four city ambulances had been
robbed at gunpoint in the past few weeks. Mayor Koch said the prevention of
further such crimes was a top police priority. (31:5.) Page 39

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

UNIFICATION CHURCH ACCEPTANCE GAINS

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 930 words


The Unification Church of the Rev. Sun Myung Moon, who was scheduled to begin an
18-month Federal prison sentence for income-tax evasion yesterday, was
frequently denounced in the 1970's as spiritually fraudulent. It was accused of
brainwashing teen-aged converts and fostering a repudiation of parental ties.

The charges are rarely heard in public now, and church officials estimate there
has been a 10-fold decline in such accusations in the past few years.

''Perhaps part of it is that the Unification Church can't be called a cult any
more,'' said Joy Garratt, who handles public information and complaints for the
church. ''It's a new religion.''

Mrs. Garratt said changing times and mores were another reason for the
Unification Church's better image.

Some Were 'Over-Zealous'


She noted that in the Vietnam War era, between 75 and 85 percent of the church's
new members were ''young singles,'' people who frequently came to membership in
the church from the civil rights struggle or other activism. In many instances,
they had already shown an interest in communal living.

''They wanted to save the world,'' she said, ''and maybe some of them were
over-zealous. They overlooked writing to their parents. If they had been in
college and that happened, parents would have understood it. But it was
different with the Unification Church.''

Mrs. Garratt said that new church members were somewhat older than the typical
new member of a decade ago and were frequently married and in their 30's. She
said only 25 to 35 percent of the current membership was under 25 and single,
and that the church was studying the changing nature of its membership.

The church says that many parents who were once suspicious of it are now much
more accepting. Don Morrison, who lives in Napa County, Calif., is one such
parent.

'Rumors Just Grew'


Mr. Morrison confirmed in a telephone interview that he and his wife were
''violently opposed'' in the early 1970's when all four of their children joined
the Unification Church.

''All we knew about the church is what we read in the newspapers,'' he said.
''But newspapers copy other newspapers and the rumors just grew, because nobody
really asked what the church was all about.''

Mr. Morrison said that he and his wife had checked the church's activities and,
''When we did, I had to stop my opposition.''

His children, now all in their 30's, have continued dedicating their lives to
the Unification Church.

''These are not kids,'' Mr. Morrison said. ''They are intelligent and well-
educated adults. My wife and I raised them to be self-examining and self-
searching. If they choose to follow a Korean evangelist, it is their own
business.''

Opposition to Communism


Mr. Morrison said neither he nor his wife had ever considered joining the
Unification Church. He said that he was not attracted to any organized religion,
and that his wife was an Episcopalian who was not active in church affairs.

The Unification Church is basically a form of evangelical Protestantism. It is
assertively opposed to Communism, and sees stopping the breakup of families
because of divorce as one of its primary missions. Mr. Moon, who was divorced by
his first wife, has 13 children by his second wife. He has a son by his first
marriage.

The church says it has 8,000 missionaries in the United States, working on
spreading its word and helping it to raise money. Another 37,000 Americans are
regarded as members with ''varying levels of commitment,'' according to Mrs.
Garratt. Its annual operating budget is between $20 million and $24 million.

Mrs. Garratt said the church had spent about $500 million on ''humanitarian and
educational'' projects in the United States. It also sponsors three daily
newspapers - The Washington Times in Washington and The New York Tribune and the
Spanish-language Noticias del Mundo in New York.

'Economic Projects' and Tithing

The church supports itself through contributions and what it describes as its
''economic projects,'' which include commercial fishing. It encourages members
to start businesses and make substantial tithes to the church.

Discussing activities that many parents had found especially bothersome, Mrs.
Garratt said that if members wanted Mr. Moon to make ''suggestions'' about
marriage arrangements, ''he will make them.'' But, she said, ''his suggested
marriages are not an order. About 10 to 15 percent of the missionaries reject
his suggestions as to whom they should marry.''

She said Mr. Moon, in a sense, was doing no more in this regard than a computer
dating service or a magazine offering advertisements that promise to bring
together men and women of similar backgrounds, cultures and interests. She
called Mr. Moon ''a trend- setter'' in what might be called a dating service.

Mrs. Garratt was also asked whether the church expected new members to give it
all their money. There have been reports of substantial gifts to the church by
new members.

She said that if new members wanted to make contributions, they were welcome to
do so, but that such gifts were not prerequisites to membership.

''All that we get from most of our new members these days is their college
debts,'' she said.

She said the church had agreed to assume 400 to 500 of the student loans that
had been incurred by full-time members, and that for those members who remained
workers, the church paid both the interest and principal on the debts. The
church spends about $15,000 month on the service of student loans, she said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 488 words


Mr. Shultz's Pacific Overtures Credit George Shultz with workmanlike diplomacy
on his three-week tour of neglected corners of the Pacific. The Secretary of
State sidestepped a collision with a new Labor Government in New Zealand,
mollified Asian allies about America's China policy and brought up the unwelcome
subject of East Timor in Indonesia.

On the road, away from the political pressures on the White House, Mr. Shultz
was his own man. He pursued a quiet, sensible policy based on shared interests
with China, shared values with Australia and New Zealand and shared security
concerns with the Association of South East Asian Nations.

Mr. Shultz's hand was sure in averting a conflict with Prime Minister-elect
David Lange. New Zealand's Labor Party had just won an election on a platform
promising to close the country's waters to nuclear-armed American warships. That
would effectively dissolve a 33-year alliance binding New Zealand, Australia and
the United States.

After a cordial meeting with Mr. Lange, Mr. Shultz made it plain that nuclear
ships would avoid New Zealand's waters for a year. That lifts the pressure from
a new Government faced with a floundering economy. Australia's year-old Labor
Government also came to power doubting the alliance's value. With time for
reflection, it chose to remain. New Zealanders now have time to think again.

Elsewhere, Mr. Shultz was allaying fears about America's friendship with China.
In Southeast Asia, he found himself explaining the obvious: that a
''constructive relationship'' with the Chinese can enhance regional stability.
Treating China as a potential friend offers the best assurance that it will
similarly treat its non-Communist neighbors.  That message was especially
important in Indonesia, which accused China of sponsoring a nearly successful
leftist coup and broke relations in 1967. Experience argues that China was at
its most provocative when most isolated. As Thailand found, China ceased
supporting Thai rebels when the two countries found common ground in opposing
Vietnam's aggressions.  In Jakarta also, Mr. Shultz did the minimally decent by
affirming America's concern about East Timor. Indonesia invaded that former
Portuguese colony in 1975 but the United States has yet to condemn the
aggression forcefully. It has said too little about the sufferings of 600,000
Timorese, a mostly Catholic people with a distinct culture. Responding to pleas
from Congress, Mr. Shultz delivered an appeal for better access to the
territory.  Over the years, Indonesia has granted greater leeway in East Timor
to the International Red Cross, Unicef and the Catholic Relief Services, whose
efforts have undoubtedly saved many lives. Congress asks for the admission of
journalists and human rights monitors. If Mr. Shultz has persuaded Indonesia to
lower the walls, he will have added a victory for humanity to a productive trip.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HART SEES TRIUMPH FOR HIS IDEAS, IF NOT FOR HIMSELF

BYLINE: By FAY S. JOYCE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, July 21


Gary Hart flew off to Hawaii today to recuperate, far from the noisy party
convention that had rejected him. His dreams of the Presidency lay dashed
against the rocks of reality, but his confidence in his vision appeared
unshaken.

The reserved Senator Hart staked his candidacy on the conviction that 1984 would
be a watershed year for the Democrats, one in which the party would redefine
itself. Walter F. Mondale may have proved the Coloradan right to a degree, by
picking Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro as his running mate and in the
process finally burying Mr. Hart's chances for the nomination.

But Mr. Hart meant something more sweeping. One of the beliefs that drove him
through his arduous race was that the American people were hungry for new
political ideas. His extraordinary success in the Democratic primaries and
caucuses - he won more than Mr. Mondale and captured nearly as many popular
votes - indicated that he tapped a powerful undercurrent coursing through the
country.

Enlisting the Young


If Mr. Hart turned out not to be the prophet leading his party to the Promised
Land, analysts see him as a key signpost to its future. Though the Rev.  Jesse
Jackson's explosive appeal to blacks provided much of the drama of the campaign,
Mr. Hart's energizing and enlisting of a whole class of millions of younger,
white-collar Democrats who are replacing their blue-collar elders in this
post-industrial age is seen by some, in the long run, as perhaps more important.

The colorful balloons cascading down on 4,000 delegates happily waving plastic
American flags and celebrating Mr. Mondale's nomination Thursday night were a
sign that as a salesman, Mr. Hart and his vague product had fallen short. The
American voters, as represented in the Democratic National Convention, did not
put their faith in an enigma they could not unwrap, or in a set of blueprints he
did not fully unroll.

To leaders of the school of neoliberal thinkers from which Mr. Hart emerged,
this was especially striking. Over the last few years this group has indeed
developed different ideas that make them, in the simplest terms, liberals with
one hand on their wallets. But Mr. Hart did not present their platform to the
voters, either because he did not completely endorse it or could not articulate
it.

Hesitancy Is Seen


Those leaders saw in Mr. Hart's campaign a hesitancy and lack of boldness in
spelling out the new ideas he said he favored. That same hesitancy, a key
adviser complained, stymied his search for delegates at a crucial moment last
weekend, after Mr. Mondale shocked many of his supporters by suddenly producing
Bert Lance from the political wilderness to head his campaign.

As a speaker, Mr. Hart ''has a great instinct for the capillaries,'' observed
Charles Peters, editor of The Washington Monthly and the man considered the
godfather of the neoliberal movement.

''People are hungry, and when Gary said 'new ideas,' people said 'Oh, boy,
that's what we're looking for.' He did so well initially because people realized
the Democratic and Republican ideas weren't good enough. ''But when Mondale
said, 'Where's the beef?' Gary started losing from then on. He failed to make
clear to the public what the new ideas were.''

On the campaign trail, Mr. Hart tried. But with his unseasoned, strife- ridden
and underfinanced campaign staff, he failed to spotlight most of the proposals
he had made in the Senate. Nonetheless, Mr. Peters applauded Mr. Hart's success
in demonstrating how much sentiment there is for change and his repudiation of
the traditional Democratic approach of building a coalition from various ethnic
and labor constituencies.

A 'Hero' to Neoliberals


''The clear great thing was that if not a majority, then something like 36
percent of the party has rejected the kowtowing to special interests,'' Mr.
Peters said. The editor said Mr. Hart also became a ''hero'' to neoliberals
because he did not run away from military spending issues, as other liberals had
after the Vietnam War.

''Gary was the first to say we really do have to look at how we defend this
country, and he went at it weapon by weapon,'' Mr. Peters said. ''But he didn't
want to be labeled antidefense. He knew where the waste was and what could be
done instead, but he never made it clear to the public. It got paralyzed in his
mind. He got so careful he couldn't be bold.''

Senator Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts, whose 1981 book ''The Road from Here:
Liberalism and Realities in the 1980's'' has been called the neoliberal
manifesto, endorsed John Glenn for President rather than Mr. Hart.

''As a Democrat, Hart was probably between a rock and a hard place,'' said Mary
Helen Thompson, Mr. Tsongas's spokesman. ''He couldn't be seen as rejecting the
traditional Democratic ideas. One of the things you've seen at the convention is
we're going to play our strong suit: Social Security, school lunches for kids,
strong families. The neoliberal stuff is a lot harder to campaign on.''

'Something Is Going On'


In the Senate Mr. Hart has backed proposals along a number of new lines,
including a break on capital gains taxes that encourages investors to buy stock
in a new company or to buy a new stock issue; a government-business- education
partnership that would pay for large-scale technological training in the public
schools, and the acquisition of smaller, cheaper, more maneuverable naval ships.
But the public heard about little, if any, of this.

Nevertheless, as Mr. Hart's jetliner rushed over the Pacific, proponents of the
melding of liberalism and conservatism said their work would go on. And shortly
before he left, Mr. Hart repeated with a quiet certitude reminiscent of Jimmy
Carter that power would change hands in this decade from the generation whose
outlook and values were shaped by World War II to the one shaped by Vietnam.

''It's not accidental that I was one of the two serious final candidates,'' he
said at a news conference after Mr. Mondale had won the nomination. ''So
something is going on out there. There is a strong desire for new leadership -
that is more than just a slogan; it represents a new way of thinking about some
issues.

The shift ''is coming about in the electoral process, in the governorships of
this country, in the Congress, certainly in the state legislatures,'' he said.
''About all we haven't done is occupy the White House - and that's the last and
most difficult.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gary Hart

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOOTBALL FINANCIER;
GOING FOR A TOUCHDOWN IN REAL ESTATE

BYLINE: By BETH ELLYN ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2102 words


DALLAS

Roger Staubach; The name conjures up many images.  There's the ruggedly handsome
quarterback who led the Dallas Cowboys to two Super Bowl victories.

There's the devout Catholic whose face topped a direct-mail fund raiser for
Morality in Media, an anti-pornography group.

There's the CBS sports commentator who publicly twitted then-President Carter by
saying that he had asked his own daughter Amy to call a game's strategy.

And there's the man who, in countless Rolaids commercials, tells the world how
to spell relief.

Now Mr. Staubach, quieter and more cerebral these days, but still lithe, lean
and athletic at 41, is trying to add real estate kingpin to the repertoire.

''Some ex-athletes just live out the rest of their lives, but not Roger,''
observed Charles Diker, a New York investor and a client of Mr. Staubach's.
''It's tough to be a star athlete and have to start a new career, but I think
he's trying to reach the apex again.''

Other athletes have done it before him, of course. Bill Bradley, once star
player for the New York Knickerbockers, made a clean break from basketball to
the United States Senate. Jack Kemp was a quarterback for the Buffalo Bills
before going to Congress. Preston Pearson, like Mr. Staubach a former Dallas
Cowboy, founded P.P. Inc., which manufactures sport sclothes. And Stan Musial, a
famed baseballer, is doing well in beer distribution.

Mr. Staubach's vehicle is the Staubach Company, a small but ambitious firm that
builds, leases, manages, sells and invests in commercial real estate in the
Southwest. In the last fiscal year, ended June 30, the firm's revenues more than
tripled, from $33 million to $100 million.

Staubach has assets of $50 million, manages 1,700 apartment units and runs with
a staff of 60 people. It currently has $40 million in new properties under
construction, including a 60,000-square-foot office building and 700 apartment
units.

Those figures, while upward bound, are less than impressive in a city where real
estate operations, and almost everything else, are designed around a Texas
concept of size. In Dallas, Mr. Staubach's firm is competing with the likes of
the Trammell Crow Company, the nation's largest developer, with $6 billion in
assets; the Lincoln Property Company, one of the nation's largest apartment
builders, which manages 60,000 units; and the Henry S. Miller Company, Dallas's
largest broker, which employs 1,300 people - until a few years ago, including
Roger Staubach.

Mr. Staubach's company comes nowhere near matching those numbers - for now. But
Mr. Staubach, whose dark curly hair is only slightly tinged with gray and who
can still run four miles in 30 minutes, has faith. In fact, he relishes the fact
that he is again ''in competition with the big boys,'' perhaps for the first
time since trading his blue and silver Dallas Cowboy uniform for dark pinstriped
suits and starched white shirts.

He has attracted some of Dallas' brightest young brokerage stars to his employee
roster. One Staubach hotshot, W. Stephen Meek, 28, alone closed $50 million in
deals last year. Another, Ka Cotter, is one of Dallas's top commercial leasing
brokers, and last year was responsible for 25 percent of Staubach's total
leasing activities.

Mr. Staubach lets his employees run at their own pace, a fact that some say has
garnered their absolute loyalty. ''Other real estate firms are boiler rooms
where you're pressured to produce,'' said Mr. Meek. ''I work my butt off for the
guy because he doesn't stand over me with a whip. We're the exception in our
high-pressured profession.''


MR. Staubach is a stand-alone in the glittery Dallas real estate community in
another way: He is visibly understated. His office, part of a typical garden
complex, is simply furnished and in no way plush. And, while $8,000 gold Rolex
President watches are considered part of the Dallas real estate broker's
uniform, Mr. Staubach wears an unobtrusive and inexpensive sports watch.

Mr. Staubach's background was not charaterized by flashy trappings, either. He
grew up in a middle class suburb of Cincinnati. After lettering in football,
baseball and basketball at a Catholic high school, he spent a year in the New
Mexico Military Institute preparing for his 1961 entrance to Annapolis. There he
majored in engineering, even though, as he now recalls, he ''knew football was
going to be my primary career,''

Military service came first, however. Mr. Staubach did a four-year stint as a
Navy lieutenant, including a year's active combat duty in Vietnam.

A friendship formed at Annapolis wound up leading him into real estate. In 1971,
Gordon Edwards, a Naval Acadamy crony of Mr. Staubach's, flew to Dallas to talk
to brokers at Henry S. Miller on behalf of some Belgian investors interested in
Texas property. Mr. Edwards looked up his old classmate while he was in town.
One introduction led to another, and Mr. Staubach wound up spending his
off-season months working for Miller's land syndication department.

Miller put him on straight commission, and from Mr. Staubach's point of view, he
had found the dream off- season job. ''They didn't pay me a salary so I didn't
feel guilty about not showing up at the office,'' he said. ''Real estate and
football seemed like a good mix.''

Miller executives thought so, too, but for quite different reasons. They
relished Mr. Staubach's ease of entree into executive suites. ''The fact that he
was Dallas's quarterback was a big plus,'' recalled Henry S. Miller Jr.,
chairman of the Miller board. ''We had Roger make initial contacts and then we
would follow up,'' said Kenneth Shulman, a senior vice president who served as
Mr. Staubach's boss.

Mr. Staubach apparently took the business seriously. ''He would research the
investment to satisfy himself that what he was proposing to sell was a good
deal,'' Mr. Miller said. ''Sometimes athletes who take part- time employment
during the off season don't get into the nitty gritty. But Roger was very
dedicated.''

In fact, Mr. Staubach's Cowboy reputation had its drawbacks. He recalls being
greeted at one Dallas executive's office with a huge banner reading ''Welcome
Roger.'' The executive's family was in attendance, each primed for autographs.
The autographs got signed; the proposed real estate deal got ignored.

Mr. Staubach, who left Miller in 1977 to go into real estate on his own, still
finds his celebrity status to be a mixed blessing. His football hero past,
coupled with his continued exposure in television commercials - albeit for
Rolaids - has enabled the company to grow without ever running a corporate ad.
But the downside, says Mr. Staubach, is that potential clients sometimes don't
take him quite seriously.

''Even today, after 14 years in the business, I still have to prove that Roger
Staubach knows how to handle real estate,'' he said.

Mr. Staubach also is convinced that his projects receive more public scrutiny
than those of fellow developers. He recalls a spate of negative publicity over a
zoning variance that he insists was granted not to enhance his profits but to
obviate the need for cutting down an inordinate number of mature trees on the
wooded site. ''The real issues got lost because it was me applying for the
variance,'' he said.

Of course, many real estate developers cite public-spirited reasons for zoning
variances that result in more profitable use of space. But Mr. Staubach's
employees and investors claim that he is genuinely motivated by a religious
sense of right and wrong. Although no one will name names, several confirm that
Mr. Staubach, who has a crucifix prominently displayed in his office, has fired
brokers whose integrity did not measure up.

''Roger only does things one way and that's the right way,'' said Mrs. Cotter.
She, in fact, was an early beneficiary of Mr. Staubach's alleged emphasis on
moral principles in business. He hired Mrs. Cotter in 1979, at a time that
commercial real estate in Dallas was entirely a male enclave.

But, she said, sex discrimination simply did not sit well with Mr. Staubach.
''Roger didn't care that I was a woman, he felt I could do the job,'' she said.

That decision turned out to be a profitable one, in that Mrs. Cotter last year
was responsible for 25 percent of Staubach's total leasing activity. Other moral
decisions have been costly, however.

Mr. Diker recalls one Staubach deal that soured. One of the investors was an
elderly man who could not afford the loss. ''Roger bought out the man's share
and sustained the loss himself,'' Mr. Diker said. ''He felt he had made the
investment decision and he was ready to live with the consequences.''

It is unlikely that absorbing the loss (no one remembers the exact amount)
caused Mr. Staubach much financial pain. Dallas sources place his net worth
between $10 million and $20 million.

What's more, clients seem to flock to his doors. Staubach is one of the few real
estate companies that has never sought help from a Wall Street firm to form a
limited partnership deal.

''There's no way they need anyone's help to put deals together,'' said Morey
Glazer, a Dallas financial counselor whose clients have unsuccessfully tried to
invest in Staubach deals. ''Financial planners call them begging to be
associated with The Staubach Company,'' said Mr. Glazer. ''Their client list
must be a Who's Who in America.''

The investment and development side of the business is relatively new for Mr.
Staubach. Until two years ago, his activities at the company were limited to
brokerage. The firm, originally started in 1977, was a partnership between Mr.
Staubach and Robert Holloway, a colleague from Miller. Mr. Holloway focused on
management and development work, while Mr. Staubach handled the brokerage end.

The break came in 1982, when Mr. Holloway wanted to build high-rise buildings
while Mr. Staubach wanted to expand brokerage and leasing operations. The two
men split the company down those lines. Staubach still avoids high-rise
development, concentrating instead on small apartment and office complexes and
condominiums. Developing new projects, as opposed to handling sales of existing
ones, altogether represents only about 11 percent of revenues.

Investments are an even less significant part of the business, accounting for
only slightly more than 3 percent of revenues. ''We'd like to do more deals, but
the syndicators are making it hard for us,'' Mr. Staubach says. ''They are
structuring strictly tax deals; we want a lot of appreciation. We've had to wait
on the sidelines this year.''

The sidelines are a strange locale for an ex-football hero. And rumors are
floating around Dallas that influential businessmen in the area want to bring
Mr. Staubach back into the limelight, this time as a Republican candidate for
senator.

For now, he professes total lack of interest. ''I can't say what I'll do 10
years from now, but right now I'm not going into politics,'' he stated.


ONE reason, he claims, is that his football career ate heavily into time with
his four daughters and son, ages 7 to 18, and his wife, Marianne, a former
nurse. In that sense, he said, ''getting into politics would be very much like
being an athlete.''

Mr. Staubach's personal life is far removed from football. He will play touch
football at the company's spring picnic, but basketball is now his sport of
choice. His office artwork sports a basketball motif, and his 60,000-square-foot
Dallas home - which, with its huge cathedral ceilings and surrounding acres of
wooded land, is huge even by Texas standards - has a basketball court paved in
Astroturf.

Mr. Staubach continues to push his celebrity days far into the background. He
says he will phase out his television commercial work as soon as existing
contracts run out. And this fiscal year the firm has budgeted a public relations
campaign centered around real estate achievements rather than Mr. Staubach's
athletic reputation.

He's already making headway in the image-changing department. ''When I first
went on presentations with Roger, clients' conference tables would be filled
with Cowboy paraphernalia they expected him to sign,'' Mrs. Cotter recalled.
''When he retired, clients would still ask him about the Army-Navy game or the
Super Bowl.''

But recently, Mrs. Cotter says, Mr. Staubach passed a milestone of sorts. ''Last
week we made a call and all we talked about was real estate. Finally people have
realized that when Roger calls, he's coming to get business.''



Beth Ellyn Rosenthal writes on finance from Dallas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Roger Staubach as Dallas Cowboy and today a real estate
broker

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NUCLEAR FLEET RAISESHACKLES ON SHORE

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 853 words


The unpredictability of the alliances on which the American global naval
strategy depends became apparent last week after New Zealand elected a Labor
government pledged to barring nuclear-powered or nuclear-armed ships from the
country's waters.

American Navy ships of this type will not venture into New Zealand waters until
the middle of next year, under an agreement between Secretary of State George P.
Shultz and Prime Minister-elect David Lange. By then, officials in Washington
believe, New Zealand will have modified its stand.

The New Zealand position puts at risk the effectiveness of military cooperation
in the Anzus (Australia, New Zealand, United States) alliance, which came into
being in 1952. Washington considers that this cooperation is critical not only
to the two island nations but to the Navy's ability to support operations in the
Indian Ocean and meet potential flash points in the Persian Gulf and the danger
represented by a Soviet naval base at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam.

Periodically the United States has faced other problems over port calls and
entry to national waters in the Philippines and Greece. Washington sources note
that when a Labor government was elected in Australia it, too, forbade port
calls by nuclear-driven or nuclear-armed ships. The ban has since been relaxed
and squadrons now call at Sydney, Perth, Brisbane and Melbourne.

There are no permanent American bases in New Zealand and, according to a
qualified Washington source, the Pentagon does not seek one. The present
American policy is to expect a change in New Zealand's stand that would follow
Australia's example. The State Department does not consider Mr. Lange and his
party to be radical leftists, and the new Prime Minister made it clear to Mr.
Shultz and to the Australians that he would work for a practical solution of the
problem. The State Department and the Navy are trying to avoid what a Pentagon
source called ''hard-nose tactics'' in the hope that the tripartite alliance
will survive intact.

The sudden uncertainty in Anzus demonstrated some of the political problems
involved in keeping the Navy operating throughout the world. The Navy argues
that it must be able to operate freely if it is to counter the expanded Soviet
fleet. Host governments in turn are torn between reliance on the Navy for
protection and their fear of becoming a battleground for the superpowers because
of the presence of that protection. Fear of nuclear accidents is also present.

Pentagon officials say they understand this problem and are not prepared to
pressure reluctant governments for facilities to deploy ships. At the same time,
they express hope that those governments recognize the growing threat of Soviet
naval power and the American need to establish a deterrent to it.

Far-Ranging StrategyThe current state of cooperation was described by a Pentagon
source as ''good.'' He said, ''We are satisfied with the present port situation
and are content to let the New Zealand problem work itself out. We have no
problems in the Mediterranean, the Sixth Fleet's home, and we believe that ports
around the world will continue open to our visits.'' The Indian Ocean is also of
immediate interest to the Navy's strategy. Both the Soviet and American navies
deploy squadrons there. The Americans have been welcomed in Sri Lanka, the
Seychelles and Mauritius. Mombassa in Kenya is usable and important to the ships
of the Indian Ocean force.

Nevertheless, the Pentagon source and other officials said they expected
continuing antinuclear demonstrations against ships berthing at Yokosuka, the
Navy's main base in Japan. But the problem is not only overseas: They also
acknowledged that there might be demonstrations when in the next two or three
years a Navy Surface Action Force is based in New York.

Agitation over port visits or entry into national waters could be a restraint on
the development of naval stratey in a period when an increasing number of
vessels are nuclear-powered or nuclear-armed. Widening American naval
deployments are largely a response to the Soviet Navy's new ''blue water
strategy'' which sends Soviet squadrons as far afield as the Caribbean, with a
base at Cienfuegos in Cuba, and the South Atlantic and the China Sea. These
Russian deployments are in areas where the United States has political, economic
and military interests that are safeguarded in peacetime largely by naval
deployments.

''The Navy's responsibilities have grown,'' Secretary of the Navy John F. Lehman
said, ''both in its role as a war deterrent and in crisis management. The Air
Force, of course, can deploy to trouble spots in a crisis but the Navy is in or
near those spots all the time.'

This increase in global responsibilities is behind the Navy's drive to establish
a fleet of 600 ships. With 521 vessels now deployed, the service is approaching
that goal.

Distance is the big problem for the other services. The shortest air route from
the East Coast to the Persian Gulf is 7,450 miles. Movement of troops by sea
from Charleston, S.C., to the Strait of Hormuz is 11,500 miles.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of protest in New Zealand over U.S.S. Queenfish

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGANS MAN IN HONDURAS IS HEARING SOME BACK TALK

BYLINE: By LYDIA CHAVEZ

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 903 words

DATELINE: TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras


While American envoys have come and gone in the turbulent Central American
countries of Nicaragua and El Salvador, John D. Negroponte has maintained a
tight grip on his position as Ambassador to Honduras. Associates say he has
brilliantly executed Reagan Administration policy in one of the region's poorest
countries. Recently, however, the Hondurans have started to question their close
ties with the United States. Mr. Negroponte has come under attack from Honduran
officials upset by accusations that they have been lackeys of Washington.

For two years, the Ambassador, who served previously in South Vietnam and
Greece, worked easily with Gen. Gustavo Alvarez, commander of the armed forces.
Honduras became the base for thousands of C.I.A.- backed Nicaraguan rebels
trying to overthrow the Sandinista Government. It also became the site of a
center where Americans trained Salvadoran soldiers, and the stage for numerous
United States military exercises.

General Alvarez, meanwhile, was acquiring enemies in the armed forces who would
ultimately force him out; they portrayed him as arrogant and corrupt and
inattentive to national interests. Honduran military officials questioned
whether it made sense to train Salvadoran soldiers while the two countries had
unresolved border disputes, or to engage in costly military exercises when the
economy was failing. They also questioned the Honduran interest in permitting
Nicaraguan exile forces to use their terrain in view of the official policy of
neutrality.

Resentment toward the American Ambassador was also growing. Many Honduran army
and political leaders complained that Mr. Negroponte and General Alvarez were
turning the country into a military outpost for the United States. The daily
newspaper La Tribuna recently assailed the ''Olympic disdain'' with which, it
contended, the Ambassador reacted to Honduran criticism of ''Mr.  Negroponte's
assiduous participation in formulating our domestic and foreign policy.'' The
United States buildup did not go unnoticed by other Central American leaders.
Honduran pride was hurt by ridicule. A Costa Rican official wisecracked to
reporters that Honduras was ''a prostitute for the United States.'' That was bad
enough, he said, ''but did it have to be a cheap prostitute?''

Assessing Mutual BenefitsOn March 31, the military ousted General Alvarez and
relations with the Embassy began to cool, Honduran and American officials
report. They said the Ambassador was not informed about General Alvarez's
departure until the former commander was already headed for exile in Costa Rica.
Col. Omar Zelaya, a member of the army's Supreme Council, said the new command
of the armed forces was keeping an ''arm's length'' relationship with Mr.
Negroponte and asking for changes in policies that had been approved under
General Alvarez.

Mr. Negroponte has been responsive to these complaints, which raises the
question of whether the Hondurans had been forced into arrangements they did not
feel comfortable with, or just never bothered to drive a harder bargain. More
Hondurans are now being taught at the American regional training center. United
States military excerises have been scaled down. But it is unclear whether
Honduras will get more aid. Mr. Negroponte's view, shared by the Reagan
Administration and in Congress, is that present levels are adequate. ''What we
do here is in their mutual benefit,'' he said recently. ''They receive the
second largest amount of economic and military assistance (following El
Salvador). These exercises have all been conducted for their mutual benefit.''
Honduras received $125 million in economic and military aid this year.

However, the effectiveness of aid is measured not simply in dollars and cents
but also in Honduran perceptions. Egos need to be boosted, but Honduran military
officials say Mr. Negroponte's ability to smooth ruffled feathers has been
damaged by his close association with the military buildup. Last week, officials
in Washington said relations with Honduras were improving and Gen. John W.
Vessey Jr., Chairman of the United States Joint Chiefs, visited the country.
Honduran leaders were entertained aboard the carrier John F. Kennedy.

The Ambassador's problems are complicated by Honduran officials who criticize
the American presence but at the same time look to Washington for direction. One
high army official recently complained about a report in a local newspaper that
quoted Mr. Negroponte as saying that a series of small military exercises would
be held in Honduras. ''He has to be smoother diplomatically,'' the army man
said. ''We make the decisions in this country.'' The comment reflected sensitive
feelings, but in fact, the exercises had already been reported. The Ambassador
was merely answering a reporter's question.

Moreover, while Honduran officials say they want to speak for themselves, they
often refuse to respond to questions about policy. Reporters recently tried for
a week to get Honduran officials to speak on the record about the country's
policy toward the 12,000-man Nicaraguan exile army that is trying to overthow
the Sandinista Government from its base in Honduras. After waiting fruitlessly
for four hours in the anteroom of Gen. Walter Lopez Reyes, the new commander,
reporters submitted a list of written questions. His response, made through his
secretary, was ''ask the Americans.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ambassador John D. Negroponte

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS July 22, 1984Fiction1

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1385 words


16

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932.  2

25

LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency.  3

39

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.  4

4

20

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  5

7

15

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  6

6

8

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.  7

10

19

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  7

8

8

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Three witches wreak
havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town.  9

5

9

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.

 10

8

8

THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch.  (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The legends
of an old manor haunt four generations of an English family.  11

14

2

THE GREMLINS STORYBOOK, by Mary Carey.  (Golden Press, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the current film ''Gremlins.'' 12

11

16

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  13

12

6

POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A
woman discovers the truth about her husband after he disappears.  14



1

HOOLIGANS, by William Diehl. (Villard Books, $15.95.) A Federal racket squad ace
tries to cope with the Mafia who have infested his old home town.  15

12

6

HIM WITH HIS FOOT IN HIS MOUTH AND

OTHER STORIES, by Saul Bellow. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) A novella and four short
stories by the Nobel laureate.



















































  Nonfiction1

34

THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and David Horowitz. (Summit,
$20.95.) The dark as well as the glamorous sides of four generations of a
prominent family.  2

16

WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The troubled life of the
late entertainer John Belushi.  3

2

3

IN GOD'S NAME, by David A. Yallop. (Bantam, $16.95.) A British journalist argues
that Pope John Paul I's death in 1978 was a case of murder.  4

4

7

THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent.  5

5

10

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  6

5

11

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  6

5

20

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard, $10.) The novelist recalls
her childhood in Mississippi.  8

8

44

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  9

9

12

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.  (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  10

13

6

POWERPLAY, by Mary Cunningham with Fran Schumer. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster,
$16.95.) The rise and fall of a woman executive at the Bendix Corporation.  11



1

D.V., by Diana Vreeland. Edited by George Plimpton and Christopher Hemphill.
(Knopf, $15.95.) Memoirs of the one-time ''Empress of Fashion.'' 11

9

13

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' television series.  13

12

5

GOOD MORNING, MERRY SUNSHINE, by Bob Greene. (Atheneum, $14.95.) The syndicated
columnist's journal of his child's first year.  13

11

19

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  15



1

REGGIE, by Reggie Jackson with Mike Lupica.  (Villard Books, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the controversial baseball player.








































 And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)


THE ABOLITION, by Jonathan Schell. (Knopf, $11.95.) The author

of ''The Fate of the Earth'' eloquently sets forth our nuclear

predicament and takes on the daunting challenge of defining a

policy to prevent nuclear holocaust.

JAMES AGEE, by Laurence Bergreen. (Dutton, $20.) A well-

researched, dispassionate biography of the Southern writer and

critic who in the 1950's became legendary for his attractive

personality, extravagant behavior and unrealized genius.

THE ONLY PROBLEM, Muriel Spark. (Putnam's, $14.95.) A novel,

with high metaphysical content, about the trials of a rich man who

is writing a dissertation on the Book of Job and exploring in his

own life the problem of evil.

PARTNERS, by Veronica Geng. (Harper & Row, $13.95.) A

collection of some very funny pieces, by a devastating witness of

present-day mores, about such subjects as journalism, politics,

feminism, easy credit, art and adolescence.

TIRANT LO BLANC, by Joanot Martorell and Marti Joan de Galba.

(Schocken, $21.95.) The first translation into English, from the

original Catalan, of the l5th-century romance. Full of brave

knights, heroic deeds and true love.

A VERY PRIVATE EYE: An Autobiography in Diaries and Letters,

by Barbara Pym. (Dutton, $19.95.) In this marvelous compilation,

one of the most restrained of modern British novelists surprises us

by revealing how emotionally unrestrained she really was.

WILLIE AND DWIKE: An American Profile, by William Zinsser.

(Harper & Row, $13.95.) An adept and satisfyingly unusual book of

reportage about two black American jazz musicians, Willie Ruff

on bass and French horn, Dwike Mitchell on piano.  Advice, How-to and
Miscellaneous

1

117

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

26

BOOK WITHOUT A NAME, by Kit Williams.  (Knopf, $10.95.) New picture story by the
author of ''Masquerade,'' offering a prize for the finder of the book's true
title.  3

3

82

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  4

5

3

CHEF PAUL PRUDHOMME'S LOUISIANA

KITCHEN, by Paul Prudhomme. (Morrow, $19.95.) Recipes for Cajun and Creole
cooking by a New Orleans chef.  5



16

WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE

DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard work updated in 1983.























 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 23, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

WESTMORELAND REVEALS DETAILS OF HIS LIBEL CASE

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words


Senior White House and military officials had abundant evidence of the exact
strength of North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces before the 1968 Tet offensive,
according to documents made public by Gen. William C. Westmoreland in his $120
million libel suit against CBS.

In legal papers filed this weekend, the general also contends that, even before
the network broadcast the 1982 documentary over which he is suing, many of the
journalists involved in the program did not think it was fair or that it proved
its central thesis of a conspiracy to suppress accurate data on enemy forces in
Vietnam.

The new documents include a 1967 military intelligence report that CBS said the
General suppressed to mislead President Johnson, Congress and the public about
whether the United States and South Vietnam were winning the war. The report was
in the files of Robert W. Komer, one of the top civilian aides Mr. Johnson sent
to Saigon to keep him informed of the war's progress.

A 365-page brief filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan also says that a
''Source X'' provided military and civilian intelligence offices in Washington
with unimpeachable information about North Vietnamese forces infiltrating South
Vietnam before the Tet offensive. CBS said General Westmoreland's command
concealed accurate infiltration-rate figures from Washington, but the brief says
the information flowed the other way, from Washington to Saigon.

What the Program Said

General Westmoreland, the commander of American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968, said he was defamed by the 90-minute documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A
Vietnam Deception.''

The program said the general and his intelligence aides conspired to falsify
estimates of enemy troop strength because they did not want to give bad news to
President Johnson and were afraid that reporting increases in enemy forces would
increase domestic dissent on the war. It said that American troops were thus not
prepared for the Tet attacks and that intelligence officers were asked to alter
enemy-casualty records after the assault.

In a brief on May 23, CBS asked Judge Pierre N. Leval to dismiss the case,
citing affidavits from intelligence aides that the network said proved a
conspiracy. It also argued that General Westmoreland could not meet the special
burden imposed on public officials of proving that the network either knew its
statements were false or did not care to find out.

The general's brief, a response to that motion, asks instead for a speedy trial.
CBS has three weeks to reply before Judge Leval rules.

The new brief, the first detailed look at what General Westmoreland hopes to
prove to a jury, says CBS either had or could easily have obtained proof that
the military intelligence estimates were not suppressed or altered. It rebuts
the program's three key points - that Central Intelligence Agency estimates of
Vietcong strength were hidden from Washington, that figures on North Vietnamese
infiltration were concealed and that figures were later manipulated to hide
earlier misreporting.

The program focused on a debate over the regular ''Order of Battle Summaries''
produced by the Military Assistance Command in Vietnam. It said Gen. Joseph
McChristian, the head of intelligence in the command until July 1967, wanted the
estimates of enemy strength to include some irregular and political forces. But
it said General Westmoreland blocked this and told his analysts to keep the
total beneath 300,000.

The McChristian report from Ambassador Komer's files includes all of the higher
figures, totalling 416,000 to 429,000. So does a slide presented to military and
civilian intelligence officers at a session in Langley, Va., that was arranged
to try to resolve the debate over which Vietcong were a military threat, the
brief says.

Support for Westmoreland

It says the outcome of this debate was an agreement by every major level of
command with General Westmoreland's decision not to include the self-defense
forces because they had no offensive capacity.

The brief says the General could not have hidden figures on the infiltration of
20,000 to 25,000 North Vietnamese troops in the four months before the Tet
offensive, as the program said, because there was no such infiltration. It also
says the General and the White House got their most accurate figures from
''Source X,'' a Washington agency that the brief said it could not further
identify for national security reasons.  General Westmoreland could not have
ordered computer data bases changed to cover up intelligence failures, the brief
said, because all of the prior data had already been widely circulated in paper
copies. It portrayed the CBS charges of data manipulation as a mistaken
insistence on mathematical formulas not applicable to the Tet casualty data.

The brief also deals with the issue of whether CBS journalists and supervisory
executives knew about the contradictory evidence, doubted the program's fairness
or did not diligently seek the truth. Its evidence comes from depositions,
affidavits, and an internal investigation by CBS that was conducted by a senior
producer, Burton Benjamin. The court made CBS turn Mr. Benjamin's report over to
General Westmoreland's lawyer, Dan M. Burt.

A Dispute Mentioned

Carolyn McDaniel, a researcher and secretary, told Mr. Benjamin she had told
George Crile, the program's producer, that interview material showed President
Johnson knew about the troop-strength issue, but Mr. Crile told her that
information was not important to the essence of the show. Sam Adams, a former
C.I.A. analyst and paid consultant for the program, also told Mr. Benjamin that
Mr. Johnson knew of the debate.

The brief says that George Carver, the top C.I.A. aide on Vietnam, disputed the
conspiracy thesis in an interview with Mr. Crile shortly before the program was
broadcast.

The documentary strongly suggested that General McChristian was transferred from
his intelligence job because he insisted on reporting higher figures for enemy
strength. In fact, the brief says, Mr. Crile and others knew that the General
was moving to a long-sought position, and that General Westmoreland had tried to
persuade him to stay on. It also says that the program edited out General
McChristian's statement that he had never been asked to understate the strength
of the Vietcong.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A picture caption Monday with an article about a libel suit by Gen. William C.
Westmoreland against CBS misidentified the program involved. It was a
documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''


GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. William Westmoreland; photo of George Crile

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 24, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STATE DEPARTMENT;
THE FRUSTRATING NEWS ACCORDING TO SHULTZ



BYLINE:
By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1112 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 23


As the Air Force plane carrying Secretary of State George P. Shultz neared
Washington last Thursday night, his aides handed out a fact sheet showing that
on the two-week mission to Asia he had just concluded, he flew 26,635 miles and
clocked 52 hours and 43 minutes aloft.

Barrie Dunsmore, the correspondent for ABC News aboard the plane, looking at the
sheet, shook his head and said, ''All that time in the air and no time on the
air.'' He was referring to the fact that in the entire Shultz trip, to Hong
Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Australia, New Zealand and Hawaii, none of
the networks found time for a television report on what he was doing.

As far as television was concerned, Mr. Shultz was on a two-week trip to
oblivion.

Ignored for Lack of Crises


This was frustrating for Mr. Shultz, not because he misses seeing himself on
television - he gives the impression of someone who could not care less about
personal publicity - but because he feels that his mission was highly successful
and that because there were no crises, he was ignored by the television
networks, which were preoccupied with covering the Democratic National
Convention.

Mr. Shultz's mission was covered in The New York Times, The Washington Post and
The Los Angeles Times, among other newspapers, but it was hardly the talk of the
nation. Moreover, neither The Associated Press nor United Press International
assigned reporters to the Shultz plane, leaving the coverage to correspondents
in the various capitals visited. Television reporters variously referred to the
Secretary as ''No-News Shultz'' and to his plane as the ''Stealth'' aircraft.

''There's a lot of news that people don't recognize as news, I guess,'' Mr.
Shultz lamented today in a brief appearance on the NBC News program ''Today.''

''From the standpoint of the United States, what's going on in Asia and the
Pacific is of tremendous importance. Some of these underlying trends and
developments that are going along that don't get punctuated by some daily news
peg are very important and, as I said, tend not to be observed.''

Good News and Bad News


Mr. Shultz is not the first Secretary of State to decry the press's failure to
report the ''good news'' adequately. When Dean Rusk was Secretary, at the height
of the Vietnam War, he used to complain that out of 1,500 cables received daily
at the State Department, only a relative handful dealt with ''bad news,'' but
that was what drew the most attention in newspapers and on television.

Mr. Rusk once suggested, in fact, that newspapers devote a column each week to
the accomplishments of American diplomacy, just to provide some balance.  Mr.
Shultz has not gone that far, but he is clearly uneasy about the press. Those
close to him say this goes back to his first days in high office, as Secretary
of Labor in the Nixon Administration. He has said he often read articles that
purported to tell about meetings he attended but that often had no relation to
what really happened.

Incident in Malaysia


In Malaysia, he was startled to find that a Malaysian spokesman, in discussing
Mr. Shultz's meeting with the Foreign Minister there, reported that the
Malaysian had sharply criticized Mr. Shultz for the American policy of helping
China economically. The press was told this would lead to a militarily strong
China, which would become a threat to Southeast Asia.

An American official who sat in on the meeting said the Malaysians had said, in
fact, that even though they had long-term concerns about China, they thought the
American aid was on ''the right track'' and that Malaysia itself was trying to
aid the Chinese through technical cooperation.

Like most of his predecessors as Secretary of State, Mr. Shultz seems ambivalent
on how much information he believes the press should possess. On the one hand,
he repeatedly tells his spokesmen to tell the story as it is, and not to cover
up. On the other hand, he finds it unsettling to see or read articles divulging
material he regards as top secret. He is opposed to leaks, he says; but having
seen the difficulty in Government of keeping secrets very long, he has virtually
stopped complaining about them.

Guessing Game Continues


On the trip, Mr. Shultz continued to keep alive the guessing game on whether he
wants to stay as Secretary of State if President Reagan is re- elected. Most of
his closest aides have already been reassigned to other jobs, and his chief
spokesman, John Hughes, has also decided to leave Government at the end of the
year, no matter what. Thus, no one would be surprised if Mr. Shultz also chose
to return to Palo Alto, Calif., and be closer to his children and grandchildren,
most of whom live there.

His wife, who is known as Obie (from her maiden name, O'Brien), certainly seems
to miss her family a great deal. On the way back from Asia, the Shultz plane
stopped at an Air Force base near San Francisco to refuel, allowing the Shultz
children to meet the plane and Mrs. Shultz to get off and go to the family house
on the Stanford campus to await the birth of another grandchild due this week.
Mr. Shultz plans to join her this weekend at the start of a two-week vacation
when he accompanies Mr. Reagan to the opening of the Olympic Games in Los
Angeles on Saturday.

But the prevalent view of senior State Department officials is that Mr. Shultz
would like to remain Secretary of State, at least for a year or so, to achieve
some solid diplomatic success, with the Soviet Union, or in the Middle East.

A Diplomatic Response


When asked his preferences, Mr. Shultz responds diplomatically by saying it is
up to the President to choose his Cabinet and by declining to say anything that
limits the President's options. At the same time, he has let it be known he
feels that the job of Secretary of State allows a person to make a significant
contribution to the country. If this leads a listener to assume he is saying he
wants to remain as Secretary, Mr. Shultz is also quick to say that he liked
private life and never asked to be Secretary of State.

This is all very high-minded, but some of his aides say that if Mr. Shultz
remains, it will be in part to prevent Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger
from taking the post. Although Mr. Weinberger has never said he wanted to shift
from the Pentagon to Foggy Bottom, there is a widespread assumption in
Washington that he would like to do so. Even though Mr. Shultz and Mr.
Weinberger were both executives for the Bechtel Corporation, there seems to be
no great rapport between the two men in their current jobs.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George Shultz

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 24, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

RISE OF VOTER-INITIATED REFERENDUMS: THE RIGHT HONES A TOOL OF LIBERALS

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1250 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 23


The voter- initiated referendum, long used by liberals as a tool of political
reform, is being increasingly used now by conservatives to bypass legislators
and enact new laws.

State officials and political researchers say the use of the referendum process,
a relic of the Populist era that enables citizens in 23 states to propose
legislation directly to other voters, is continuing a surge that began a decade
ago.

This summer, they say, more than 200 petition drives are under way to propose
new statutes or constitutional amendments to voters.

''We've just recently awakened to the power that we have to change the direction
of government and get the changes we want to come about,'' said Richard A.
Viguerie, the direct-mail advertising executive who is founder and publisher of
The Conservative Digest. ''There's going to be an explosion of efforts on the
part of conservatives to use the initiative.''

'Tax Revolt Is Being Revived'


Noting that conservative-backed petition drives were under way this summer to
get signatures to put tax-cut measures on the ballot in eight states, David D.
Schmidt, editor of The Initiative News Report, a newsletter published in
Washington, said: ''Some people were writing the obituary of the taxpayer's
revolt. Well, the tax revolt movement is being revived and there's no end in
sight.''

The tax revolt started in June 1978 with the passage of Proposition 13, the
measure that slashed property taxes in California by nearly 60 percent.

This year, Californians will vote on another tax-cutting measure, in addition to
other conservative-backed measures that would reduce welfare benefits to the
poor and endorse a move to hold a constitutional convention to consider an
amendment to the United States Constitution requiring a balanced Federal budget.

In Utah, voters will be asked to ban pornographic programming on cable
television channels. In Michigan, proponents say they expect to have enough
signatures to qualify a proposed amendment to the State Constitution to require
direct voter approval of tax increases.

Besides the increased use of the initiative process by conservative groups,
specialists say two other patterns are emerging: First, voter-initiated
referendums are being used increasingly by conservatives and liberals alike to
apply the pressure of public opinion on elected officials by forcing elections
on such issues as abortion and nuclear arms control.

Also, there are increased efforts to reduce the powers of elected officials.

23 States Allow Initiatives


Most of the 23 states that allow voters to originate legislation are in the
West. The others are Florida, Illinois, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri
and Ohio. The District of Columbia also has such a law.

In most states, to place a measure on the ballot, the initiators have to get
voter signatures equal to 5 to 10 percent of the votes cast in the previous
general election.

The state laws that allow citizens to originate legislation or, in some cases,
amendments to state constitutions were conceived by turn-of-the-century
reformers unhappy with sometimes- corrupt state legislators.

Political historians say the laws were used rather often before World War I,
then faded in popularity, came into vogue again in the Depression and faded away
again in World War II and the prosperous postwar years.

Mistrust of Government Cited


Since the early 1970's, Mr. Schmidt said, the use of such laws ''has boomed,''
largely in step with the general sense of mistrust of government that developed
from the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandals and the emergence of the
environmental and consumer movements.

From 1969 to 1982, he noted, the number of voter-initiated referendums that
qualified for state ballots quadrupled to more than 60, while the number of
states in which such measures were voted on increased to 18 from 8. The number
of states' measures that made the ballot in the last national election in
November 1982 was 50, a 60-year high, Mr. Schmidt said.

In many instances, the measures have been backed by environmentalists, consumers
and others who usually have a liberal point of view, seeking such goals as
banning the development of nuclear power plants, requiring deposits for beverage
bottles and cans to reduce litter and seeking ways to curb campaign financing
abuses.

This year in Oregon, for example, efforts are being made to place a measure
before the voters that would legalize the personal use of marijuana.

South Dakotans will vote in November on a proposal calling for a freeze in the
development and deployment of nuclear weapons. In Colorado, Democrats are
backing a proposal that would register state residents to vote when they
obtained a driver's license.

Arizona Health Cost Plan


And in the usually conservative state of Arizona, more than 1,200 employers are
behind an unusual effort to regulate business. They have had a measure qualified
for the November ballot that would impose strict controls on hospital rates to
control soaring costs of employee medical insurance.

But researchers say conservatives are having increasing success in placing
measures on the ballot and getting them passed. Their success began with the
passage six years ago of Proposition 13, which was drafted by two conservative
businessmen, Howard Jarvis and Paul Gann.

Although campaigns in support of voter-initiated measures elsewhere in the
nation have tended to be grass- roots efforts, California's sprawling size has
led over the years to the emergence of a large ''initiative industry,''
specialized companies that collect signatures and promote proposed measures for
a fee, making it easier for well- financed conservative groups to get measures
before voters.

If conservatives expand efforts elsewhere to use referendums to accomplish their
goals, specialists in the field say that California may be providing a preview
of what to expect.

Legislature's Budget Cut 30%


On June 5, Californians narrowly enacted a measure drafted by conservative
Republicans, with Mr. Gann as their spokesman, mandating drastic changes in the
operating rules of the Democratic-controlled Legislature, cutting its budget 30
percent and substantially weakening the strength of the Democratic majority.

The first layoff notices to legislative employees went out last week, although
Democratic leaders still hope to overturn in the courts a provision of the law
that mandate changes in the Legislature's operational rules.

Another measure that would limit the power of the Democratic majority has
qualified for the November ballot. It proposes to remove the Legislature's power
to re- draw the boundaries of Congressional districts and, with it, the power to
gerrymander districts. The measure would give the redistricting power to a
commission of retired judges.

Besides California and Michigan, the states in which new tax-cutting measures
have been proposed this year are Nevada, Montana, Idaho, Nebraska, Oregon and
Washington.

Sue Thomas, executive director of the National Center for Initiative Review, a
business-financed clearing house of information about voter-initiated
legislation in Englewood, Colo., said the more than 200 petition drives under
way throughout the country appeared to be a record since the Depression, when
nationwide data began to be kept. She estimated that ''59 or 60'' of the drives
would qualify for the November ballot.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 24, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

'CITZEN: THE POLITICAL LIFE OF ALLARD K. LOWENSTEIN'

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 562 words


''CITIZEN: The Political Life of Allard K. Lowenstein'' is an homage to the
activist, slain by a disturbed former associate four years ago. It traces Mr.
Lowenstein's involvements, and finds they were all connected by his concern for
human rights. The one-hour documentary will be shown on Channel 13 at 11:30
tonight.

In particular, the documentary looks at Mr. Lowenstein's activities in the civil
rights and peace movements. In the early 1960's, he helped to organize the
Mississippi Summer Project, which joined Northern white students and
disenfranchised Southern blacks in a voter-registration drive.

A few years later, after deciding that the nascent peace movement lacked
effective tactics, Mr. Lowenstein co-founded the ''Dump Johnson'' movement. Its
aim was to persuade President Johnson not to run for another term. A constant of
Mr. Lowenstein's career as organizer, activist and standard-bearer was his
determination to work within the political system, and, where possible, to
change it. This gave him a framework; it strengthened everything he did.


Thus, in an old interview we hear Mr. Lowenstein say, ''I try to make people
realize how powerful their political strength is whenever they get
discouraged,'' and ''Elections belong to the people - that's what they tend to
forget.''

Meanwhile, we also hear a great many people, some of them well known, talk about
Mr. Lowenstein. ''It seems he was always showing up,'' Senator Edward M. Kennedy
says fondly, while even William F. Buckley Jr., who was seldom in sympathy with
Mr. Lowenstein's political viewpoint, remembers him kindly.

At the same time, the documentary, which is without narration, has something of
an insider's quality to it. It supposes that viewers will be as attracted to Mr.
Lowenstein as were the people he dealt with in his life. Few people ever doubted
Mr. Lowenstein's commitment to the causes he advocated; his energy and
dedication were boundless.

But trying to capture these qualities in a posthumous documentary is something
else again. We hear about them, but we don't feel them. And in citing the ''Dump
Johnson'' movement as one of Mr. Lowenstein's accomplishments the documentary
overlooks the fact that the underlying purpose of ''Dump Johnson'' was to end
the war in Vietnam. It did not do this, and it can be argued that its only
accomplishment was to help splinter the Democratic Party and to elect a
Republican President.


On the other hand, the documentary does Mr. Lowenstein a disservice by ignoring
one of his very real accomplishments in the House of Representatives. Mr.
Lowenstein, elected in 1968, served only a single term. We hear Representative
Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts and an old colleague, say that Mr.
Lowenstein was effective in that single term, but we do not hear how.

In fact, Mr. Lowenstein helped lead the fight against the seniority system in
the House. He adapted tactics he had used in the civil rights and peace
movements, sometimes packing the House gallery with his supporters. Even
hard-rock conservatives were impressed. For a freshman Congressman, Mr.
Lowenstein turned in a remarkable performance.

Still, ''Citizen: The Political Life of Allard K. Lowenstein'' does show that a
single passionate person can make himself heard in the political system. It is
worthwhile at least for that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Allard Lowenstein

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AIRPORT IS NEARLY READY, BUT GRENADA IS NOT

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1311 words

DATELINE: ST. GEORGE'S, Grenada, July 18


The big airport here that the Cubans started and that the United States is
finishing is supposed to go into operation in about three months, making it
possible for jet airliners to fly to Grenada from anywhere in the world.

But Grenada, which has wanted a modern airport for so long, does not appear
quite ready for this.

First of all, there is no place to put large numbers of visitors. Grenada is
used to dealing with tourists on a small scale. When it counts all its available
rooms, including 200 in guest houses and cottages, it comes up with a total of
461, which is not many more than the number of seats on one 747 jumbo jet.

Roads Better but Still Bad

There are also problems with electricity, water and telephone service. Most of
the roads are an obstacle course of potholes. But nearly everyone says they were
even worse a few months ago and they cite road maintai nence as one of the areas
where the appointed interim Government has excelled.

Some parts of the island, which is about twice the size of Washington, D.C., are
getting only four hours of electricity a day and the phones are so unreliable
that some people say they have given up trying to use them.  When there is no
electricity water pumps do not work so there have been shortages of water for
drinking and bathing for months.

$57 Million in Aid Sought

The Reagan Administration has requested $57 million in aid to deal with these
problems. In the meantime, a serious financial crunch seems to be shaping up.

No one here seems to know how much it is likely to cost to operate the airport
annually. But one early study by a team of United States agencies suggested that
the cost might be as high as $10 million, an enormous sum in a country with a
gross domestic product of about $100 million.

Both Nicholas Brathwaite, the chairman of the nine-member appointed interim
Government, and Loren E. Lawrence, the highest ranking United States official on
Grenada, said that $10 million did not seem to be an excessive estimate for
operating the airport.

''The most frightening thing in the equation,'' Mr. Lawrence said, ''is, 'Can
that airport be supported?' It's going to take a lot of airplanes, a lot of
revenues, a lot of airport taxes, a lot of goods going out and coming in.''

Nearly everyone here agrees that Grenada needed a jet airport that would permit
night flights. The present airport is 50 years old. The terminal is a wooden
shack, and service from one small regional airline is erratic.

Some of its propeller craft carry only nine passengers, and people with
confirmed reservations say they have sometimes waited for more than a day in
Barbados or Trinidad for a seat to become available. Businessmen say air freight
service is so undependable that they prefer to wait several weeks for a cargo
ship.

But nearly everyone also agrees that the island of perhaps 100,000 people could
have done very nicely with a much smaller airport than it is getting for about
$71 million.

The runway of 9,000 feet, which extends into the sea on a finger of land on the
southern end of the island, is no bigger than runways on many islands in the
Caribbean and Grenadian and United States officials say it is the minimum length
required for full international operations.

But, the Americans and Grenadians say, the concrete and glass terminal, which is
about the length and width of a football field and more than three stories high,
could have been about half the size.

Plans Go Back to the 60's

Grenadians had been working on plans for a new airport since the late 1960's.
But they could never raise the money. Finally, with much assistance from Cuba,
the project was started in 1980.

When some 7,000 American troops invaded Grenada last October after the leftist
Prime Minister, Maurice Bishop, had been killed and a hard-line faction had
taken over the Government, the airport was slightly more than 60 percent
finished, Grenadian and United States officials say.

''Chopping it back would have cost more than going ahead and finishing what was
already there,'' Mr. Lawrence said.

The United States contracted with Morrison-Knutson, an Idaho construction
company that was part of a consortium that built most of the roads, ports and
bridges in Vietnam, to complete the airport for $21.8 million. Morrison- Knutson
went to work with 20 Americans and about 270 Grenadians in late May.

United States officials say that ''if everything goes right'' one-third of the
terminal building will be ready for passengers and the first jetliners should
arrive on Oct. 25, the anniversary of the American invasion.

Year's Work Will Remain

To meet that deadline, which was apparently set in Washington, officials here
have decided to use two old wooden barracks that once housed Cuban work crews as
shelter for arriving passengers. None of the landscaping or fencing will be
completed and officials estimate that another year of work will remain.

The Reagan Administration has asserted that the Cubans and the leftist
Government here were building the airport with military activity in mind. Many
Grendians and Americans here who have studied the airport agree that it may well
have been designed for use as a transit point for troops and supplies and as a
fueling station.

They note that the leftist Government, which contended that the airport was
meant to increase the island's opportunities in tourism and industry, had taken
no steps to expand hotel facilities.

One American said the terminal provided enough restaurant space to ''feed a
troop movement.'' And several said that the airport's fuel storage tanks, with a
capacity of more than one million gallons, were far larger than would be needed
for strictly commercial use.

Island's Development at Issue

So far only one airline, British West Indian Airways, has received Government
approval to begin flying to the new airport. But United States officials here
and in nearby Barbados say that Pan American World Airways, American Airlines
and Eastern Air Lines are discussing landing rights with the Government.

Officials of British West Indian Airways said the airline would begin operations
at the jet airport with two daily flights between Grenada and Trinidad, 90 miles
to the southeast, using DC-9's, which carry 116 passengers each.

As work proceeds on the airport, some Grenadian businessmen and Government
officials seem at odds over how development on the island should proceed.

The Grenada Hotel Association says that initially air traffic should be
restricted to permit tourism to grow gradually as basic services are improved.
The association, whose members own the existing hotels, says it would be a
mistake to invite foreigners to come to Grenada to build hotels for a mass
market.

Hotel Projects Approved

Instead, the association proposes that its members expand their facilities,
possibly build a few new ones and invite outsiders to put up two new hotels,
providing the island with perhaps 800 more rooms within three years.

But Mr. Brathwaite says he thinks Grenada needs 3,000 hotel rooms by the end of
next year and 2,000 more as soon as possible.

The Government has approved half a dozen new hotel projects, officials say. But
so far no construction has been started.

The hotel association says it is concerned about changing the rustic character
of the island and wants to concentrate on attracting wealthy tourists in
relatively small numbers. Mr. Brathwaite says the increase he envisions would
''not create too many social problems.''

''The question I ask,'' Mr. Brathwaite said, ''is how does one defend the
construction of that size of airport with the maintenance costs involved if you
don't expect tourism to develop to a certain level?''

''It would,'' he added, ''represent a waste.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING-HANOI VERBAL DUEL HEATS UP

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 450 words

DATELINE: PEKING, July 24


China accused Vietnam today of fomenting trouble along their common frontier to
sabotage any normalization of Chinese- Soviet relations.

An official commentary by the New China News Agency repeated Peking's charge
that Hanoi was creating border tensions to distract world attention from
Vietnam's activities in Cambodia, where Vietnamese troops have been fighting
Cambodian guerrillas that are supported by Peking.

The official press agency went on to assert that ''the Vietnamese authorities
want to put a spoke in the wheels of Sino-Soviet relations.''

The commentary also implicitly criticized the Soviet Union for having pledged
support for Vietnam before ''Hanoi's latest armed provocation against China''
earlier this month.

Battle Reported on July 12

This referred to a battle reported between Chinese and Vietnamese troops on the
frontier of Yunnan Province on July 12, in which the Chinese claimed to have
beaten back a division-sized Vietnamese attack.

While similar reports of fighting have been exaggerated in the past, Western
diplomats here think that a substantial fight did take place between Chinese and
Vietnamese forces.  They speculate that Vietnam tried unsuccessfully to seize
two pieces of high ground that China had taken in an attack last April. The
hills are in disputed territory.

The New China News Agency said today that Vietnam was ignoring China's warnings
against further such ''armed provocations'' and was moving up more troops. It
contended that Vietnamese artillery fired 7,000 shells into Malipo County of
Yunnan Province on July 13 and 14.

3 Chinese Conditions

The commentary today, which was signed by Huang Yuan, gave no indication that
China had softened its three conditions for normalizing relations with the
Soviet Union. These are an unconditional withdrawal of Soviet forces from
Afghanistan, an end to Moscow's support for the Vietnamese military occupation
of Cambodia and a sharp reduction of Soviet missiles and troops along China's
northern frontier.

The New China News Agency said Vietnam, with Soviet backing, was determined to
pursue an expansionist policy in Southeast Asia. It charged that the Vietnamese
had stepped up border tensions with China to undercut the visit by the Soviet
Deputy Prime Minister, Ivan V. Arkhipov, in May.

The Soviet Union indefinitely postponed Mr. Arkhipov's visit to China the day
before he was scheduled to arrive. Western diplomats in Peking have guessed that
the visit was called off because the Kremlin did not want to endure the
embarrassment of having an official delegation sitting in Peking while fighting
was continuing on the border between China and Vietnam.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 36 words


A picture caption Monday with an article about a libel suit by Gen. William C.
Westmoreland against CBS misidentified the program involved. It was a
documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 26, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

40 SHIPS IGNORE PLEADING VIETNAMESE

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 617 words

DATELINE: MANILA, July 25


Refugee officials are troubled by what they say is a growing tendency by passing
ships not to help Vietnamese fleeing their country by boat.

In one incident, officials said today, 68 Vietnamese refugees died of
starvation, thirst or disease aboard a 39-foot fishing boat that drifted in the
South China Sea for 32 days, apparently ignored by at least 40 passing ships.
The 16 survivors were finally rescued off the Philippine island of Luzon.

More than half a million Vietnamese have fled their homeland by boat since the
mid-1970's, mainly between 1978 and 1981.

''The big numbers belong to another era, but the problem continues,'' said Gregg
Beyer, representative in the Philippines for the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

 Some Ships Passed Yards Away

The survivors who were brought here said that they had waved white T-shirts and
shouted at the crews of passing vessels, some coming as close as 10 yards, but
none stopped. A Philippine fishing boat finally came to their rescue.

''Other ships' not helping is a problem that is getting worse,'' said Janvier De
Riedmatten, deputy representative for the High Commissioner for Refugees.

Many captains, Mr. De Riedmatten said, are unwilling to lose the time involved
in taking refugees to the nearest point and dropping them off.

Recently, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has worked with
countries to speed up the drop-off time so that the rescuing vessel will not be
tied up for four or five days, as has often been the case.

Exodus by Boat Continues

It is a rare occurrence for as many as 68 out of 84 people on a boat to die,
refugee officials said. But the case, they added, is another illustration that
the refugee problem is by no means over.

Most of the boats go to Malaysia. Nearly 200,000 Vietnamese have landed there.
The next most popular destination is Hong Kong, followed by Indonesia and
Thailand. The vast majority of the refugees are ultimately resettled elsewhere,
usually within a year and mostly in the United States, Australia, Canada and
France.

The Philippines ranks fifth as a landing point for the boat people. A total of
31,595 are said to have come here through June - more than 1,700 of them in
1983.

The Vietnamese boat rescued off the Philippines went to sea early in June from
Ben Tre, in what was formerly South Vietnam. There were 44 men and 40 women
aboard, with enough food and water for about six days. Of the 16 who survived,
nine were men and seven were women, ranging in age from 11 to 39.

Malnutrition and Deydration

All the survivors were suffering from extreme malnutrition and dehydration, and
a few had other disorders including pneumonia and shock.

Dinh Xuan Hoa, 24 years old, said she was with her half-brother, Koan Chau Dat,
who had served as a pilot in the South Vietnamese Air Force. He died at sea.

She, along with three other survivors, are in a hospital in Manila. The rest are
in a transit center near the Manila airport. Government officials would not let
them talk with outsiders. ''They are very weak,'' one official said.

Toward the end of the ordeal, those still alive were so feeble that they could
not even lift dead relatives and friends to bury them at sea. ''We were very
weak,'' Dinh Xuan Hoa said. ''We could not throw them out to the sea.''

Refugee officials, who talked with most of the survivors, said that, like most
Vietnamese boat people, they had fled for a variety of reasons. Some left to
escape harassment or punishment for ties to the previous anti-Communist
Government. Others wanted to avoid military service. Some said they found the
Communist system too authoritarian.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Vietnam

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 26, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
Trial Delay in Suit On Agent Orange



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B; Page 22, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 108 words


A trial scheduled for September to determine the Federal Government's liability
for injuries caused by Agent Orange, the herbicide used in the Vietnam War, will
be delayed for ''months and months,'' the judge in the case said yesterday.

The judge, Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, told lawyers
in the case that the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ''in
its wisdom has prevented the trial from going forward in September.''

The appellate court's failure to decide a key preliminary issue - whether the
Government could be sued at all - made it impossible to keep to the schedule,
the judge said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 26, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTHCOM GAME

BYLINE: By Robert A. Manning ;
Robert A. Manning writes on foreign affairs for publications in the United
States and abroad.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 790 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


President Reagan is eager, in this campaign season, to convince American voters
that he has turned over a new, more moderate and conciliatory leaf in his policy
toward Central America. Nothing could be further from the truth.

In fact, the Administration's tactical maneuvering makes little difference, for
our Central America policy has taken on a bureaucratic momentum of its own.
Unless that momemtum is checked, it will make the debate over our policy in the
region largely academic and may in the end lead to direct military involvement.

Congressional skepticism about the Administration's policy was sharply reduced
this summer by election re

sults in El Salvador and Guatemala. Yet recent disclosures that the Pentagon is
drawing up contingency plans for United States air strikes against Salvadoran
guerrillas says more about our policy in Central America than any images of
moderation.  The hard truth is that the institutions most involved in
implementing United States policy are the Pentagon and Central Intelligence
Agency, while the role of the State Department has steadily shrunk as the
Administration has turned away from serious diplomacy in the region. This is a
dramatic turnaround from the Carter years, when military and economic aid to
Central America was minuscule and the Pentagon was but a minor actor in the
shaping of policy.

Today, the State Department has been largely cut out of the conduct of policy
toward Central America. Instead, the main players are the Under Secretary of
Defense for Policy, Fred C. Ikle, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Inter-American Affairs, Nestor D. Sanchez, the C.I.A., and Gen. Paul E. Gorman,
chief of Southern Command, or Southcom, headquartered in Panama.

How has this happened? One of the main causes is the skyrocketing increase in
United States military aid to the region.

In the past three years, the C.I.A. has spent at least $75 million in covert
support for the contras, or counterrevolutionaries, seeking to oust the
Sandinista regime. The Administration's request for $243 million in military aid
for El Salvador for fiscal 1984 is a 4,000 percent increase over the $5.9
million granted to that country in fiscal 1980. Similarly, its request for
military aid to Honduras for 1985 amounts to 1,000 percent more than that
country received in all four years of the Carter Administration. Even in Costa
Rica, which has only a police force and no army, military aid has jumped from
$35,000 during the last year of the Carter Administration to the $10 million
requested for fiscal 1985.

Beyond these figures is the burgeoning United States military and paramilitary
involvement in the region. Southcom, until recently viewed in the Pentagon as a
sleepy backwater, has become the hub of the kind of controversial activity known
in the Pentagon as ''low-intensity conflict'' - in effect, undeclared war.
Military exercises in Honduras have meant a constant military presence in the
region and allowed us to build some half dozen air bases, radar stations,
storage bunkers and base camps. These facilities, which would provide a system
of forward bases if the United States intervened directly, have already been
used to fly reconnaissance for Salvadoran forces and provide support for the
contras.

The growing mission in Central America has also seen the expansion of elite
special forces in each branch of the military. A number of the new special
forces, such as the Army's Intelligence Support Activity, were formed to combat
terrorism, but they have put to other uses and many now operate closely with the
C.I.A. in its varied covert operations in Central America. As was the case in
Vietnam, this incremental expansion of paramilitary involvement has its own
dangerous momentum.

In Central American, as in Vietnam, military aid and paramilitary operations can
for a time help us avoid direct intervention. The danger, of course, is that
such indirect involvement will eventually lead to the commitment of troops.
Meanwhile, a military approach does nothing to address the root causes of the
Central American crisis, and in the end it can only heighten the conflict. It
promises to further polarize the region and lead eventually to the very radical
victories Mr. Reagan seeks to prevent.

It took a hopelessly deteriorating situation on the ground and widespread
popular opposition to force the executive branch to end the war in Vietnam.
Similiarly, in Central America, Congress cannot hope to limit our involvement by
''nickle and diming'' here and there in response to the Administration's
requests for military aid. If we really want to alter course, we must do
something to reverse the building military momentum.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A RETURN TO BANK INTEREST CEILINGS SOLVES NOTHING

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 384 words


To the Editor:


Albert M. Wojnilower confuses cause and effect in claiming that deposit
deregulation at banks raised interest rates and ''has been strongly
inflationary'' (''Stabilize Banking: Restore Some Controls,'' Op-Ed July 18).
Inflation, emanating from the deficit-financed Vietnam War, easy money and two
major oil price increases during the 1970's, raised interest rates and
necessitated deposit deregulation.

Savers in all types of regulated-rate instruments, including bank depositors,
suffered major erosion of purchasing power - negative ''real'' rates - during
much of the 1970's and the early 1980's. This situation eventually proved
non-sustainable because of disintermediation, i.e., depositors' taking their
money elsewhere.

The enormous growth of money market funds in the period of double- digit
inflation (1978-81) can be viewed as a arbitrage. People withdrew money from
rate-regulated institutions, and depository institutions had to ''pay up'' to
get corresponding deposits back from the money market funds or (after
deregulation) from the public. Distintermediation not only rendered the ceilings
a sham but did as much or more damage to the institutions as does the present
necessity to pay market rates of interest.  Reimposing deposit ceilings has no
economic merit. Savers - including the small-time savers, who have the least
ability to evade ceilings - are entitled to a positive real rate in return for
the profitable use of their capital by borrowers.  As to the first-time home
buyer, for whom Wojnilower expresses concern, one may ask what good it will do
him to confront hypothetically lower mortgage rates if the institutions have no
money to lend; and, if they did, why such buyers should rate subsidies from
savers regardless of relative income circumstances.  Inflation not only raised
interest rates but also shook institutional stability. After a transitional
period, during which past sins are exposed, a stable financial environment will
both reduce interest rates and the incidence of failure or near-failure of
institutions. It is on causes that we ought to focus, not on symptoms.

FRANCIS H. SCHOTT New York, July 19, 1984

The writer is chief economist for the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the
United States.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JOURNALISTS FIND GROWING DIFFICULTY IN GETTING INTO MUCH OF THIRD WORLD

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2055 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 26


On the last day of 1983, there was a military takeover in Nigeria; on April 3,
1984, a coup in Guinea, and three days later, a violent attempted overthrow of
the Government in Cameroon.

As each of these West African political upheavals took place, one of the first
measures taken by the authorities was to close their borders and stop issuing
visas to foreigners, including journalists.

Many overseas reporters, as well as editors and administrators, say problems in
West Africa are symptomatic of a growing difficulty faced by foreign
journalists, particularly Americans. The problem is gaining access to many parts
of the third world.

Journalists who work for newspapers, magazines and television, particularly in
Africa and the Middle East, say they are encountering long and frustrating waits
for visas, which in some cases are not granted at all.

Movements Restricted

But even when journalists do obtain visas in many developing nations and in
Communist countries, many say they find themselves faced with tight restrictions
on their ability to travel, to witness events and to talk freely with local
citizens and officials.

The result has been that, in some parts of the third world, restrictions on
journalists tend to increase just as events are taking place that most need to
be reported.

It is difficult to quantify with any precision the obstacles to journalistic
access, but human rights organizations that monitor press freedom have found in
general that in many areas restrictions have become tighter.

''I can say to you that the trend in the last 18 months certainly has been for
foreign journalists to have more difficulties,'' Peter Galliner, director of the
International Press Institute in London, said in a telephone interview. Mr.
Galliner named Africa, the Middle East, and Asia as areas where his organization
has noted this trend.

Another human rights monitoring organization, Freedom House, studies conditions
for the press in every country. It lists only 23 percent of the countries in the
world as having free conditions both for print and broadcast journalists. It
lists 89 countries, 57 percent of the total, as being not free for broadcast
journalism and 64 more that are not free for print journalism.

Little Access to Gulf War

In recent months, for example, many Western reporters have found it difficult to
provide continuous, first-hand coverage of several events of worldwide
significance, including the war in Chad, the war between Iran and Iraq in the
Persian Gulf and the violent confrontation last month between Sikhs and the
Indian Army.

In the Soviet Union, no Western journalist has been able to travel to Gorky,
where the Andrei D. Sakharov, the physicist and dissident, was reported to be on
a hunger strike. And when the police in London discovered an opponent of the
Nigerian Government being smuggled out of the country last month in a packing
crate, Nigeria denied visas to all journalists who applied to report on the
situation from the Nigerian side.

Problems of access can also be a problem for journalists working in the West, a
fact illustrated last year when American reporters were not allowed to cover the
early stages of the invasion of Grenada. But the situation in many places in the
third world seems characterized by a sustained and continuing pattern of
restrictions on the activities of foreign journalists that pose nearly constant
obstacles to independent reporting.

The situation reflects more than a host of practical problems facing reporters
assigned to cover third world and Communist bloc countries. To many journalists,
it seems to indicate a deep distrust and suspicion of the press among third
world nations, many of whose leaders have complained that the Western press and
broadcasting pay too little attention to them and their problems.

New Order Proposed

Some of these dissatisfactions have resulted in calls by third world leaders,
supported by the Soviet bloc, for a New World Information Order that would be
created under the auspices of the United Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, or Unesco.

The New World Information Order has not been formally constituted, largely
because of objections in the West to implied controls on reporters. Various
resolutions have been passed unanimously by Unesco's member nations call for a
''plurality of sources and channels of information'' and the ''removal of the
internal and external obstacles to a free flow and wider and better balanced
dissemination of information and ideas.''

Even while subscribing formally to such principles, many third world nations
seem to indicate through their actions that they believe their interests are
harmed by Western reporting. Their response has often been to adopt methods long
in use in such Communist countries as the Soviet Union and China, which is
either to deny access to reporters or to closely control and monitor their
activities.

''In Africa, it's a constant hassle,'' B. William Mader, a deputy chief of
correspondents at Time Magazine, said, referring to the difficulties experienced
by his organization's correspondents in gaining entry to some countries. ''An
enormous amount of time is being spent by our correspondents on visa
applications.''

Mr. Mader continued: ''I wonder, to be fair, if this is not also a function of
American journalism focusing attention more assiduously on these areas and thus
trying to get into these countries more often. Who, 10 or 15 years ago, was
trying to get in consistently to Saudi Arabia or Qatar?

Different Conception of Press

''We have changed, and they have changed in the process, partly as a function of
their national self-assertion and partially because their conception of the
press is vastly different from ours,'' he said. ''Their perception of a good
journalist is someone who repeats the government line, whatever it may be at the
moment.''

The most difficult problem for a reporter is gaining entry to a country in the
first place, and there are several countries where the admission of journalists
is so rare that they are in effect prevented from doing any first-hand
reporting. Among these are North Korea, Albania and Soviet-occupied Afghanistan.

In addition, there are many other countries that in recent months have admitted
only a very small number of Western journalists and then only on very rare
occasions, often restricting entry to those who officials believe have reported
favorably on them in the past. These include Iran, Nigeria, Saudia Arabia,
Vietnam, Angola and Ghana, among others.

The Iran-Iraq war has caused several difficulties for reporters trying to cover
the conflict. Correspondents of The New York Times, for example, report that
since the war has intensified, many of the Governments along the Persian Gulf,
such as Kuwait and Oman, have made access to journalists much more difficult
than before.

Mixed Picture in Mideast

Several countries in the Middle East, including Egypt, Israel, Jordan and
Lebanon, have traditionally been open to Western reporters and remain so. But
other, such as Syria and Libya, are very restrictive.  Syria has ceased issuing
multiple entry visas to journalists last fall, and since then, many Western
journalists report, visa applications go unanswered for weeks or months.

Restrictions have been particularly severe in situations of open conflict in
such places as Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf. Only one Western reporter,
Patricia Sethi of Newsweek, has been allowed into Afghanistan by the Government
side to witness military operations. All other reporters have had to cross
illegally over the border from Pakistan and to report from the side of the
anti-Soviet insurgents.

In the three years of the Iran-Iraq war there has been virtually no unrestricted
access for Western reporters to the areas of conflict. Generally, it has been
very rare for reporters to gain visas to Iran, despite assurances by Iranian
officials, such as Said Rajaie- Khorassani, the chief delegate to the United
Nations, that they are welcome to the country to view the situation for
themselves. When reporters have applied for visas, most of them have been turned
down, and even those few who have gotten into Iran have found their movements
highly restricted.

Divided Authority in Iran

One problem, according to Jeremy Lamprecht, the general manager of foreign
coverage for NBC News, seems to be a division between the Foreign Ministry in
Iran, which has favored giving visas to journalists, and the Ministry of
National Guidence, which has the power to issue the visas.

Mr. Lamprecht reported one instance last winter when an NBC News crew received
visas to go to Iran but, once there, was denied work permits by the Ministry of
National Guidence.

''They just sat there for about a week and then left,'' Mr. Lamprecht said.
''They were able to walk around, but not with their cameras. They had meetings
all the time with Government officials about getting work permits but they never
came through.''

The other party to the Persian Gulf conflict, Iraq, illustrates that even when
reporters do get visas, their movements are so tightly controlled by local
officials that the reporters are unsure of getting a complete picture of the
situation.

Most of Iraq Off-Limits

In Iraq, for example, reporters have even had typewriters confiscated from them
upon arrival at the airport. A New York Times reporter recently in Iraq, John
Kifner, said local officials and even taxi drivers, who are assigned to
reporters by the Ministry of Information, prevent photographers from taking
pictures of virtually anything that suggests poverty or backwardness. Mr. Kifner
reported one instance where a photographer was prevented from taking a
photograph of an elderly Bedouin on a camel.

Most of Iraq is off-limits to journalists and travel anywhere must be in the
company of an official guide. Foreign reporters with experience in the country
say requests for interviews with senior officials usually go unanswered. Visits
to the war front with Iran have generally been to the area of Basrah, while many
areas where fighting has taken place have remained closed.

In southern Africa, the ability of reporters to go to and move around several
key countries was impaired last year by an agreement by Zimbabwe, Angola,
Mozambique, Tanzania and Zambia to exclude any reporters based in South Africa.
The agreement, called the Kadoma Declaration after the town in Zimbabwe where it
was signed, has been selectively enforced. In Angola, for instance, it has made
little difference, some journalists say, because reporters were virtually
excluded from that country in any case.

Zambia, according to the New York Times correspondent for southern Africa, Alan
Cowell, has applied the ban sporadically. The country, which used to be largely
open to foreign reporters, has turned some reporters back at the airport but at
other times has allowed them in. One of the latter occasions came during a peace
conference on South-West Africa, also known as Namibia, co-hosted by South
Africa.

Latin America Mostly Open

Elsewhere in black Africa, according to Mr. Cowell, restrictions have generally
become tighter. In Uganda, press access has become very difficult since Milton
Obote came to power, with visas issued only to reporters who have a letter of
introduction from the Government. Ethiopia, which has a Marxist Government, has
tended to allow reporters into the country only to cover specific events, such
as the summit meeting of the Organization of African Unity last year and this
year's drought.

One area of the third world that remains relatively open to American journalists
is Latin America, according to analysts of the press there. The most notable
exception is Cuba, which has given visas only irregularly and limited the
movements of foreign journalists once they are in the country.

Most of the other countries of the region remain open to the Western press,
though there has been some concern over trends in such places as Costa Rica,
Brazil, Ecuador and others whose governments have sponsored journalists'
organizations with which foreign reporters must register before being allowed to
work.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EMBASSY ROW;
THE MOVABLE FEAST, MOROCCAN STYLE



BYLINE:
By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1013 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 26


In a capital larded with titles and protocol, they are known simply as Ali and
Jackie and their embassy residence in Northwest Washington reigns as one of this
town's more beguiling social enclaves.

Ambassador Ali Bengelloun of Morocco and his wife, Jacqueline, do not represent
one of the great powers of the world. But they are a couple to be reckoned with
in Washington, a popular and enduring team who get maximum diplomatic mileage
for their nation.

Social events in the capital city are, often as not, an extension of the working
day, a chance to mix it up with the decision makers. Few diplomatic couples
worker harder, or more successfully, at the business of entertaining than the
Bengellouns. And they make it look easy.

On Gold-Brocaded Banquets


At the Moroccan Embassy, guests in black tie find themselves sitting on
gold-brocaded banquets around low tables, dipping their fingers into a common
pot of bastilla, better known as ''Jackie Bengelloun's pigeon pie.'' Then
everyone digs into the lamb, using chewy Moroccan bread as a handy scoop. By the
time the almond and honey pastries are passed and sticky fingers are wiped on
perfumed wet towels, even such long-legged guests as Gen. Paul X. Kelley, the
Commandant of the Marine Corps, and Secretary of Commerce Malcolm Baldrige have
figured out what to do with their knees.

Introductions are almost unnecessary when dining at the Moroccan Embassy, for
the faces are familiar: Associate Justices of the Supreme Court, members of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, White House assistants, high-level operators
from State, Commerce and the Export-Import Bank.

A diplomat's primary role, Mr. Bengelloun says, is to make people aware that you
are present in a capital city. ''It is a public relations job, to make your
country better known,'' he said. ''Its politics, traditions, culture and
history. That is why we serve Moroccan food: It is unique.''

Two Tours of Duty


An array of photographs in the comfortable embassy library testify to the
success of the Bengellouns' two tours of duty here, four years in the 1960's and
a return to Washington in 1977. Among the inscriptions: ''Pour Jacqueline, tr es
affectueusement, Jackie Kennedy;'' ''To my friend Ali with admiration, Alexander
Haig;'' ''To Ali with best wishes, Ronald Reagan.''

When the Bengellouns arrived back in Washington seven years ago, they found many
familiar faces and a city that was still beautiful. But, says the impeccably
groomed Ambassador, Washington has become ''more and more difficult'' for a
diplomat.

''In the 1960's when I had to speak about some problem, I dealt with the White
House and the State Department and we had only social relations with Congress,''
he explained.

''I would call up MacGeorge Bundy or talk to Bobee,'' he said, referring to the
late Robert F. Kennedy. ''You didn't need to go to Congress. It was the business
of the White House to obtain the green light from Congress. But now you have to
talk with everyone: the State Department, from the fifth to the seventh floor;
the Pentagon, and sometimes even the C.I.A. And you have to take care of the
fourth power: the media, the television, the magazine writers.''

'You Have to Be Everywhere'


He attributes many of the changes to the Vietnam War and Watergate. ''The center
of power has changed,'' he said. ''Congress is more powerful. The media is more
powerful. It is very complex. You have to be everywhere.''

With coastlines on both the Atlantic and the Mediterranean, Morocco is not
without strategic importance and Ambassador Bengelloun spends many of his
working days on matters relating to joint economic and military commissions that
have been established with the United States. But in recent months the
Ambassador's primary concern has been lobbying against a bill in Congress that
would require that the United States Embassy in Israel be moved from Tel Aviv to
Jerusalem.

''We have to preserve the city of Jerusalem as a religious city,'' he said.
''For three religions that all believe in God, it is a religious capital, not a
political capital.''

As he drank mint tea, the Ambassador reminisced about March 1962, when he first
presented, at the age of 32, his credentials at the White House. ''President
Kennedy told me,'' he recalled, '' 'But you are bringing me big problems. You
are a lawyer and younger than Bobee and it is we who are supposed to be the
young New Frontier.' ''

That initial meeting was not the ceremonial five minutes usually allotted such
appointments, for the President plunged into a long discussion exploring how the
United States could help bring peace to Algeria, Morocco's neighbor, then
struggling for independence from France.

No Complex on Speaking English


''As I left, the President said something to me I never forget,'' Ambassador
Bengelloun said. ''He said, 'If you would like to see me again, study English.'
''

Ambassador Bengelloun now speaks fractured English with accomplished elan,
explaining: ''I said to myself, 'I don't have to have any complex. What I have
to do is to communicate to my American friends what I am thinking, even if it is
grammatically a little mixed up.' ''

Mr. Bengelloun, a lawyer who, like most educated Moroccans, speaks French as
well as Arabic, was his country's second envoy to this country after Morocco, a
French protectorate, gained its independence in 1956. His first task here was to
buy the ambassadorial residence where the Bengellouns now hold forth as popular
hosts.

Back in the 1960's the Bengellouns also set a quick social pace with their
dinner dances, couscous and belly dancers. Invitations to an exotic night at the
Moroccan Embassy, where guests lounged about on Persian rugs and oversized
pillows, were prized then, too.

''Washington seemed smaller, cozier, more gay in the Sixties,'' Mrs.  Bengelloun
said. ''We had more friends, it was not so anonymous.''

''But then,'' she added with a smile, ''I think I am different now too. We both
are different.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ambassador Ali Bengelloun and Jacqueline, wife

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SCHOOL PRAYER BILL: A TROJAN HORSE?

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1214 words


NewsAnalysis


WASHINGTON, July 26 - A measure that cleared Congress Wednesday, hailed by
President Reagan and other conservatives as a way of putting prayer back in
public schools, may turn out to be a classic case of unintended consequences. It
is also likely to provoke years of political debate and litigation about its
meaning and its constitutionality.

The legislation has been advertised as giving student groups that want to hold
religious meetings access to school buildings that is equal to that of other
groups, such as drama clubs, bands and photography clubs.

But as written, legislators and others say, the ''equal access'' provision could
create pressure for the nation's high schools to open their buildings to student
groups associated not only with mainstream religions but also with controversial
cults and political causes ranging from Marxism to fascism to pacifism to
homosexual rights.

This prospect, while pleasing to some civil libertarians, was not exactly what
Mr. Reagan and other advocates of school prayer had set out to accomplish. But
to get their proposal through Congress, conservative supporters had to accept
amendments lumping religious observance with ''political, philosophical or
other'' forms of speech, and protecting them all alike.



Seen Aiding 'Gay Rights'

Representative Barney Frank, a liberal Democrat from Massachusetts who supported
the bill, said: ''In some ways, this is the best empowerment of teen-agers
that's come along. People should understand what this means, which is that
15-year-olds have some decisions to make that adults can't interfere with. It
means the young Trotskyites can meet, it means the gay rights activists can
meet. I think it's wonderful, but I'm surprised at some of my allies.''

Thus, if as seems likely, Mr. Reagan signs the bill, the President, long a
champion of federalism and community control of schools, may be opening the way
for Federal court suits by students claiming all manner of ''free speech''
rights against local school administrators.

At the same time, because of the inevitable constitutional challenges, it
remains to be seen whether the legislation will accomplish its central purpose
of allowing student groups to conduct prayer sessions before or after regular
instructional hours.

Four Federal appeals courts and state appellate courts in New York and
California have barred various types of religious activities by student groups
in public schools, citing the First Amendment's prohibition of ''establishment
of religion.''

In a decision Tuesday, a three-judge Federal appeals court panel in Philadelphia
ruled that it would be unconstitutional for a high school in Williamsport, Pa.,
to allow a Protestant student group, Petros, to hold prayer sessions during
compulsory attendance hours.

Unsettled Legal Questions


In a 2-to-1 decision written by Judge Leonard I. Garth, the court said that ''we
are faced with a constitutional conflict of the highest order,'' pitting
students' ''free speech right to engage in religious activity'' against the need
to avoid an establishment of religion. To resolve this conflict, he said the
group should be relegated to meeting away from the school to avoid the
impression of official endorsement of particular religious practices.

But the law in this area is still unsettled. Constitutional experts such as
Harvard Law School's Laurence H. Tribe express confidence that the Supreme Court
would uphold genuinely student-initiated religious activities in schools of the
kind that Congress has now approved.

Others are not so sure. ''If it were decided today, I think the Supreme Court
would strike it down,'' said Marc D. Stern, an attorney with the American Jewish
Congress, which contends that that the bill ''opens wide the gates of our public
schools to aggressive cults and militant extremist groups.''

In any event, the new legislation is vague enough to keep school administrators
and courts busy for years trying to interpret it. It provides that public
secondary schools that allow extracurricular activities of any kind before or
after the day's ''instructional'' periods may not ''deny equal access to or a
fair opportunity to, or discriminate against'' any student groups ''on the basis
of the religious, political, philosophical, or other content of the speech at
such meetings.''

In addition, the bill contains several safeguards designed to prevent school
officials from using it as a pretext for promoting particular prayer groups, and
to limit proselytizing in schools by nonstudents.  Such provisions helped propel
the bill through the House Wednesday by a vote of 337 to 77, and through the
Senate last month by 88 to 11. While some liberals who have long denounced all
forms of organized school prayer opposed the bill, others voted for it, and the
American Civil Liberties Union, long a scourge of organized school prayer, took
a neutral position.

Tool for Protest


Barry W. Lynn, an A.C.L.U. lawyer in Washington, explained: ''To the extent that
the bill protects and clarifies secular free speech rights it's a good bill. I
suspect that if two years from now we find American troops in Nicaragua, it
would be a real good tool for students who want to organize groups against
that.'' Mr. Lynn said he expected that many of those who voted to strike a blow
for school prayer ''will climb the walls'' at some of the bill's effects.

He said he hoped the courts would interpret ''the religion part'' of the bill to
allow only ''the study of sacred books'' and similar cerebral exercises, not
prayer and other ''organized rituals.''

Senator Jeremiah Denton, Republican of Alabama, a conservative sponsor of the
bill, said in debate last month that ''it is religious speech which has been
singled out for censorship'' by the Federal courts. He said he had reluctantly
agreed to include language protecting other forms of speech only because they
were already protected under existing case law.

Legal experts, however, said the legislation was likely to encourage more
student groups to bring lawsuits to expand the limited First Amendment rights of
political free expression in schools. The Supreme Court ruled in 1969 that high
school students could not be prohibited from peacefully wearing black armbands
to protest the Vietnam War.

Some Difficult Choices


By adding to what was already a murky legal situation, the new legislation will
present school administrators like those in Williamsport with some difficult
choices.

If they prohibit either prayer groups or other ''free speech'' groups from
meeting, or if they favor popular groups over controversial or fringe groups,
they may be sued for denying them the ''equal access'' that the legislation
requires. If they allow religious groups to meet, on the other hand, they may be
sued for unconstitutional establishment of religion.

Some school districts, Mr. Lynn and other lawyers said, may even conclude that
the safest course is to ban all extracurricular student activities from the
schools. Because the bill that cleared Congress Wednesday applies only to
schools that allow some extracurricular activities, this might make them
relatively secure from lawsuits.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: MISS TUCHMAN YIELDS ON DESCRIPTION OF EX-OFFICIAL

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words


In ''The March of Folly'' by Barbara Tuchman, a book published this March about
how

governments persist in pursuing policies contrary to their own interests, the
author describes how American reporters in Vietnam often filed stories at odds
with optimistic official briefings.

Miss Tuchman wrote: ''The result was a press war: the angrier the newsmen
became, the more 'undesirable stories' they wrote. The Government sent Robert
Manning, the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, himself a former
newspaperman, to Saigon to try to subdue the storm, hoping, according to a
memorandum by Manning, to 'see the American involvement in Vietnam minimized,
even represented as something less than in reality it is.' ''

Mr. Manning objected to that characterization, and this week lawyers for him and
for Miss Tuchman jointly released a statement from Miss Tuchman. ''The language
I quoted from the Manning memorandum re- fers to Government policy as it existed
prior to the Manning mission,'' the statement said. ''His mission, as described
in Pierre Salinger's book 'With Kennedy' (which was my source), was to make 'an
on-the-spot survey of the situation.' On his return, Manning wrote a memorandum,
which Salinger calls 'remarkable for its candor and insight.' The memorandum
recommended a change in policy, saying, 'Our involvement is so extensive as to
require public, i.e., press scrutiny.' ''

Miss Tuchman's statement also said, ''the language quoted in my book described a
governmental attitude that Mr. Manning was seeking to change,'' and it affirmed
her ''respect and esteem'' for Mr. Manning.

Mr. Manning, who is editor in chief of the Boston Publishing Company, which is
producing an 18-volume history titled ''The Vietnam Experience,'' said he was
satisfied with the statement, which is coupled with an agreement that the
corrected version will appear in subsequent hard-cover and paperback editions of
the book. ''I was advised that I could well have sued for libel, but I'm not
interested in money or litigation,'' he said. ''I was concerned for my own
reputation, but I became even more concerned for the reputation of the
publishing enterprise I'm involved in.''

Greek Company Drops Gerald Green Novel

Gerald Green is the author of more than 20 books, including ''The Last Angry
Man'' and ''Holocaust.'' His latest book is ''Karpov's Brain,'' a novel about
the pursuit of a Jewish dissident by the K.G.B., the Soviet intelligence agency,
which was published in hard cover two years ago and in paperback two months ago.

The Scott Meredith Literary Agency sold rights to publishers in Britain, Italy
and Spain, and early this year, it also sold rights to an Athens publisher,
which paid an advance and began translating the book for publication next year.
The other day, however, the Meredith agency received a letter from the Greek
publisher, Harlenic Hellas, saying, ''We have decided to forgo publication.''

The reason? According to Idris Thomas, an official with Harlenic Hellas, ''We
signed this contract on Feb. 8, 1984, but since then we have discovered that
when 'Eleni' by Nicholas Gage was published, the publishers received no support
from the Government by way of tax-free paper. Accordingly, our board believes
that this is highly likely to happen with 'Karpov's Brain,' which is, after all,
anti-Soviet, inasmuch as the persecution of the Jews in this book is described
in a very forthright manner.''

The letter further explained that publication of the Green book ''would probably
affect us financially, directly as far as this book is concerned, and possibly
indirectly in reference to subsequent books.''

Mr. Gage, who was a New York Times correspondent in Greece, said that paper is
very costly in Greece because most of it is imported, and the Government imposes
a stiff tax. But newspaper and book publishers are exempt from tax on a certain
amount of paper, and are free to buy additional paper at a higher price.
''Eleni,'' an account by Mr. Gage of the death of his mother at the hands of
Communists during the Greek civil war, was a best seller in Greece.

Jonathan Silverman, director of foreign rights for the Meredith agency,
expressed concern that the same fear of being denied Government permission to
buy tax-exempt paper for books regarded as anti-Soviet could have a chilling
effect throughout the Greek publishing industry. Meanwhile, the agency has
obtained a formal reversion of rights from Harlenic Hellas, he said, and is in
the process of marketing the book elsewhere in Greece.

New Interest in 'Ulysses,' And a Book About Trial

James Joyce's ''Ulysses'' is enjoying renewed interest after the recent
announcement that a team of scholars found some 5,000 errors in the existing
text. The revised text was recently published in three volumes by Garland
Publishing Inc., under terms of a contract with the trustees of the Joyce
estate. Random House in this country and the Bodley Head in England also have
contracts with the Joyce estate to publish trade editions, subject to the
trustees' approval of the revised edition.

Though both Joyce and ''Ulysses'' have long fascinated scholars, there had not
until recently been a book about the 1934 trial that led to the United States
Court of Appeals decision that ''Ulysses'' was not pornography and therefore
could be published in this country, from which it had been banned since 1922.
University Publications of America not long ago published ''The United States of
America v. One Book Entitled Ulysses by James Joyce: Documents and Commentary -
A 50-year Retrospective,'' edited by Michael Moscato and Leslie Le Blanc.

The 482-page book, published by the Frederick, Md., company, which specializes
in works of scholarly research, contains the major documents relating to the
trial. Only the transcript of Morris Ernst's arguments before Judge John Woolsey
is missing, because it apparently has been lost.

But the voice of Mr. Ernst, the lawyer who represented Random House

 in the case, can be found throughout the book. For example, an account in The
New York World-Telegram of the appeal from Judge Woolsey's decision, dated May
17, 1934, quotes the United States Attorney Martin Conboy as saying the book
''begins with blasphemy, runs the whole gamut of sexual perversion and ends in
inexpressible filth and obscenity.'' By contrast, Mr. Ernst told the court,
''The arena of the action of 'Ulysses' is not a Dublin brothel but the human
skull.''

The book reprints defenses of ''Ulysses'' by such writers as John Dos Passos,
Malcolm Cowley, Theodore Dreiser, Louis Untermeyer and William Rose Benet. F.
Scott Fitzgerald wrote from Towson, Md.: ''Of course I think 'Ulysses' should be
published legally in America. In the first place, time has crept up on
'Ulysses,' and many people are under the daisies who were horrified 10 years
ago.'' In addition, he added, ''people who have the patience to read 'Ulysses'
are not the kind who will slobber over a few little Rabelaisian passages.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ART: LAURIE ANDERSON NOW STARRING AT MUSEUM



BYLINE:
By GRACE GLUECK

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1144 words


There must be a few artistic skills that the multitrack performance artist
Laurie Anderson lacks - come to think of it, she doesn't really dance - but so
much territory is covered by those skills she has that what's missing doesn't
count. Drawing, sculpture, photography, film making, writing, acting,
storytelling, violin playing, composing, graphic design, electronic effects -
the mind boggles at this unaccustomed reach.

Taken each by each, as they are surveyed in the current - and first -
retrospective of her work at the Queens Museum (through Sept. 9), they are not
very large talents, to be sure. But she has managed, by dint of a personality at
once fey and funny, and through an instinct for ''high'' taste, pop culture and
media techniques, to combine her skills in clever presentations. These are
livelier and more accessible than most of the conceptual-performance duds of the
last decade. They bring an appealing humor to bear on some very grim American
topics - loneliness, violence and technological overkill.

Anderson's heady presence - either vocal or visual or both - naturally informs a
good deal of this show, which covers the years 1969 to 1983 and also contains a
lot of performance documentation and notations.  It's the performance dimension
of her work, of course, that we'll remember her by, and yet there are a
surprising number of ''objects'' that don't plug in - handmade books,
sculptures, drawings, prints and such, mostly done before 1980 - which reveal
her abilities in more traditional modes of art.

A real talent for drawing, for instance, is seen in a group of sensitive
etchings of surreally observed heads and figures, and in a couple of Vietnam
protest posters, in one of which President Lyndon B. Johnson appears as a winged
ogre dropping bombs. Her graphic talents also extend to handmade books, which
give expression to the quirky wordplay she revels in as a writer, and which, in
fact, is a basis of her art. Among them is ''Handbook,'' from 1972, a large
manual, whose subject is the turning of its own pages.

By 1974, we can see in photographs that she was well into personal appearances,
performing in this country and abroad in ''Duets on Ice,'' a street-corner
ritual in which, while wearing skates embedded in two blocks of ice, she played
the violin. As she sawed away, she explained to her audience the parallels in
balance between skating and fiddling. She had - quite literally - other strings
to her bow. On display, for instance, are a couple of ''adjusted'' violins, in
which audio equipment replaces conventional strings and bows, enabling her to
produce and manipulate words and phrases.

A number of by-now well-known larger works play important roles in the show,
though they are of uneven interest. ''Handphone Table'' of 1978, a step in
Anderson's increasingly sophisticated exploration of audio techniques, is a
conventional table wired to deliver recorded songs through the listener's arm
bones when he places his elbows on two nodes in its top, but it's funhouse
stuff. So is ''Numbers Runners,'' a phone in a booth that plays back the
talker's voice almost as he uses it, creating additional ''dialogue'' by
interspersing recorded comments from the artist.

There's more substance to the installation ''Jukebox'' (1977), in which a good
selection of Anderson songs can be had by punching buttons on an old Rock-Ola
Princess, attended by wall pieces containing photographs, texts and scores for
them. A strong Anderson presence is also felt in ''Dark Dogs, American Dreams''
(1980), another room in which a dozen blurry but evocative photographs - a
mailman, a waitress, a ''be-bop lyricist'' - are mounted on the wall and
repeated in miniature on a console in the room's center. Punch the button next
to the photo of the mailman, say, and you get his recorded ''dream,'' a deadpan
recital of a nightmare filled with sly humor.

By 1980, the artist had turned her full attention to performing and had, in
fact, already begun her rambling four-part epic, ''United States.'' Among the
few videotapes on view here is ''O Superman,'' the hit song from that epic, with
its rock beat and Anderson's eerie hand gestures projected in giant scale. It's
a stirring windup to a very large show that traces the ripening of a provocative
talent. The show was devotedly assembled by Janet Kardon, director of the
Institute of Contemporary Art of the University of Pennsylvania, who has also
written a thoughtful catalogue essay. The Queens Museum is in the New York City
Building at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.

Also of interest this week:

Matt Mullican (Queens Museum): Flat, highly simplified pictographs adorn the
banners, posters and rubbings of Matt Mullican - sort of cosmological highway
signs, in which private symbols are given the force of universal metaphor. A red
square on a big white banner, for instance, boasts the white silhouette of a
head with a bean-shape hole in it, through which the red shows; another banner
of deep blue has a center square divided into four smaller ones; two white, two
black, placed at diagonals to one another.

On each of a series of eight gray posters (evoking the 1960's work of Robert
Indiana), elegantly lettered with the artist's name on top and a single, charged
word on the bottom, such as ''demon,'' appears a black- and-white symbol,
presumably relevant to the word. Unyielding and inscrutable, the posters have a
striking cumulative impact.

Much freer and more interesting, however, are the artist's ''rubbings,'' such as
a huge triptych of three vertical cotton panels, each dyed deep red and bearing
a loose linear motif in shadowy black. The eye caresses these, where it tends to
dismiss the harsh, reductive stereotypes of the others. (Through Sept. 2.)



Carole Richard Kaufmann (Sid Deutsch, 20 West 57th Street): All manner of
amusing non sequiturs occur in Carole Richard Kaufmann's rugged Chinese
mountainscapes, which take off from ancient painting, done with a vigorous brush
that doesn't shrink from high-key colors. In ''4687 - Lucky Year of Minnie
Mouse, With a Peacock, 3 Guardians and a Money God,'' for instance, the canvas
is dominated by a large and vivid peacock, who stands uncertainly on a peak, his
body made up of collaged horizontal strips. More delicate intrusions, collaged
and painted, include a sinuous Chinese maiden holding flowers, the head of a
young girl with a Minnie Mouse doll and a tiny junk sailing down a mountain
river.

Other mountainscapes are no less packed with incident. One exception: a
deliberately garish canvas called ''Hong Kong: Glitz and Glitter,'' in which the
city is seen as a strident grid of frenzied activity, built up by paint,
newspaper fragments and photographic snippets. Having a good time with her work,
the artist gives us one, too. (Through Aug. 17.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of drawing ''Duets on Ice''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES;
;
Variation on a theme from France.

BYLINE: By Nan Robertson

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words


One classic French theme, in literature, plays and films, involves the young man
and the older woman who teaches him the arts of love. Colette's ''Cheri'' and
two post-World War II movies come immediately to mind: ''Le Ble en Herbe'' and
''Le Diable au Corps.'' More than 20 years ago, another French movie, called
''Sundays and Cyb ele'' in this country, turned the convention shockingly on its
head.

The same is true for ''La Petite Sir ene,'' which opens next Friday at the Metro
Cinema. Isabelle, a 14-year-old Parisian girl lost in fantasy in her candlelit,
fabric-swathed bedroom, becomes obsessed with Georges, a 40- year-old garage
mechanic. What at first seems a light comedy about an enchanting teen-ager's
crush on an amiable older man gradually grows darker and more complicated - a
tale of how someone just emerged from childhood can enmesh a mature man in a
tragic and deadly game.

The pair in question, Laura Alexis and Philippe Leotard, were in New York this
week, along with Roger Andrieux, the director and writer of the screenplay. It
turns out that Miss Alexis, who speaks flawless French, is American. Born in
Miami to American parents 20 years ago, she was enrolled in the Children's
School for the Performing Arts at the age of 5 and taken to Paris when she was 7
by her mother, a sculptor, after her parents' divorce.

Miss Alexis returned to the United States to live last fall. She was 16 when Mr.
Andrieux chose her after auditioning almost 300 aspiring Isabelles over many
months. She projected the conflicting qualities the director was seeking: ''She
was complex, intriguing - very pure yet sneaky, devious,'' he said. She came to
the director's attention playing the daughter of Catherine Deneuve and
Jean-Louis Trintignant in Christian de Chalonge's ''L'argent des Autres.''

By contrast to the relative obscurity of Miss Alexis, Mr. Leotard, 44, has
appeared in 33 feature films, including two by Francois Truffaut, Fred
Zinnemann's ''Day of the Jackal'' and John Frankenheimer's ''French Connection
II.'' Last year he won the Cesar, France's Academy Award, as best actor for his
performance in Bob Swaim's ''La Balance.''

Twelve years ago, Mr. Leotard toured Europe in Francoise Sagan's stage
adaptation of Tennessee Williams's ''Sweet Bird of Youth.'' Starring opposite
him was Edwige Feuill ere - the ''woman of a certain age'' whom few have
forgotten in ''Le Ble en Herbe.''

From Superman To Southern Gentleman

Is the man who became famous around the planet as the world's most powerful wimp
breaking out of his Superman stereotype? Christopher Reeve says there are two
ways of looking at it.

In the latest James Ivory-Ismail Merchant movie, based on Henry James's 1886
novel, ''The Bostonians,'' Mr. Reeve, sporting a thin, Clark Gable-type mustache
and suited up as a dapper Victorian, plays what he describes as ''a true
Southern gentleman - with an iron will and a courtly disposition.'' The triangle
in this sexually and morally ambiguous tale consists of Mr. Reeve as Basil,
pitted against Vanessa Redgrave as Olive, a neurotic Boston bluestocking, for
nothing less than total possession of Madeleine Potter, who plays Verena, a
seductive and charismatic feminist speaker.

Mr. Reeve, who as Clark Kent gave new meaning to the term ''square,'' calls
Basil Ransom ''fascinating: both the hero and the villain of the film, depending
on your point of view and the moment in the movie.'' As to whether ''The
Bostonians'' represents a ''breakout'' from his Superman role, the 32-year-old
actor replied:

''There are two ways of looking at it. From an inside perspective, I have never
felt obligated to any image since I began acting. Therefore I feel I am not
'breaking out' of anything. From an outside perspective I realize that Superman
made a very big splash. People have referred to me as Superman since the first
of the three Superman movies in 1978. I also realize that the role opened many
doors to me. Without it I probably would not have been able to play opposite
Vanessa Redgrave, as I did recently in London in 'The Aspern Papers' - also from
Henry James, with Wendy Hiller, directed by Sir Michael Redgrave - nor in Sidney
Lumet's movie adaptation of Ira Levin's play 'Deathtrap.' ''

Mr. Reeve said Mr. Lumet told him: ''Any actor who can make me believe he's
Superman can be in my film.''

He is still tickled by the way kids react to him as the living, breathing
Superman, but says ''I haven't been typecast by the industry, and I've had no
difficulty getting other parts.'' One Broadway role, for instance, was as the
legless Vietnam veteran Ken Talley Jr. in Lanford Wilson's ''Fifth of July.''

The hardest part of playing Basil Ransom in ''The Bostonians,'' Mr. Reeve said,
was ''making sure I didn't bring modern sensibilities to a period piece. That
would ruin it. Yes, Basil is a chauvinist pig by modern standards, but he's not
a monster. I see him also as a gentle and compassionate man who is genuinely, as
well as obsessively, in love with Verena.''

''The Bostonians,'' which also stars Jessica Tandy, Linda Hunt and Nancy
Marchand in a screenplay by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, opens at Cinema I next
Thursday.

Benefit to Help Rebuild James's Writing Room

There will be a benefit world premiere of ''The Bostonians'' next Wednesday,
with proceeds helping to rebuild the Garden Room, Henry James's favorite writing
room in his home, Lamb House, in Rye, England. A German bomb destroyed it in
World War II. In the Garden Room, James wrote his most celebrated novels,
including ''The Bostonians.'' The benefit will be for the Royal Oak Foundation,
the United States affiliate of Britain's National Trust, which owns Lamb House.

Supper and dancing at Regine's will follow the film's world premiere at 8 P.M.
at Cinema I. Tickets may be bought from the Royal Oak Foundation, 41 East 72d
Street (861-0529). They're $25 for the screening and $50 more for the party at
Regine's.

Filming 'A Chorus Line': Plans and a Hitch

''A Chorus Line,'' the longest-running show in Broadway history and still
dancing its way into the record books with every passing day, is scheduled to
light up the screen by late 1985. Richard Attenborough. Academy Award winner for
''Gandhi,'' will direct; the cast is to be announced soon, and filming is
scheduled to begin in October in the Mark Hellinger Theater.

However, Variety, the trade paper, reports that a dispute over the size of the
crew of legitimate-theater stagehands is threatening to force the Embassy
Pictures production out of Manhattan. Negotiations continue.

Best Defense' is No. 1

The summer movie front-runners in New York City are, from first to eighth:
''Best Defense,'' ''Ghostbusters,'' ''The Muppets Take Manhattan,''
''Gremlins,'' ''Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom,'' ''The Karate Kid,''
''The Neverending Story'' and ''Bachelor Party.'' ''Best Defense,'' starring
Eddie Murphy and Dudley Moore, zoomed to the top of the list and pulled in $2
million at local theaters last week alone. The other seven in descending order
made from $1.1 million (''Ghostbusters'') to $500,000 (''Bachelor Party'') in
ticket sales last week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Laura Alexis

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 28, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Casualty Identified

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 63 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 27


The Army confirmed the identity today of the remains of one of eight Americans
handed over to American authorities by Vietnam July 17, the Pentagon said. The
remains were identified as those of Army Sgt. 1st Class Dominic Sansone of New
York, a paratrooper who was killed when the aircraft he was in crashed into a
mountain near Da Nang Dec. 10, 1964, the Pentagon said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


;
A 60'S GENERATION MADE BY MYTH-MAKERS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 282 words


To the Editor:


In his Op-Ed article about ''Baby Boom Voters'' (July 15), Carter A. Eskew asks
how ''the generation that lived through Vietnam, Woodstock, Watergate and the
assassinations of the 1960's'' ended up backing Ronald Reagan.

I'm not sure of the answer, but I think something is wrong with the question. It
rests on the assumptions that we were a rebellious generation leaning to the
left, or it implies that after living through those events we could not
logically turn to the right.

But regarding those events: Many, if not most, of my generation did not march
against the Vietnam War, however much we disapproved. We were studying, working
in new jobs, starting families or we were in the military. I, for example, would
have found it difficult to organize a protest on the flight deck of an aircraft
carrier.

Most of us never set eyes on Woodstock, and of those who attended that concert,
most were probably doing what young people of every generation have been known
to do in their own unique style: raising hell.

Also, it was not my generation that forced Nixon out of office. For the most
part, that was accomplished by older journalists and members of Congress.

And what did the assassinations of the 1960's have to do with party affiliation?
If some of us rejected certain values held by our parents, it should be noted
that most of our parents were New Deal Democrats.

My suggestion is that the Vietnam- Woodstock-Watergate-assassination generation
occupying Mr. Eskew's mind is a myth. The myth-makers made the best headlines.
The real baby boomers did the voting. Thus Mr. Eskew's confusion.

T. ST. LAURENT Brooklyn, July 16, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW THE DEMOCRATS CAN WIN

BYLINE: By Joseph L. Rauh Jr.  ;
Joseph L. Rauh Jr., a civil rights lawyer in Washington, has been active in
liberal and Democratic Party affairs since the New Deal.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1200 words


At the risk of being promptly dispatched to the loony bin on a warrant sworn out
by the conventional- wisdom dispensers, I can't get over the idea that the odds
are shift- ing to the Democrats for November.

As one who participated actively in eight of the 10 post-World-War II Democratic
National Conventions, I do not remember a convention that presented as
compelling an image to the electorate as this one. The losers did not squabble
over rules or credentials, and there were no major disruptive platform splits.
We had electrifying liberal speeches night after night and a historic vice
presidential choice. The Presidential nominee's acceptance speech even told the
truth on the need to raise taxes - the toughest issue of them all. What more
could anyone want?

I also disagree with the conventional wisdom that the Democratic platform
shifted significantly to the right - and I think this will help the Democrats in
November. Sure, I would have preferred the three platform changes sought
unsuccessfully by Jesse Jackson - no runoff primaries, a pledge of
no-first-strike, a substantial cut in defense outlays. I would also have been
happier with more specifics and less thematics. Even so, the gulf between the
Democrats' liberal platform and the Republicans' conservative one will

likely be the widest in this century, and this fall's election will indeed be a
liberal vs. conservative referendum - this time without the Republicans owning
family and flag.  But, if the convention put the Democrats on the right road, it
was only the first lap of a very long journey - and victory depends upon keeping
the momentum rolling for the next three months. As an ancient New Deal liberal,
I offer a prescription for doing just that.  First, the Democrats need to show
their boldness - and to do so, they need to clarify their positions. My only
complaint about the Democratic platform is about its ambiguity - at times, it
seems, a calculated ambiguity. One can, for example, read the platform either
way on legislation requiring domestic content in automobile manufacturing. To
me, it seems less important which way Walter F. Mondale comes down on the issue
than that he avoid looking weak by hiding behind a flow of ambiguous words. So,
too, on issues like health care, housing, nuclear power and a host of others,
the Democrats must use the campaign to clarify their views.  Affirmative action
may be the most important of these issues, for here the natural tendency will be
to provide different nuanced interpretations to Jews and other minorities. The
platform pledges the ''use of affirmative action goals, timetables and other
verifiable measurements'' to eliminate discrimination - and that clearly means
preferences for qualified minorities and women until reasonable goals and
timetables are met. Waffling would be a sure sign of weakness, the road to
disaster. Clarity on this and all the other issues is the only way to achieve
the boldness and Presidential demeanor needed for success.

Second, the Democrats need to evoke intense support from among all the
constituencies that make up the party. The convention showed that the Roosevelt
coalition of liberals, labor, blacks, urbanites, unemployed, the poor and
near-poor is not only in place but strongly augmented by other minorities,
environmentalists, doves and, above all, the gender gap. It is held together by
a deep belief in affirmative government - in the ability of the people to use
the democratic process to improve the lot of all. But the effectiveness of the
coalition will depend in substantial part on ''the intensity factor.''

The tendency for any candidate is to take one's natural constituency for
granted, rely on lieutenants from within other constituent groups to intensify
interest there and move to the center to find new converts. But unless voters
feel that the candidate cares for their group and for each of them, they are
unlikely to vote in enough strength to produce the turnout needed for victory in
November. Such evidence of caring and respect is especially necessary in the
case of black voters - and Jesse Jackson's active participation will be critical
if the Democrats are to win.

Third, the Democrats must make a campaign issue of ''the sleaze factor.'' If
there was one thing conspicuous by its absence from the convention, it was any
reference to the unethical cast of characters assembled in the Reagan
Administration - certainly the most unethical in my lifetime. The numbers alone
are staggering. Even worse is the fact that some of the highest officers in the
Administration are involved and their number even includes those charged with
enforcing law and ethics.  Actually, this record of unethical conduct should
have come as no surprise to anyone. An Administration that holds that Government
is part of the problem has no motivation to insure that such Government is not
tarnished. Under Ronald Reagan, the ethics of the marketplace have become the
ethics of Government.  Fourth, the Democrats need a respected Southerner in a
top job in the campaign. Why did the party shy away from the sleaze issue at the
convention? I can only think it was because of Mr. Mondale's last-minute effort
to rehabilitate Bert Lance, who also left the Government under a cloud. Mr.
Mondale's loyalty to Mr. Lance - and to President Jimmy Carter, too - is an
admirable private trait, reminiscent of Hubert H. Humphrey's loyalty to
President Lyndon B. Johnson on Vietnam. But Mr. Humphrey's loyalty lost one
election, and this is no time for a repetition. A Presidential campaign is not a
rehabilitation center or a half-way house, and the candidate's higher loyalty
must be to his constituency and his country.  What can be done now to remedy the
situation? Leave Mr. Lance with whatever title he has, but create a new and
bigger title and a new top position for a moderate white Southerner. Persuade a
respected ex-Governor (Terry Sanford or Reuben Askew) or a distinguished Senator
(Ernest F. Hollings or Dale Bumpers) to come to the aid of his party and do the
job.

Fifth, the Democrats must make an effort to draw independent voters into the
fold. F.D.R. pointed the way when he created an independent committee headed by
Senator George Norris and Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia to rally independents and
wayward Republicans. Today, the Democrats might consider enlisting John B.
Anderson, who has great appeal to the independents and disaffected Republicans
unhappy with the defeat of Gary Hart. Mr. Anderson also looks and acts like Mr.
Clean and could be very effective in keeping the sleaze factor before the
public.

Would Mr. Anderson do it? Obviously, I don't know. But he did decide not to run
again, even with a big Federal check waiting for him, because he did not want a
Reagan victory forever on his conscience. There is no reason to believe he would
not consider going the whole distance with the Mondale-Ferraro ticket.

Okay, the Democrats can win. Will they? Yes, if the Walter Mondale we see from
now on is the one who boldly chose Geraldine A. Ferraro and boldly pronounced
his intention to raise taxes. B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE VIKINGS FALL IN AT A NEW COMMAND

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1472 words

DATELINE: MANKATO, Minn.


HE is 38 years old, the youngest head coach in the National Football League, a
former Marine lieutenant who spent a year with a combat unit in Vietnam and a
major in the Marine Corps Reserves. He has a boyish face, a warm smile, a trim
physique and a friendly manner. But don't let that pleasing demeanor fool you.

By his own assessment, Les Steckel is a demanding coach who feels perfectly
comfortable adapting a military metaphor to football.

''Whether you're in coaching or the Marines,'' he said, ''neither one promised
you a rose garden.''

The Vikings, a team on the rebound under Steckel in his first season, will
sooner find themselves an obstacle course than a rose garden. In fact, Steckel
had one constructed at the club's in-season training facilities in Eden Prairie,
Minn. It includes 10 stations so players can do things like climb a rope, push a
large ball up a short hill, jump rope, do dips on parallel bars and chin
themselves. There is also a new jogging path through the woods near the complex
and new ''plyometric'' exercise equipment, which helps improve the elasticity of
muscles. To insure proper use of all these new facilities, Steckel has hired a
strength coach and a conditioning coach, neither of which the Vikings ever had
before.

''I've got a ton of ideas,'' Steckel said.

One of them served as his welcome mat for the Vikings when they returned to
training camp this month. He and his staff devised an ''iron-man'' competition
of eight events to test his players' strength, quickness, speed, endurance and
attitude. Mostly, their attitudes. ''I watched them out there,'' he said. ''I
watched them to see what they were doing and how they were doing it.''

Everyone survived; not everyone finished, which was a shame because the club was
offering prizes worth nearly $30,000, including a new car, for the top three
competitors in each group. Three players dropped out because of fatigue, two
after pulling hamstring muscles, and two simply collapsed. By late afternoon,
many players were so exhausted that they were actually looking forward to the
two-a-days that began the following morning. Little did they know that Steckel
would require some of them to climb a 20-foot rope, using only their hands,
before they could leave the field for lunch.

Such is the new way of life for the Vikings, and it's a dramatic departure from
the laid-back style of Bud Grant, Steckel's predecessor, who retired last winter
with a record of 161-99-5 in 17 seasons as Minnesota's head coach. Under Grant,
a former pro football and basketball player who was 56 years old when he
retired, the Vikings were always the last team to go to camp. And assuming that
his players instinctively knew how to prepare themselves for a season, he let
each develop at his own pace.



Steckel joined Grant's staff in 1979 as an assistant coach working with the
Vikings' quarterbacks, wide receivers, tight ends and the special teams. His
style was immediately discernible to those working under him. ''My initial
impression was that he was a maniac,'' said Joe Senser, the tight end who joined
the Vikings the same year as Steckel. said. ''The way he presented himself on
the football field, he pushed you so hard. But after the second or third day, I
realized that here was a guy who was on my side. He wanted to see me improve.''

Now that he is the head coach, the emphasis, as one might imagine, is on
conditioning and ''mental toughness.'' One of his pet theories is that unlike a
machine, which wears out with use, the physical efficiency of a human body
improves with use.

To put that theory to use, Steckel said that in training camp, at least 20
minutes of each practice session will include drills and exercises designed to
improve the players' strength and endurance. And after the season starts, each
player will be required to run the obstacle course at least once a week.

''My experience in the Marine Corps taught me a lot about the team concept,'' he
said. ''I found that those who sweat together appreciate and respect each other,
and that they can all respond to each other in each thing they do. We have a
slogan around here for this season, 'Operation Teamwork, 1984,' and I have
talked to the team about our formula for success. It's simple, ABC: A for
attitude. B for best. C for commitment. That's easy to live up to when you're
winning. But when you hit the tough times, you find that tough times don't last
but tough people do.''

Under Grant, the Vikings had 12 winning seasons and made 4 appearances in the
Super Bowl, none of which they won. Grant was known more as a humanitarian than
disciplinarian and ever the masterly coach on game day. In practices, his
presence was barely noticeable beyond the occasional toot of his whistle.
Steckel orchestrated that first day of practice by barking instructions through
a bull horn.

Yet Grant's recent teams were less than distinguished, winning no more than nine
regular-season games in any year since 1977. Last year, they finished at 8-8. It
is, perhaps, the recent mediocrity that has forestalled any talk of mutiny over
Steckel's methods. Most players seem willing to give him benefit of the doubt.

''I kind of look at Bud and Les like Fred Astaire and Michael Jackson,'' said
Greg Coleman, the Vikings' punter for eight years. ''Both know their craft; they
just go about it in different ways.'

''Bud's philosophy was that it's a long season and you don't win the
championship in training camp,'' said the linebacker Scott Studwell. ''I am an
extremely intense football player, but I can only give what I have every day.
There are going to be some days that I can't give everything. If they realize
that there are going to be those kinds of days, that an individual can be tired,
which I think he will recognize, then everything will be all right.''

''I would be lying if I said his way of doing things doesn't bother me,'' said
Senser. ''But I realize he's trying to make me a better football player.''



Steckel not only preaches his program, he lives it. On the first day of
practice, in the 20-minute exercise period preceding the workout, he joined in,
bending and stretching with the players. Before lunch, while the players were
showering, he ran three miles.

Last year, he challenged Ahmad Rashad, the former Viking wide receiver, to lose
20 pounds. Rashad, he said, weighed 217 at the time. Rashad issued a
counter-challenge, that if he lost the weight, Steckel would have to run a
marathon.

''He got down to 197 on the nose,'' Steckel said. ''So I ran in a marathon.''
And finished, he said, in the top third.

Steckel said he learned his values from his parents.

''My father looked like a bouncer,'' he said. ''He was very strict and big on
discipline. To this day he is big on discipline. To me, discipline is a form of
love, but I don't think all young people realize that.''

As an extension of his concern for his players, Steckel and the Vikings have
arranged for a panel of four experts to talk to the team weekly during the
season, offering help and guidance on personal development and career
counseling. One of them is Carl Eller, the former Viking defensive end who
overcame problems with drugs and alcohol.

The idea for such a program came from Steckel's experience in the Marines.

''I remember saying, 'What am I going to do with my life after the Marines?' ''
Steckel said. ''These guys come out of school, sign contracts for a lot of
money, get up there on a pedestal while they're playing. But what happens to
them after football? An injury can end their careers overnight. Then what?

''I'm a big guy for goals. I have goals tatooed all over my brain. I like to see
our football players improve their work habits and their ethics so that they
carry over on Sunday, then to their second careers beyond football. To me, that
is what's truly rewarding for a football coach.''



Steckel has tried to convince his team that these new programs can only be
beneficial when the season begins. He has stressed the importance of being a
''good third-quarter team,'' one that can begin play in the second half with the
same freshness and strength as it had at the opening kickoff. He has also
modified his staff's teaching methods to take advantage of new techniques being
used in training for other sports, such as those of the Olympics. The
conditioning coach, for example, Dean Brittenham, is a former staff member of
the Olympic Training Center in Colorado.

But how all this may influence the standings remains to be seen.

''Nobody likes change,'' said Coleman. ''I think most of us regard all this with
some apprehension. I don't know how good we can be this year, but we all seem to
be headed in the right direction. If we give him our support, it has got to
help.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: action photo

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Cumulative Effect of History

SECTION: Section 7; Page 27, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 173 words


To the Editor:


Benjamin DeMott's essay ''Did the 1960's Damage Fiction?'' (July 8) places
inappropriate emphasis on the 60's as a historical concept. History does not
happen in decades or watersheds. In recent years, our media-made society has
tried to make it seem so. The spiritual deadness that he rightly sees in much of
our recent fiction is not simply a response to the dramatic events of the 1960's
but comes from the cumulative effect that modern history has had on our literary
imagination. A century of world war, genocide, nuclear showdowns, etc., stood
behind the civil rights struggle and American society's critical view of the
Vietnam War. If these events had been singular in our century's history, then
what Mr. DeMott says about our recent fiction would have more validity, but the
events that occurred in the 60's simply pushed our modern pain threshold one
step higher. Hemingway had one major catastrophe in his immediate background
when he wrote his early and best fiction.  PETER BALAKIANHamilton, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW AND NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words


RUSSIA: THE PEOPLE AND THE POWER, by Robert G. Kaiser. (Pocket Books, $5.95.)
The Washington Post's Moscow correspondent from 1971 through 1974, Robert G.
Kaiser won the Overseas Press Club's 1974 prize for best foreign correpondence.
His approach is ''outstanding,'' Phillip Knightley wrote in The Book Review.
''Russia'' describes how people in the Soviet Union feel about the country, its
Government, cars, homes, schools, premarital sex, crime, sports, drink, prices,
food, war and peace. ''For the first time,'' Mr. Knightley wrote, ''I now know
something about todays's Russians as a people.'' Originally published in 1976,
the book has been updated.

THE FREE STATE , by V. S. Naipaul. (Vintage, $4.95.) This collection - which
earned V. S. Naipaul England's Booker Prize in 1971 - consists of two stories,
two frag ments of a travel diary and a short novel. The last prompted our
reviewer, Nadine Gordimer, to write, ''I know of no other contemporary novelist
who can deal so devastatingly yet quietly with the sensation and terror at the
core of ordinary encounters.'' She added, ''This (book) is not his best work,
but it is part of an achievement that I believe in the end will show him to have
been a great writer.'' Vintage has also just issued two other Naipaul
collections:

THE MYSTIC MASSEUR ($4.95), published in 1957, and

THE OVERCROWDED BARRACOON ($6.95), published in 1973.

THE KITCHEN BOOK, by Terence Conran. (Crown, $14.95.) The kitchen from ceiling
to floor, wall to wall, cupboard by cupboard, drawer by drawer and every item
therein is the subject of ''The Kitchen Book,'' an extensively illustrated
oversize classic on the history, design and furnishing of that critical space.
Published in 1977, it drew such adjectives as ''inspiring,'' ''informative'' and
''helpful.'' Lighting, flooring and equipment, including stoves, dishwashers,
sinks, pots, pans, knives and gadgets, are examined by Terence Conran, a
designer who also wrote ''The House Book'' and founded the Conran's stores in
London and New York.

THE HOUSE OF THE ARROW, by A. E. W. Mason. (Carroll & Graf, $3.50.) This was one
of A. E. W. Mason's best best sellers. Before he died in 1948, he wrote more
than 18 books, including ''The Four Feathers.'' ''The House of the Arrow,''
published in 1924, is a mystery featuring Mason's police creation, Inspector
Hanaud, working in the south of France. The Book Review called the work ''a
well-imagined and well-contrived mystery story.''

A CARNIVAL OF BUNCOMBE: Writings on Politics,

 by H. L. Mencken, edited by Malcolm Moos. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) H.
L. Mencken had three strings to his critic's bow, said our reviewer, Cabell
Phillips: scholar, essayist and journalist. ''A Carnival of Buncombe'' is
Mencken the journalist. It consists of columns gleaned from The Baltimore Sun
between 1920 and 1936. Mr. Phillips considered Mencken ''probably the most
perceptive and at the same time boisterous and irreverent reporter of this
century.'' And, he added, ''all Menckeniana, I happen to believe, is
educational, uplifting to the spirit and good for a belly laugh on at least
every other page.''

GARDENS OF STONE , by Nicholas Proffitt. (Carroll & Graf, $3.95.) This is a
story of an Army sergeant who survived three wars and is trying to survive his
current, and unwelcome, cushy post - platoon leader at Arlington National
Cemetery. Nicholas Proffitt, the son of an Army noncom, was a Vietnam
correspondent for Newsweek. Elisabeth Jakab, our reviewer, found him ''a
skillful writer,'' noting that in the military sections and ''when he allows his
characters to take over, the book acquires . . . energy and resonance.''

NATHANAEL WEST: The Art of His Life, by Jay Martin. (Carroll & Graf, $8.95.)
Nathanael West wrote four slim books of fiction - hardly enough to enshrine an
author in the literary pantheon. ''If you care to be strict about it, he was a
minor figure,'' our reviewer, Irving Howe, wrote. ''But within the limits of the
shamefully few years granted him, he became that rare and marvelous figure: an
original.'' Mr. Howe called Jay Martin's 1970 biography ''always meticulous,
responsible and affectionate'' and ''a wholly decent piece of work.''

RATNER'S STAR , by Don DeLillo. (Vintage, $7.95.) In this 1976 satirical work,
the main character is Billy Twillig, mathematician, Nobel laureate, alumnus of
the Center for Refinement of Ideational Structures and 14- year-old. George
Stade, our reviewer, judged ''Ratner's Star'' ''not only interesting, but funny
(in a nervous kind of way). From it comes an unambiguous signal that DeLillo has
arrived bearing many gifts. He is smart, observant, fluent, a brilliant mimic
and an ingenious architect.''

THE MATURE MIND, by H. A. Overstreet. (Norton, $5.95.) Harry A. Overstreet was
chairman of the psychology department of City College from 1911 to 1936. ''The
Mature Mind'' is an analysis of the immaturities that cause most of our
conflicts. Mr. Overstreet's book represented an early popularization of modern
psychology and sociology. Published in 1949, it was a best seller for a year and
sold more than half a million copies by 1952. Some critics called it an
oversimplification. Others cited its ''wise, temperate and calm observations.''
This is the first paperback edition.

THE BLACK HOUSE, by Paul Theroux. (Pocket Books, $3.95.) When this novel
appeared, Paul Theroux was 33 and had written seven novels. Michael Mewshaw
wrote in The Book Review that ''The Black House'' was ''an abrupt departure from
the comic vision of his earlier work.'' It tells of an anthropologist and his
wife who after 10 years in Africa return to England because of his heart
condition. The couple settles in a remote area of Dorset in an apparently
haunted house. Mr. Mewshaw described the book as ''a hybrid composed of unequal
parts of social satire, commentary on colonialism, anthropological insights,
some randy sex and an inconclusive Gothic tale.''B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

July 29, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1415 words


Fiction1

17

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932.  2

26

LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency.  3

421

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  4

3

10

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.  5

6

9

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.  6

5

16

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  7

7

20

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  8

9

10

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.  9

10

9

THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch.  (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The legends
of an old manor haunt four generations of an English family.  10

7

9

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Three witches wreak
havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town.  11

12

17

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.

 12

11

3

THE GREMLINS STORYBOOK, by Mary Carey.  (Golden Press, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the current film ''Gremlins.'' 13

13

7

POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A
woman discovers the truth about her husband after he disappears.  14



1

MACHINE DREAMS, by Jayne Anne Phillips.  (Seymour Lawrence/Dutton, $16.95.)
Small, ordinary moments in a family's life burst into unexpected meanings. 15

15

7

HIM WITH HIS FOOT IN HIS MOUTH AND

OTHER STORIES, by Saul Bellow. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) A novella and four short
stories by the Nobel laureate.





















































 Nonfiction1

15

THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and David Horowitz. (Summit,
$20.95.) The dark as well as the glamorous sides of four generations of a
prominent family.  2

34

IN GOD'S NAME, by David A. Yallop. (Bantam, $16.95.) A British journalist argues
that Pope John Paul I's death in 1978 was a case of murder.  3

27

WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The troubled life of the
late entertainer John Belushi.  4

4

8

THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent.  5

5

11

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  6

6

21

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard, $10.) The novelist recalls
her childhood in Mississippi.  7

13

6

GOOD MORNING, MERRY SUNSHINE, by Bob Greene. (Atheneum, $14.95.) The syndicated
columnist's journal of his child's first year.  8

8

45

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  9

6

12

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  10

10

7

POWERPLAY, by Mary Cunningham with Fran Schumer. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster,
$16.95.) The rise and fall of a woman executive at the Bendix Corporation.  11

11

2

D.V., by Diana Vreeland. Edited by George Plimpton and Christopher Hemphill.
(Knopf, $15.95.) Memoirs of the one-time ''Empress of Fashion.'' 12

13

20

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  13



20

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.  (Dodd, Mead, $15.95.) A psychologist's
analysis of the plight of men who have never grown up.  14

9

13

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.  (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  15



1

AT SEVENTY: A Journal, by May Sarton. (Norton, $15.95.) The veteran
poet-novelist grapples with new and old personal problems.











































 Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

118

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

383

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  3

27

BOOK WITHOUT A NAME, by Kit Williams.  (Knopf, $10.95.) New picture story by the
author of ''Masquerade,'' offering a prize for the finder of the book's true
title.  4

5

17

WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE

DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard work updated in 1983.  5

3 THE 100 BEST COMPANIES TO WORK FOR IN

AMERICA, by Robert Levering, Milton Moskowitz and Michael Katz. (Addison-Wesley,
$17.95.) Profiles of the country's most successful businesses.  The listings
above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in
every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in
all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond
that point, sales in this category are not generally large enough to make a
longer list statistically reliable.  *An asterisk before a book's title
indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling industry
nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND

(Editors' choice of other recetn books of particular interest)


THE ONLY PROBLEM, by Muriel Spark. (Putnman's, $14.95.) A rich novel, with high
metaphysical content, about the trials of a rich man who is writing a
dissertaion on the Book of Job and exploring in his own life the problem of
evil.


PARTNERS, by Veronica Geng. (Haper & Row, $13.95.) A collection of some very
funny pieces, by a devastating witness of present-days mores, about such
subjects as journalism, politics, feminism, easy credit, art and adolescence.


THE QUALITY OF MERCY: Cambodia, Holocaust and Modern Conscience, by William
Shawcross. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A report on the world's response to
disease and famine in the wake of Cambodia's civil war.


THE SECOND SELF: Computers and the Human Spirit, by Sherry Turkle. (Simon &
Schuster, $17.95.) A study of the effects of computers on American society, by
an M.I.T. sociologist and clinical psychologist who worked with both children
and adults.


TO A DISTANT LAND, by James McConkey. (Dutton, $13.95.) A highly original novel
about Chekhov's trip in 1890 to Sakhalin Island, Russia's penal colony at the
time, intermixed with emotionally parallel aspects of Mr. McConkey's own life.


THE WEIGHT OF THE WORLD, by Peter Handke. (Farrar, Strauss & Giroux, $16.95.)
The Paris journals of 1975-77 kept by the avant-garde Austrian playwright,
novelist and poet, full of day-to-day observations charged with a tragic sense
of life.


WILLIE AND DWIKE: An American Profile, by William Zinsser. (Harper & Row,
$13.95.) An Adept and satisfying unusual book of reportage about two black
American jazz musicians, Willie Ruff on bass and French horn, Dwike Mitchell on
piano.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AGAINST INTERVENTIONISM

BYLINE: By Martin F. Nolan

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1197 words


Martin F. Nolan is the editor of the editorial page of The Boston Globe.
ENDLESS ENEMIES

The Making of An Unfriendly World.  By Jonathan Kwitny.  435 pp. New York:
Congdon & Weed. $19.95.

WHEN gobs of American ordnance are suddenly shipped to a developing country to
battle the Bolshevik tide, prudent American newspaper readers experience a low-
grade foreboding. When United States ''advisers'' arrive for maneuvers, the
feeling intensifies. At the next plateau of apprehension, I invoke Nolan's First
Law of Diplomacy: When we begin to learn about a country's rainy season,
American policy toward that country is already wrong.

Jonathan Kwitny is angry about American foreign policy. He writes about it with
immense energy, eloquence, indignation and an appetite for documentation that
will stupefy opponents of his arguments. Of all the polemics against our foreign
policy that have appeared in the past few decades, ''Endless Enemies'' stands
out because it is principled and free of ideological cant. For destabilizing
governments and economies and reckless arms sales and unsound bank loans, Mr.
Kwitny indicts the malicious and the well-meaning with equal ferocity. Mr.
Kwitny, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, writes in that newspaper's
tradition, with an admirable no-frills conciseness and comprehensiveness but at
prodigious length and with a running commentary on each episode that The Journal
would edit out.

His manifesto against American interventionism covers all continents and all
Presidents since Herbert Hoover. His two chapters on ''Making Our Bed in Central
America'' present a historical context of ill-fated coups that leads to a
cleareyed prescription:

''Because we care about our principles, and aren't pacifists, our wishes go out
to people elsewhere who fight for their freedom and independence. Our
willingness to arm them, however, must be constrained. We must consider the ease
with which arms get out of hand, and we must consider the likelihood that the
principles of most other peoples, especially in the Third World, will at some
point diverge from ours. . . .

''It should be the clear policy of the United States that we will not tolerate
Soviet or any other foreign military presence in our own neighborhood if it
seems to pose a serious new threat to our ability to defend our borders. We
showed that policy in the Cuban missile episode in 1962. . . . Surely a large,
well-supplied Soviet military presence in Nicaragua would be an intolerable
threat to the U.S. But it would be a threat we created. By returning to those
principles we value, we can extinguish the threat without hiring an extra
soldier or building an extra warship.''

Risky bank loans to developing countries, Mr. Kwitny says, represent ''part of a
giant flimflam, which accounts for a large part of the half a trillion dollars
or so now owed by the poorer countries to the richer ones. Much of this debt is
owed even though the poorer countries never received the money they supposedly
borrowed. This debt is one of the most unsettling factors in the world today. If
you look beneath such boiling pots as Poland and Central America, you will find
this debt, burning.''

Do developing countries want what Eddie Coyle wanted from the cops, a good
''leavin' alone''? What is the alternative to risky bank loans? Does Mr. Kwitny
want to swell the United States budget deficit with more direct foreign aid? In
the absence of choices, his jeremaid seems simplistic and isolationist. He
quotes Walt Kelly's Pogo: ''We have met the enemy and he is us.'' Yet his
relentless cataloguing of every Shah-praising folly, conspiracy and blunder
makes it necessary to recall Harry Golden's observation that ''America ain't
what's wrong with world.'' (Mr. Kwitny does document another superpower's
intervention in a ''tar baby war'' in Afghanistan and says, ''The Soviets had
revealed themselves as self-centered bullies, and were doomed to face the wrath
of Afghan patriots for the foreseeable future.'') The reader is flung constantly
into a deja vu dizziness about the American experience in Vietnam, a theme that
seems to me to characterize Mr. Kwitny's vision of the pattern of postwar
diplomacy. Not until late in the book does he even mention the Marshall Plan,
the main virtue of which was apparently its openness: ''The Marshall Plan was no
secret, and was a great success for every country that participated. The Berlin
Airlift was not carried out by mysterious Cuban mercenaries with forged IDs
flying planes with painted-out serial numbers. The Battle of Midway wasn't
subcontracted to the Mafia. If what we're doing is right, why hide it?''

A return to Woodrow Wilson's ''open covenants openly arrived at'' does not seem
to be a sophisticated answer to the American dilemma in the world today. There
must be some middle stance between being a stumbling colonialist bully and a
helpless Gulliver tied down by the self-righteous rhetoric of developing
countries. Mr. Kwitny is not hopeful: ''You can search your atlas a long time,
but you still won't find many places where the IMF and that American army of
hard-selling bank vice-presidents have furthered the cause of political and
market freedom.''

Although the Reagan Administration responds more flamboyantly to
Marxist-Leninist hobgoblins, the trend Mr. Kwitny outlines has been building in
a steady bipartisan tempo since President Carter's human rights crusade. ''In
the decade of the 1970s,'' the author notes, ''annual international arms
transfers, world wide, more than doubled, from $9.1 billion to about $20
billion. Meanwhile, U.S. arms sales rose from $1.1 billion in 1970 to about $16
billion in 1980. While the statistics aren't precisely comparable, the U.S. was
clearly leading the way in the arming of humanity.''

He quotes Macbeth: ''We but teach bloody instructions, which, being taught,
return to plague the inventor. This evenhanded justice commends the ingredients
of our poisoned chalice to our own lips.'' Thus is the road to ruin paved with
the crushed idealism of American principles. Cuba, Tanganyika, Nigeria, Angola,
Iran, Vietnam, the Philippines, Nicaragua and El Salvador - they are so many
garish bumper stickers of shame.


FOR Jonathan Kwitny, every year since 1945 has been a year of living
dangerously. His ideas about rearranging American priorities are bold. For
instance, he suggests comparing Fidel Castro and Lech Walesa; ''both have sworn
a commitment to bring their peoples independence, despite a history of
domination by an overwhelmingly powerful neighbor. . . . Yet one man, and his
followers, we idolize. And the other, and his followers, we have waged war on
for twenty-five years.'' A crucial distinction that eludes Mr. Kwitny is that
Lech Walesa has not thrown his opponents into jail.

Not much light penetrates the barrios and casbahs in this Baedeker for the Ugly
American. Mr. Kwitny quotes for inspiration Gen. Omar Bradley, who understood
what he was fighting for 40 years ago: ''The United States has matured to world
leadership; it is time we steered by the stars, not by the lights of each
passing ship.''B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of marine

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 30, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Morning Sickness, Legal Miscarriage

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 527 words


Merrell Dow, the maker of the morning sickness drug Bendectin, has agreed to pay
$120 million to settle claims that the drug causes birth defects. For that money
- more than was paid even in the case of thalidomide - you'd think Bendectin had
been proved some kind of a hazard. But it hasn't.

The company has so far won both the cases that have come to trial, and the Food
and Drug Administration believes Bendectin is safe. From more than 20
epidemiological studies the agency concludes there's no evidence that the drug
increases the natural rate of birth defects.

So why did the company choose to settle? Juries' hearts go out to deformed
children and their parents. In one Bendectin case the jury decided the child's
injuries were not caused by the drug but awarded $20,000 for medical expenses
anyway. The company won on retrial. In the other case a jury awarded $750,000
and was reversed by the judge, whose decision is now under appeal.

These two wins by Merrell Dow did not discourage new claims, as the company had
hoped. In fact, each trial stimulated a flood of new claims. Since even wins
were only adding to the costs of defense, the company says, it decided to
settle. It, or its insurers, may also have anticipated some costly losses;
animal tests indicate a possible link with some kinds of birth defect, although
these are not confirmed by epidemiology.

So there's now no drug on the market that's recommended for morning sickness.
That may be all to the good: No drug should be lightly taken in pregnancy, and
morning sickness can be treated through control of diet. But something is badly
wrong with the route to the Bendectin settlement.  If the drug is unsafe or
ineffective, the Food and Drug Administration should have been the first to act
against it. If Bendectin indeed increases the rate of birth defects, courts
should so determine and the company should pay. That's not what's happened. The
courts have so far determined the opposite but the company has paid anyway.
Judgment of the issue has been usurped by the parties' considerations of legal
cost and risk.Like the Vietnam veterans in the $180 million Agent Orange
settlement, the Bendectin claimants will now receive administratively determined
payments from the trust fund created by the defendant. With Agent Orange, too,
there's been no proof, only quite flimsy suspicions that the herbicide has
caused more than a skin disease.  In both cases the central issue of causation
has been left unresolved. The court administrators of these grand payouts will
have little rational basis for excluding any veteran exposed to a drop of Agent
Orange or anyone with a birth defect whose mother took Bendectin.  Satisfying
the F.D.A.'s safety requirements should not absolve a company of liability for
unexpected damage caused by its drug. But Federal safety review, if properly
conducted, ought to count for something. Courts are a necessary forum for
second-guessing the F.D.A. and resolving scientific uncertainties. But in the
case of Bendectin, they did neither. With Bendectin and Agent Orange, the law
has made a devastation and called it a settlement.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 30, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodia Refugees Flee Vietnamese Shelling

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 136 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 29


Vietnamese troops shelled a refugee camp in Cambodia with heavy artillery today,
forcing more than 2,000 civilians and 500 rebels to flee into Thailand, Thai
military officials said.

Western relief officials said the dawn attack on the O-Smak camp, 180 miles
northeast of Bangkok, caused many casualties and forced the entire population of
more than 2,000 refugees and 500 rebels to take shelter across the border in
Thailand.

Officials of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, based in the
nearby Thai province of Buri Ram, sent urgent requests to other agencies along
the border to help care for the new refugees.

The artillery attack followed warnings over Cambodian radio stations by
Vietnamese military authorities that Hanoi planned to attack guerrilla positions
during the monsoon season.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 31, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
MR. GROMYKO'S POINT

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 743 words


The on-again, off-again prospect

of Soviet-American negotiations

this fall - whether to ban space weapons, as Moscow says it wants, or to include
nuclear arms control, as Washington insists - may give President Reagan a
domestic political boost he needs but hardly deserves.

These exchanges no doubt signal to the casual voter a commendable willingness on
Mr. Reagan's part to sit down with the Russians and talk about anything. And
some in the State Department really may want to use Moscow's apparent desire for
a ban on space weapons to get broader arms controls talks going again.

But the one concrete proposal on either side so far is the Soviet call for a
moratorium on further testing of anti- satellite weapons, while negotiations to
ban them go forward - and to that worthwhile proposition, Mr. Reagan shows no
sign of agreeing.

Ostensibly, the reason - tamely parroted by much of a press that seems to have
forgotten what Vietnam and Watergate taught about government credibility - is
that the Russians are ''ahead of us'' in anti-satellite weaponry. Therefore,
official sources say, a moratorium would be to their advantage.

That's baloney, as anyone who queries independent scientific authorities about
the Russians' ''operational'' anti-satellite weapon (ASAT) can learn. It's known
to be a primitive device with an unimpressive testing record that can attack
satellites only in low earth orbit, from a total of eight launching pads. The
multi-ton ASAT is deployed atop a monster Soviet missile that cannot be
concealed; nor could its launch; and the ASAT, once in orbit, could be readily
tracked by U.S. radar and cameras. There's no way the proposed moratorium could
be violated without U.S. detection.

Meanwhile, the Administration is preparing to test this fall a far more
sophisticated ASAT - an 18-foot rocket with a heat-seeking warhead, to be fired
into orbit by an F-15 fighter. This weapon can take out Soviet satellites up to
about 1,000 miles in the atmosphere.

That's why the Administration doesn't want a moratorium; it would prevent the
crucial tests of the American ASAT, tests that would vault the U.S. ahead. But
the history of the arms race leaves no doubt that the Russians would then drop
the moratorium and their proposed anti-ASAT treaty and move to catch up. The
arms race would go on at a new and more dangerous level.

Satellites, after all, are vital to the verification of treaties limiting arms
deployments. If a nation's satellites are not secure, that nation cannot have
enough confidence in its verification procedures to enter into such treaties. So
Mr. Reagan's reluctance to negotiate a ban on ASAT's, his refusal so far to
accept a moratorium on testing them while negotiations proceed, only suggest
again his lack of real interest in any form of arms control.

George McGovern, emerging from a meeting with Andrei Gromyko, quoted the veteran
Soviet Foreign Minister's conclusion that the Reagan Administration was ''the
first one he has had to deal with that deliberately offered proposals they knew
were unacceptable to the other side. . . . The Administration seems to be
looking for proposals that would be rejected. They do not want agreements, but
they want the appearance of negotiations.''

It's unpleasant to concede that Mr. Gromyko, with so many sins of his own to
answer for, has a point. But look at the Administration's record:


* Negotiations only for an ASAT ban refused.


* Negotiations for a comprehensive test ban treaty abandoned despite the U.S.
commitment to such a treaty since the Eisenhower Administration.


* Ratification of a completed treaty banning smaller nuclear explosions refused,
because the Russians rejected Administration demands that the treaty be
reopened.


* The intermediate-range missile talks canceled by Moscow after the
Administration deployed cruise and Pershing 2 missiles in Europe, despite
repeated Soviet warnings that this deployment would mean the end of the talks.


* The strategic missile negotiations canceled by the Kremlin, partly because of
the U.S. missile deployment in Europe, partly because of one-sided
Administration proposals that would have forced a complete reshaping of Soviet
nuclear forces.


* The successful antiballistic missile treaty, in force since 1972, to be put
aside if necessary for the development of the enormously costly but dubiously
effective ''Star Wars'' defensive system. B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 31, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Official Wants Talks on Amerasians

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 157 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 30


A Vietnamese immigration official has called for direct talks with the United
States to speed the resettlement of Amerasians from Vietnam, refugee workers
said today.

But United States officials in Bangkok said they saw no need to discuss the
issue with Hanoi.

Refugee workers who recently returned from Vietnam quoted the immigration
official, Nguyen Phi Tuyen, as saying he wanted talks to resolve technical
problems that have slowed resettlement. But a United States official in Bangkok
said: ''We don't really see any necessity for talks. The orderly departure
program is the only program set up to take Vietnamese refugees, and it is
working.''

Vietnam estimates that it has 11,000 to 20,000 Amerasians, children of mixed
race fathered by United States servicemen during the Vietnam War.

The United States has taken 3,244 Amerasians and their relatives since Vietnam
first began letting them go in 1982, refugee workers said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 1, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSIT SYSTEM IS FACING A TROUBLED FUTURE

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 4081 words


On a Friday afternoon in March, a month after he became president of the Transit
Authority, David Gunn left his office in Brooklyn for a weekend of hiking in the
White Mountains of New Hampshire.

To catch a 5 P.M. plane to Boston, he took an IRT No. 7 subway train to
Roosevelt Avenue and 69th Street in Queens, where he planned to catch a bus to
La Guardia Airport. But as he got up to leave the train, he discovered that no
rider is immune to the whims of the subway system.

The train shot by his station. He missed his bus. He missed his plane. And the
reason - track replacement that prevented his train from making its normal stops
- will become ever more familiar to millions of riders throughout the city in
coming years.

Not all of them will share Mr. Gunn's reaction. As he got off at the next
station and turned back, he was ''tickled to death'' that the track work was
moving ahead.

The Transit Authority is at the midpoint of the $6.3 billion, five-year capital
program that began in January 1982. With most of the effort so far spent on
design and the letting of contracts, the impact of the program on the public has
been relatively small. That will soon change, according to officials.  The Gunn
administration is working on many fronts: It is fighting to increase management
control over the work force, it is considering a final decision on a
controversial Queens subway project and it is devising ways to reduce
duplicative subway and bus service on some lines and schedule subway service on
other lines that have lost 30 to 60 percent of their ridership.

And all the while, projects such as track renewal are being intensified.

Mr. Gunn recently requested that spending for track replacement be increased by
more than 50 percent, to $612 million, from $392 million. The track work,
officials say, will combine with the replacement of aged trackside signals and
the modernization of barns and repair shops to create service disruptions so
severe in the daytime as well as nighttime that ridership may dip further.

''Just maintaining our current levels of ridership while major reconstruction is
under way and operating problems are being addressed will be noteworthy,'' said
George Miller, the executive vice president of the Transit Authority.''

Among the lines that are expected to be heavily disrupted during the day - as
some are already - are the downtown IRT No. 2 and No. 5, the uptown IRT No. 1,
the Queens-bound IRT No. 7, the Manhattan-bound BMT J and the BMT M in both
directions and the IND A line in the Rockaways.

Heavy disruption at night is expected on the uptown IRT No. 4 and No. 6 lines,
the downtown IRT No. 1 line, the Manhattan-bound IND F line, the Manhattan-bound
BMT J line, the downtown BMT RR line and the Manhattan-bound IND A line.

Smooth execution of the track work, transit officials say, will be complicated
not only by its scale but also by the inexperience of the work force: Nearly
half the employees on the reconstruction will be new to the job.

According to Mr. Miller, the dangers inherent in track replacement were
illustrated by the derailment that occurred last March 17 on the Brooklyn-bound
IRT No. 4 line in the Joralemon Street tube under the East River. About 1,500
riders were led off trains in the incident, which was attributed to improperly
shored rails.

''Incredibly,'' Mr. Miller said, ''management responsible for the inspection and
for the supervision of that effort was not adequately staffed, with a result
that trains were allowed to pass over track that should not have been cleared
for service in the first place.''



The Initiatives Taken By the New Leadership

By raising the funds for the 1982-86 capital program, Richard Ravitch, the
previous chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, offered the new
transit leadership the potential for progress. But neither he nor John D.
Simpson, whose presidency of the Transit Authority coincided with Mr. Ravitch's
tenure from late 1979 to early last summer, turned around the operational
problems of the subway system.

Mr. Simpson, who is now a transportation consultant with the Fluor Corporation
in Irvine, Calif., said in a recent interview that he had managed ''a modest
upturn'' in the fortunes of the system, while ''keeping my sanity playing
racquetball.'' But Mr. Ravitch, a lawyer and builder, said he was ''amazed that
the system ran at all.

''It won't really change for the better,'' he said, ''until it is physically
rebuilt and until the public stops dumping on it.''

As the new head of this troubled system, Mr. Gunn is eager to stress that his
administration is not responsible for its failures. To underscore the
difficulties he faces, he is fond of likening the Transit Authority to a
supertanker: ''You turn the helm, so to speak, and it responds very slowly.
It's not a sports car, the T.A. It's a large, cumbersome machine, and it changes
direction very slowly.''

He points to initiatives that have been undertaken in the past few months.

The timing of car-inspection cycles is being reviewed, as the agency tries to
move from ''breakdown maintenance'' to preventive work.

Plans are afoot to hire at least 50 additional track walkers - there are now 112
- and to insure that all track is inspected at least once a week.

Purchasing and data-processing systems are being revamped.

Car-door circuitry and master door controls are being redesigned.

Graffiti, when they appear, are being wiped off the model R-62 Japanese subway
cars, which are now arriving at a rate of about 20 a month.

White-Glove Tests


A campaign to clean the interiors of all cars has generated a fourfold increase
in the demand for the cotton gloves used by maintenance workers. An effort to
improve lighting in the cars has driven a similar demand for light bulbs.

Meanwhile, the capital program is being scrutinized by a committee of agency
vice presidents to improve coordination between design and construction
projects, between in-house engineering staff and outside consultants and between
operating departments and the public - especially as service disruptions
increase. Ways are being sought to reduce the agency's dependence on technical
consultants, who were paid $40.3 million in 1983 alone.

In this process, some aspects of the capital program are being slowed, if not
discarded, and others, such as station renovation and increased
air-conditioning, are being assigned low priority. The prime focus is the
restoration of the physical underpinnings of the system.



The Reaction Of the Old Guard

At Transit Authority headquarters, as well as in the field, many experienced
employees and managers of the system resent the suggestion that they are
responsible for the system's ills. Their pride, a manager said, ''has been hurt
by people who never ran anything but Toonerville trolleys'' in other cities.

Just before Charles Kalkhof suddenly retired this month as the Transit
Authority's vice president for subways, ending 34 years of service, he fired off
a memorandum whose sting was interpreted by some colleagues as a rebuke of the
new regime. Mr. Kalkhof noted in the memorandum that an unusually large number
of trains was not ready for morning service.

''Better get control of this,'' he wrote to A. Richardson Goodlatte, a transit
consultant whom Mr. Gunn had named chief of the car-maintenance department in
April. ''The job is to get 557 safe, clean trains on the road each A.M. We need
more action and less words.''

''When John Simpson ran this agency before Gunn and things really got bad,'' a
Coney Island supervisor recalled, ''he came around and shook hands with us and
said, 'Thank you, thank you for working.' The same with Dick Ravitch when he
headed the M.T.A. When Ravitch left, he came here and gave a farewell speech and
said, 'Anything I've ever accomplished in this system, you've been part of it.'
''

Lawe's Proposal


There is no small irony in the sudden embrace of Mr. Simpson, whose relations
with labor were often thorny. Even now, John Lawe, the president of Local 100 of
the Transport Workers Union, remembers Mr. Simpson as ''a bar of steel'' with
whom it was difficult to find common ground.

The week Mr. Gunn succeeded Mr. Simpson, Mr. Lawe sought to open a dialogue over
productivity that was interpreted by some officials as a raw bid for power.
Noting that it was pointless for the union to agree to productivity changes
without the cooperation of management, he sent Mr. Gunn a five-page ''program of
action'' that gave employees direct participation ''in the development of
budgets and operating plans'' throughout the agency.

On Feb. 8, Mr. Gunn wrote Mr. Lawe that, while he was ''anxious to meet and get
to know you,'' he would rely heavily for labor advice on his aides and M.T.A.
executives. Months later - after two meetings with Mr. Gunn and other transit
officials - Mr. Lawe was complaining about the ''macho image'' of the new
management, whose upper ranks had so swelled as to become ''a parasite's
paradise.'' And no one, Mr. Lawe said, had responded to his program. One Gunn
assistant referred to it as ''that thing where Lawe runs the T.A.''

In an interview, Mr. Gunn said his approach to labor relations involved giving
employees a ''decent working environment and the tools to do their job with''
and providing realistic planning and organization ''so people are not tilting at
windmills.''

'Gentleman Freddy Gaines'


Part of that process, he said, required ''weeding out the bad people and the
bullies who will deviate.''

James Sullivan, who recently took over as assistant chief mechanical officer in
charge of the system's southern division, remarked that if employees did not put
in a full day's work, ''we'll break their toes.''

The other night, when David F. Feeley, the Transit Authority's senior vice
president for operations, found a large - and empty - ale bottle at a repair
facility in the Bronx, a contemptuous look crossed his face.

''Now, I wonder what this is doing here?'' he said.

This concern with discipline - ''this big deal they're making out of a few
girlie magazines and a little drinking'' - was attacked by a foreman who
recalled looser and, in his view, better times:

''When I came on the job, some of the bosses in the shops couldn't read or write
but, unlike Gunn and his people, they knew how to deal with men. In those days,
you could be drunk or an hour late, but you got those cars cleaned. The bosses
were respected. Why, when Gentleman Freddy Gaines or Joe Shea walked down the
aisles at the 207th Street shop, the aisles parted. Nobody dared challenge
them.''




Making the Managers More Accountable

When Mr. Gunn took over the Transit Authority, he found a management structure
that, he says, ''was incapable of operating or maintaining a transit system'' in
which performance was the basis for promotion and dismissal the price for
laxity.

Of the more than 5,000 managerial and supervisory employees then in the agency's
operations, only 274 at or above the rank of assistant superintendent were not
represented by unions and paid according to collective-bargaining settlements.
Only 200 of those did not get their jobs through competitive Civil Service
examinations.

''If you look at any successful transit operation in the country, it's
successful because it has a group of skilled managers,'' Mr. Gunn said in an
M.T.A. publication, ''On the Move.''

''My success in this business up to now is based on the fact that I pick people
to do a job,'' he continued. ''If they don't, I get rid of them.''

With compensation and promotion tied to competitive tests and union contracts,
Mr. Gunn said, senior executives are constrained in their ability to motivate
middle-level managers and those managers, in turn, are not encouraged to
motivate hourly workers.

Because the assignments of many workers are geared to a seniority system, he
continued, experienced employees who have picked an attractive job and do not
want to give up the opportunity to earn overtime lack an incentive to apply for
promotion.  In the last four years in the car-maintenance department alone,
overtime has amounted to $53.3 million. Much of it, according to state auditors,
was in shops with low productivity during regular hours.

Appointing Supervisors


Mr. Gunn and Robert R. Kiley, chairman of the M.T.A., have proposed to abolish
union representation for more than 4,000 supervisory jobs and to increase to
1,189 the number of managerial jobs that are also exempt from competitive tests.
Current occupants of these jobs, and hourly workers, would not be immediately
affected.

The City Personnel Department has approved the hiring of nearly 700 managers
without the use of competitive examinations. And Mr. Gunn, according to the
minutes of his weekly staff meeting, made it plain that the positions ''are to
be filled by the most qualified people - not the most senior, not cronies, not
relatives and not referrals by outside parties.''

'Power Grab'


But there are formidable political difficulties facing the management proposals.
To remove supervisors from collective bargaining - which is being challenged by
the unions as a ''power grab'' by people ''looking for scapegoats'' - may
require legislation, and neither Governor Cuomo nor legislative leaders, nor
even some M.T.A. board members, have rushed to endorse it.

Mr. Cuomo has urged transit leader to see if they can reach an accommodation
with the unions. And Sidney Schwartz, the M.T.A. Inspector General, who reports
to the Governor, recently suggested that the proposal be diverted to the State
Public Employment Relations Board, which normally determines collective
bargaining status.

''We would just be spinning our wheels with P.E.R.B.,'' said Bruce C. McIver,
director of labor relations for the M.T.A. ''That's where the supervisors got
collective bargaining in the first place.''



The Politics Behind The Project in Queens

Another major and equally controversial issue in which political considerations
are apt to play as critical a role as any other is the fate of the 63d
Street-East River subway project, which was intended to provide significantly
improved express service for Queens residents. After enormous expenditures, it
now seems certain to serve far fewer riders than intended.

Two of the principal figures in the debate are Senator Alphonse M. D'Amato,
Republican of New York, to whom transit leaders have repeatedly turned for
support in obtaining Federal funds, and Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro of
Queens, the Democratic candidate for Vice President.

In Mr. Gunn's view, the tunnel project is of ''minimal value'' and represents
the ''misplaced priorities'' of the officials who started it 16 years ago. It
has cost $600 million to $800 million - most of it Federal funds.

The Choices


Now, it seems, the M.T.A. will end the project either by doing nothing more,
which would leave the tunnel virtually unused, or by building what is known as
the Queens Boulevard Local Connection.

The latter, which would cost an estimated $360 million by completion in 1993,
would link the new 21st Street station in Long Island City to local tracks of
the Queens Boulevard N and GG subway at Northern Boulevard. This would allow an
additional 12 trains to operate at peak hours from 179th Street in Queens via
the 63d Street tunnel to the Avenue of the Americas in Manhattan.

The Queens Boulevard E and F express trains are the most crowded in the system,
with 55,000 passengers traveling through the 53d Street tunnel during peak
hours. Some 10,000 of those passengers and 6,500 other riders would take the
local trains that would pass through the new tunnel, the M.T.A. has projected,
but the Department of City Planning said those figures may be too high.

For years, the Regional Plan Association has pressed for another option - called
the Montauk-Archer Connection - that it says would provide substantially greater
service for Queens, although at more than twice the cost. A two-track subway
would be built along the right of way of the Long Island Rail Road's lightly
used Montauk branch, from Long Island City to Richmond Hill, where trains would
connect to the Archer Avenue subway line that is expected to open next year.

Disrupting Life in Queens


At an M.T.A. hearing last month, John P. Keith, the president of the Plan
Association, said the Queens Boulevard Local Connection was ''a palliative''
that would ''slam the door on the future of Queens and throw away two-thirds of
a billion-dollar investment,'' helping to put ''the crowning touches on a decade
of broken promises and misguided political decisions.''

But Representative Ferraro conveyed the fears of some of her constituents that
the Montauk-Archer connection - by its appearance, increased noise and altered
traffic patterns - would disrupt the quality of life in such communities as
Glendale, Middle Village and Maspeth.

The Queens Boulevard Local Connection, Mrs. Ferraro said, provides ''the most
bang for the taxpayer's buck.''

Mr. D'Amato, a member of the Senate Transportation Appropriations Subcommittee,
has said that no Federal money for the Montauk-Archer alternative would be
appropriated as long as he was a member of the subcommittee.



Streamlining Service: Many Ideas and Few Plans

In 1982, when he wrote the chapter on mass transit in ''Setting Municipal
Priorities,'' Edward S. Seeley Jr., an economist, observed that the subway
system had grown out of ''forced marriages'' between a network of lines
''developed at different times to serve travel needs that are substantially
changed or no longer even exist.''

In terms of cost effectiveness, Mr. Seeley suggested, maybe it was nearing time
for ''a smaller system operated less intensively'' and not around the clock.
Forty-three percent of the 3.4 million weekday riders travel during rush hours;
about 3 percent between midnight and 6 A.M.

To M.T.A. board members like Stephen Berger, who is chairman of the agency's
finance committee, it is past time to consider reconfiguring the system, and
certainly to reduce bus service in congested areas where it duplicates cheaper
and faster subway operations. But, like Mr. Gunn, who said he was anxious at
this stage to avoid any fight that would hamper his management reforms, Mr.
Berger is under no illusion about the political sensitivity of the issue.

Dramatic Decline in Ridership


''Talking about reconfiguration is a very traumatic discussion,'' said Mr.
Berger, ''but we're beginning to do that.''

About 75 percent of all subway trips have an origin or destination or both in
the city's ''central business district,'' defined as Manhattan south of 60th
Street. But the growth in ridership on private express buses, in cars and on
commuter railroads contrasts vividly with the decline in use of many subway
routes and stations.

For example, in the last 20 years, while city ridership was falling by 26
percent, the IRT No. 2 Lenox Avenue/White Plains Line dropped 61 percent; the
IRT No. 6 Pelham Bay Park Branch Line, 49 percent; the IRT No. 1
Broadway-Seventh Avenue Line, 33 percent; the BMT RR and N Broadway Lines, 31
percent; the BMT RR Fourth Avenue Line, 40 percent; the BMT LL 14th
Street-Canarsie Line, 42 percent; the BMT M Myrtle Avenue Line, 65 percent; the
IND D Bronx Concourse Line, 44 percent, and the IND A Eighth Avenue Line, 31
percent.

As neighborhoods crumbled in the South Bronx, central Harlem and large areas of
Brooklyn, a number of stations along these and other lines had a 50 to 87
percent decline at the turnstiles.

No Effort to Cut Costs


''Basically, stations are remaining open where traffic has vanished,'' said a
Federal transit analyst, Robert Abrams, ''Apparently, no attempt is being made
to economize and cut costs. I realize that often political pressures make cuts
nearly impossible. But many of these lines, particularly the old elevated
structures, are going to need rehabilitation soon. Some decisions are going to
have to be made, and some may not be too palatable.''

In some cases, said Boris S. Pushkarev, vice president for research at the
Regional Plan Association, the costs of shutting down some lines, as well as
some of the system's 465 stations, could outweigh any gains.

''Look at the North Bronx lines,'' he said. ''They don't have enough ridership
to be efficient transit lines and they're slow and they have too many stations.
But they have enough ridership so that replacing them with buses would cost you
more than tearing them down and, bus operations, on the average, are about two
and a half times more expensive per passenger than subway operations.''

On the other hand, Mr. Pushkarev said, significant economies might be realized
through improved productivity in the maintenance shops, fewer employees using
better tools, faster trains on some runs and the use of one-man trains, rather
than trains with a motorman and a conductor.

Mr. Pushkarev was not sanguine about the ability of the Transit Authority to win
back the ''big bulk'' of riders who, he said, had left the subways when
conditions of crime and filth ''went from bad to impossible.''

To do that, he said, ''you first need to show that somebody is in control and
cares about the subways, that somebody loves the system.''



In the Troubled System, A Few Signs of Change

Mr. Gunn, when he came to the Transit Authority, promised to do his
''damnedest.'' But, while the average mileage between train failures this year
has improved over the first five months of 1983, on-time performance remains
about 85 percent, and ridership and service delays are about the same.

Felony crimes, which increased 193 percent between 1970 and 1983, are up 14
percent this year, and, despite a new drive against crime at stations with the
highest rates and a series of policy meetings with Mayor Koch, Mr. Gunn feels
hindered by having to share control of the transit force with the Police
Department.

There are plenty of other problems, too - ranging from the rats at the East
180th Street barn in the Bronx to the new tile that is already cracked or
stained at the remodeled 179th Street station in Queens to the inability of the
Transit Authority to produce timely, reliable information about its own
activities. Even senior officials of the new regime found it difficult to
ascertain what work had been done on the tracks in earlier years.

Vietnam and the Subway Car


Among some employees, there is a belief that the Gunn administration will be too
short-lived to affect them, that they can wait out any efforts to change their
ways of doing - or not doing - things. ''They've seen new guys come, and they've
seen them go,'' said Paul Peters, a supervisor at the 207th Street shop.

Among some managers there is concern that the big money obtained for the capital
plan may dissipate without results. ''We poured a lot of money into Vietnam,''
said one manager, ''and we didn't win there.'' But most officials worry that,
when the time comes for even more money, Federal and other subsidies for capital
and operating expenses will have shrunk.

Despite the size of New York's subway system, Federal grants for its capital
costs do not exceed 20 percent of the national total, much of which goes for new
rail projects as well as municipal bus systems. And M.T.A. officials project the
current level of Federal funding together with other revenue would provide less
than two-thirds of the $7 billion capital investment the subway system is said
to need between 1987 and 1991.

Although the 1982-1986 capital plan was essential, said Mr. Kiley, the M.T.A.
chairman, it was only ''a down payment on the rejuvenation'' of the system.

Yet Mr. Gunn is guardedly optimistic about the future of the subway system. And
so are many observers who note that it still moves millions of people, if not as
quickly or surely as a generation ago.

''For too long, there has been a pervasive view in the T.A. that that things
couldn't be changed, that two people could kill an idea and no one person could
push it through,'' said Michael B. Gerrard, an attorney who has been involved in
transit affairs. ''Gunn has to deal with that. But I would say that five years
ago, the subway system was comatose. Today it's only unconscious.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: THE DECLINE OF THE SUBWAYS; Last of three articles

GRAPHIC: graph of train conditions (page B4); photo of track work (page B4)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 1, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Services for Vietnam Casualty

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: Lieutenant Sansone, who is 27 years old, was 7 when his father, a
paratrooper with the Army's 82d Airborne Division, was killed in a plane crash
near Da Nang on Dec. 10, 1964. His remains, along with those of seven
unidentified American soldiers, were returned by the Vietnamese last week.  The
New York Times/Vic Delucia
Lieut. Gregory Sansone being presented with American flag yesterday after
military funeral service for his father, Sgt. Dominic Sansone, in Pinelawn, L.I.

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CUOMO TO CHALLENGE ARCHBISHOP OVER CRITICISM OF ABORTION STAND

BYLINE: By SAM ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2103 words


Governor Cuomo, seizing the offensive in a long-simmering conflict, has decided
to confront the implied criticism of his position on abortion by the Roman
Catholic Archbishop of New York.

In an unusual challenge to the Catholic Church by a Catholic politician, Mr.
Cuomo intends to raise the issue of the role of religion in politics regularly,
beginning tonight in remarks to the International Platform Association in
Washington. The association is honoring him for his keynote speech last month to
the Democratic National Convention.

The Governor is also scheduled to lecture on politics and religion at the
University of Notre Dame in the fall.



'Tend to Antagonize'


''It's always been safer not to talk about religious beliefs because religious
beliefs are so personal that they tend to antagonize,'' Mr. Cuomo said Tuesday
during an extensive interview at his home in Holliswood, Queens. ''But formal
religion, more aggressively than ever before, is seeking to use the political
process in the traditional way. Also, you have politicians themselves talking
about religion.

''Look at what happened in my last legislative session - the Catholc Church
killed the E.R.A.,'' Mr. Cuomo said, referring to his proposal for a state equal
rights amendment, which Republican state senators said was doomed by the
opposition of the Conservative Party and antiabortion groups.

''The church has never been this aggressively involved,'' he said.

The Governor, taking a calculated political risk, said he would make it his goal
to shift the public focus from selective moral tests, such as where a candidate
stands on school prayer or abortion, to a broader debate over which political
party best espoused universal religious values about peace and the poor.

Mr. Cuomo began by responding to an outspoken archbishop of his own church, John
J. O'Connor of New York, whom he characterized as ''a good and holy man who is
living by his lights.''

''Now,'' he said, ''you have the Archbishop of New York saying that no Catholic
can vote for Ed Koch, no Catholic can vote for Jay Goldin, for Carol Bellamy,
nor for Pat Moynihan or Mario Cuomo - anybody who disagrees with him on
abortion. He amends that by saying, 'I'm not telling anyone how to vote - that's
my personal judgment.' But you're the Archbishop.''

In addition to Mayor Koch, the Governor was referring to City Comptroller
Harrison J. Goldin, City Council President Carol Bellamy and Senator Daniel
Patrick Moynihan.

''You have a President,'' Mr. Cuomo said, ''who has wrapped himself in
religiosity. Reagan has used religion aggressively as a weapon, as a tool. He
has held himself out as offering the American people a religious value that will
be a foundation for the Government. You have Reagan moving into what was a
vacuum and brandishing religious values.''

Mr. Cuomo advised fellow Democrats that only by confronting and debating the
proper role of religion in politics could they loosen Mr. Reagan's grip as a
self-proclaimed guardian of the nation's morality. ''I believe it was wrong for
us to allow the President to pre-empt and co-opt us on the issue,'' he said.

Pluralistic Foundation


The Governor is not alone in expressing concern that the manner in which some
candidates and clergymen have injected religion into political campaigns and
depicted themselves as arbiters of morality represents a threat to the country's
pluralistic foundation and the First Amendment principle of separation of church
and state.

But Mr. Cuomo's comments are considered particularly significant because several
of his own political positions have placed him directly at odds with Archbishop
O'Connor.

Echoing an earlier declaration by the Catholic Bishops of New York State, the
Archbishop said during a televised news conference June 24, ''I don't see how a
Catholic in good conscience can vote for a candidate who explicitly supports
abortion.''

Mr. Cuomo has said repeatedly that while he personally opposed abortion, the
United States Supreme Court ruled in 1973 that the right to an abortion was
guaranteed by the Constitution, which he was sworn to uphold. The Governor has
been dogged by antiabortion protesters, as has Representative Geraldine A.
Ferraro, a Queens Democrat and her party's nominee for Vice President.

Such questions about the conflict between her religious beliefs and her
political positions prompted Mrs. Ferraro to respond last month that President
Reagan ''walks around calling himself a good Christian, but I don't for one
minute believe it because the policies are so terribly unfair.'' She explained
later that she was referring to the President's policies, not to his soul.

''The debate has begun in earnest now,'' Mr. Cuomo said in the interview. ''I
don't think they ought to duck it. I think Geraldine should say what she means
by her definition of a 'good Christian,' that Reagan should say what he means
when he says Mondale isn't true to his own morality.''

Role of Formal Religion


''They should both say what the role of formal religion is,'' the Governor said.
''Are you saying we are a Christian country? And what does that mean? My kind of
Christianity or yours?

''So, Mr. President, if you want to debate in this campaign on the implications
of religion, I will start with the need for love in society and I will say that
my platform, which says we're going to reach out to those people in wheelchairs
and to those people who have been left out, we're going to help them up.

''Your platform is, 'We'll take care of the people God has already taken care
of, make them as stong as possible and hope that on their own they'll take care
of everybody else.' That's not my kind of Christianity.''

Does he believe that Mr. Reagan is a ''good Christian''?

''I don't think we ought to judge one another's soul,'' Mr. Cuomo said. ''I'm
not going to judge Ronald Reagan and ask why did you leave your first wife, was
that a Christian thing to do, have you seen your grandchild? I don't want to
judge his soul or his conscience.

''What Geraldine was saying is, 'As long as you, Mr. President, have brought up
the matter of religion, let me explain to you that my particular Christianity
tells me I should be finding money for the homeless, and I should be taking care
of the poor as well as the strong, and your policies don't do that. So I judge
your policies to be unchristian.'

''I will encourage a debate as to values,'' the Governor said. ''I'm not going
to debate Ronald Reagan on whether he's a hypocrite.''

Of Archbishop O'Connor's remarks about abortion, Mr. Cuomo said: ''We have a
difference of opinion. If you took literally what he's saying, he can only vote
for a right-to-lifer. He can't vote for Reagan because Reagan signed the
abortion statute.'' The reference was to a measure signed by Mr. Reagan when he
was Governor of California.

A spokesman for Mr. Reagan's campaign, John Buckley, said yesterday that the
President's ''position on abortion is very clear - he is opposed to it.''

Mr. Cuomo said he was not intimidated by Archbishop O'Connor's remarks. He
recalled: ''The Archbishop said in his last appearance that he wants to make it
extremely clear that he's not telling the Catholics how to vote. I don't see
anybody stopping Geraldine Ferraro's priest having his picture taken on national
television with his arms around Gerry applauding her. If Rome wants to stop
things like that, they can. To have intimidation, you have to be intimidated.''

Were the Archbishop's remarks a signal to voters?

''Then is it a signal that all the bishops who signed the letter, including
Cardinal Cooke, on nuclear disarmament are voting against Reagan?'' Mr. Cuomo
asked. Archbishop O'Connor was appointed last January to succeed Terence
Cardinal Cooke, who died last fall.

''I think when all is said and done, the conclusion will be that Pat Moynihan is
not a hypocrite, Geraldine Ferraro is not untrue to her religion and Mario Cuomo
is trying to do the best he can and still remain a Catholic,'' the Governor
said.

Mr. Cuomo said that he expected to arrange a meeting with Archbishop O'Connor
soon and that he had told him in June, ''I am a Governor, I am a Democrat, but I
am a Catholic first - my soul is more important to me than my body.''

A spokesman for the archdiocese, the Rev. Peter G. Finn, said that ''the
Archbishop's position on abortion is one of long standing'' and reflects a
statement by New York bishops last April that ''we fail to see the logic of
those who contend, 'I am personally opposed to abortion, but I will not impose
my personal views on others.' ''

In the interview, the Governor debated the issue with himself:

''The Archbishop says, 'You, Mario, are a Catholic who agrees with me that
abortion is an evil.' I say: 'I agree with you, Archbishop, that as I see the
world, abortion is not a good thing. I therefore will not encourage my daughters
to have one, God forbid. I will not say that it is a good thing, and in so doing
I will remain true to my belief and a member of the church, which is more
important to me than remaining a member of the Demcratic Party.'

''The Archbishop says, 'O.K., now I want you to insist that everybody believe
what we believe.' I am entitled to make the case that everybody should, but once
the law has decided contrary, I have to respect that, too.''

Constitutional Amendment


Even if agreement could be reached on the scope of a constitutional amendment to
ban abortion, Mr. Cuomo said: ''Is there any chance of its success? And, if not,
what have you done except divide people?

''Say I'm an Orthodox Jew - it is a sin to profane the sabbath, to work on
Saturday. Should I seek to interpolate all of my religious beliefs that I think
obviously are good for society, should I fight to impose them on everybody?

''No, I should not, because to do so makes me vulnerable to an Orthodox Jewish
governor and an athiest governor and an agnostic governor who someday will argue
for a body of beliefs that is contrary to mine. For me to preserve my right to
be a Catholic means preserving your right to be a Jew.

''Christ sums it all up for Christians,'' Mr. Cuomo said. ''He gave a doctrine
that never mentioned abortion. He wasn't terribly strong on negatives. He
prescinded from politics - he refused to register in the zealot party.

''He didn't get actively involved, although he allowed you to by saying, 'Render
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's.' He's talking to people who weren't
educated, fishermen, not terribly subtle people, and they said: 'What's the law?
I can't read books and I can't follow you around forever. I heard that great
speech you gave on the mountainside, Sermon on the Mount - terrific. But you
have to sum it up for me.' And he said, 'The whole law is, love thy neighbor as
thyself for the love of me.' ''

While other controversies have divided voters along religious lines before, two
issues that have aroused intense emotion - abortion and homosexual rights - were
barely debated publicly as recently as a generation ago. When the Rev. Jerry
Falwell's Moral Majority and other evangelical leaders plunged into politics, it
was viewed, in part, as a backlash to court decisions, legislation and executive
orders recognizing such rights.

Clergymen and candidates of many political parties have traditionally invoked
religious values in American politics, from the abolitionist movement to
campaigns against the Vietnam War and in support of civil rights. But what has
prompted concern in some quarters is the extent to which Mr. Reagan has publicly
allied himself with the emerging evangelical movement and embraced positions
that could enhance his appeal to Catholics.

Last January, the President established full diplomatic relations with the
Vatican. Later that month, in his first address as a declared candidate for re-
election, he repeated his support for constitutional amendments to permit school
prayer and to ban abortion. On Wednesday, he discussed foreign policy with the
Vatican's Apostolic Delegate over lunch at the Presidential ranch in Santa
Barbara, Calif.

''America surely benefits when its President possesses a deep religious faith,''
David M. Gordis, executive vice president of the American Jewish Committee, said
yesterday, ''but this is very different from the use of the prestige of the
highest position in the land to endorse particular forms of religious
expression. In doing so, the President has weakened an important component of
the American ethos.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

4 SOVIET DESERTERS TELL OF CRUEL AFGHANISTAN WAR

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 875 words


Four Soviet soldiers who deserted in Afghanistan said yesterday that the
military intervention was taking a toll on the soldiers, whom they described as
demoralized by harsh conditions and wide drug use as well as the perils of
battle in a hostile environment.

The four deserters, speaking at a news conference in New York, said that
indiscriminate killing of civilians, brutal treatment of soldiers by their
officers and widespread illness were among the problems affecting the soldiers.

''Some Soviet soldiers are so filled with rage that they kill everyone they
see,'' said one of the deserters, Alexei Peresleni, a 20-year-old sergeant. ''A
war is a war and a soldier is a soldier. We're no different from the way
American soldiers were in Vietnam. The fighting is very indiscriminate.''

The four, dressed in sports clothes and speaking through an interpreter at
Freedom House, a New-York-based organization that promotes democratic
principles, were the third group of Soviet soldiers to desert to the West since
the Soviet Army invaded Afghanistan in December 1979.

All said they deserted to the Afghan insurgents between June and December last
year.

 U.S. Grants Parole Status

The former soldiers have been granted refugee parole status by the United States
and they will be resettled by the International Rescue Committee.

The committiee and Freedom House officials refused to divulge how the deserters
had reached the United States.

Freedom House estimates that the Afghan resistance forces are holding 200 to 300
Soviet soldiers who do not want to return home but want to move on to other
countries.

The soldiers said that they had deserted because they felt the war in
Afghanistan was immoral, they had not wanted to be killed in such a war and also
because they were opposed to the Soviet system.

''We were told we were being sent to offer friendship and help to the Afghan
people,'' said Mr. Peresleni, who had commanded a six-man crew of a
122-millimeter howitzer. ''But when you're sent to fight in a time of peace, you
can't feel very good about it.''

 Angry Soldiers Kill Civilians

Although Soviet troops are ordered to shoot only Afghans bearing weapons, their
anger and frustration prompted them to kill civilians as well, the former
soldiers said in a later interview.

''I can't hide the fact that women and children have been killed,'' Nikolay
Movchan, 20, a Ukrainian who was a sergeant and headed a grenade-launching team,
said in an interview later. ''And I've heard of Afghan women being raped.''

Sergei Zhigalin, 20, an army private who was driver of an armored personnel
carrier, related a friend's account of a mission in which an entire Afghan
village was wiped out. The troops were ordered to ''take a village and they
couldn't take it,'' he said, so they requested air cover, ''and they just bombed
that village clean down to the ground.''

What added to the sense of isolation, the soldiers said, was the knowledge that
they were hated by Afghans.

''We would go out on patrol with them and they would pretend to be friendly with
us during the day,'' said Yuri Shapovalenko, 19, a private who operated a rocket
launcher. ''But at night they'd open fire on us.''

 Take Guns From Afghan Allies

They said that in some cases Soviet soldiers would take weapons away from Afghan
soldiers at night, especially antitank weapons.

The deserters said young soldiers were often subjected to harassment and abuse
by older enlisted men. ''On my second day, they made me sing and dance,'' said
Mr. Peresleni.''Anything to humiliate me. Then they took a huge log and started
beating me - for nothing. It's inhuman, animalistic.''

The soldiers often retaliate, they said, and younger draftees have tried to kill
senior enlisted men by throwing hand grenades into their tents and trucks.

Adding to the distress of Soviet soldiers, the deserters added, is illness. The
most common ailments are hepatitis and three strains of typhoid. Some soldiers
have contracted malaria and dysentery. One deserter said that almost 50 percent
of the soldiers in his platoon had been unfit for duty.

 Find Escape in Narcotics

Soviet soldiers try to overcome their fear, boredom and frustration by smoking
chars, a common form of hashish in Afghanistan, or by using opium and heroin.
They buy the drugs with money looted from Afghan houses and by selling army
supplies - kettles, ammunition both live and spent, spare parts and automatic
weapons.

Drug use by Soviet soldiers is widespread, even in combat, they said.
''Practically everybody uses hashish all the time, and some use opium, but you
just make sure officers don't see you when you're on military operations,'' Mr.
Peresleni said.

There are rumors, the deserters went on, that both the Soviet forces and the
Afghan insurgents have been using chemical weapons. None of the deserters had
any firsthand knowledge of this. They said they had heard rumors of chemical
warfare being waged by both sides near the Punjsher Valley, 50 miles north of
Kabul.

Mr. Movchan said he had heard of an incident in the town of Ghazni, southwest of
Kabul, in which Soviet soldiers may have been attacked by chemical weapons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Agent Orange FundTo Provide for Tests



BYLINE:
By United Press International

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 108 words


A Federal judge released $74,000 yesterday from a $250 million settlement for
victims of the herbicide Agent Orange so they and their families could be
screened for genetic damage or birth defects.

Although the judge, Jack B. Weinstein of United States District Court in
Brooklyn, has not yet approved the proposed settlement, the seven chemical
companies who were defendants in the class-action suit have already begun making
contributions to the fund.

Judge Weinstein approved a proposal by the March of Dimes Birth Defects
Foundation for a large-scale family counseling and testing program for Vietnam
veterans and their families.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY;
Jim Dale is leaving his 'cubbyhole' to play 'Joe Egg.'

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words


Jim Dale enjoyed playing ''Barnum,'' but not enough to be saddled with it the
rest of his life. ''People are now calling me Jim (Barnum) Dale,'' he said by
telephone the other day from Dallas, where he is winding up a tour in ''The
Music Man.'' He added: ''I had to get myself out of that cubbyhole by doing
something very different.''

And what could be more different than playing the role of the father in a
revival of ''A Day in the Death of Joe Egg,'' which will be staged at the new
Roundabout Theater from Dec. 6 through Jan. 20.

''I've done two other Peter Nichols plays,'' said Mr. Dale, whose portrayal of
the legendary showman won him both a Tony and a Drama Desk Award. ''I did
'National Health' at London's National Theater and 'Privates on Parade' at the
Long Wharf Theater in New Haven, and I've wanted to do 'Joe Egg' for some time.
And I like working in smaller theaters.''

The new production, which was originally planned for last year, will also star
Stockard Channing, who was in the play when it was at the Long Wharf in 1981. It
will be directed by Arvin Brown, artistic director of the Long Wharf, who has
''American Buffalo'' among his credits.


There's just one sure thing in show business, and that's that nothing is a sure
thing, with the possible exception of one-gloved singers who moon-walk. For
non-moon-walk singers, it comes down to minimizing the odds, which is just what
Jo Sullivan has done. Miss Sullivan, the widow of Frank Loesser, is opening her
one-woman show Off Broadway on Oct. 1 after trying it out at the White Barn
Theater in Westport, Conn., the Inner Circle in New York and the John Drew
Theater in East Hampton, L.I. For good measure, there will be another warmup at
the Hyde Park Theater in Hyde Park, N.Y., on Aug. 21.

Although Miss Sullivan, who has played in such diverse productions as ''The
Threepenny Opera'' and ''The Most Happy Fella,'' is doing a solo act, she will
have five musicians right up there with her. The whole thing, which incidentally
goes by the name of ''I Hear Music . . . of Frank Loesser and Friends,'' has
been staged by the Tony Award winner Donald Saddler. The ''Friends'' of the
title include Jerome Kern, Kurt Weill, Puccini and Richard Rodgers, and they'll
all be heard at the Ballroom Theater.


She was an internationally known anarchist, deported from the United States in
1919, but Emma Goldman had her moments. When she wasn't raising the blood
pressure of the Establishment, she was, apparently, carrying on a torrid love
affair with Dr. Ben Reitman, and it's very likely that the story of that affair
will be seen in New York this fall.

Lynn Rogoff, who won a fellowship from the Writers Guild of America and acquired
the rights to the couple's letters, has written a play called ''Love Emma, Love
Ben,'' which will be tried out at Lucille Lortel's White Barn Theater in
Westport, Aug. 17 to 19. Penelope Allen and Kevin O'Connor have the leading
roles, and plans call for a production at the Theater for the New City next
month.


At this point in his life, Gary Sinise would like to make some money, not for
custom-made clothes or a penthouse with a view or a chauffeur-driven limousine
but, as he puts it, ''to get out there and deal with some life.''

It's not that Mr. Sinise, who plays Dopey, the drug dealer, in ''Balm in
Gilead,'' has led a sheltered existence. He was a rock singer and played guitar,
drums and bass before he became involved in the theater. And as one of the
founders of Chicago's Steppenwolf Theater, he's been both poor and unknown, and
relatively well off and relatively well known. But in his nine years in the
theater, he's never made enough money for a prolonged period of what he calls
''R & R.''

''If I got a chunk of money, I'd like to take three months off and get to where
there are mountains, lakes and clean air, away from noise and screaming
people,'' he said.

The 29-year-old Mr. Sinise, who both acts and directs (he won a 1983 Obie award
for directing ''True West''), describes himself as ''just a guy,'' which, in
fact, he is, offstage. He is reticent beyond the point of modesty and is most
comfortable discussing almost anything that doesn't deal with himself as an
individual.

He does, however, admit to some pride in his direction of ''Tracers,'' which was
written by a group of Vietnam veterans and produced in Chicago. But even then,
the subject is usually ''we,'' not ''I.''

''At the first performance, half the audience was Vietnam veterans, and they
gave us a standing ovation,'' he recalled. ''We cried our eyes out. It was an
experience that changed every one of our lives because we were investing
ourselves in something so true, so honest, so important.''

Mr. Sinise's role as Dopey is one of his favorites. The tattered and
none-too-clean costume he wears, including a threadbare Army-green coat and red
headband, is the same outfit he put together for the opening in Chicago four
years ago.

''If anything happened to it, I don't know whether I could go on,'' he said.
''It's real sentimental to me. I didn't really define the character until I
found that coat in a pile of junk, and then I started feeling like I had a
personality.''

The coat's been washed only once in four years, and until recently his shirt,
which requires special handling because it's so full of holes, was laundered
once every six weeks. It added verisimilitude to the role but it had its
drawbacks.

''It began to stink me out,'' he said. ''I wash it once a week now.''

The word was out more than a week ago that the Broadway production of
''Victor/Victoria,'' which traveled a somewhat rocky road to financing but
finally made it, had run into a detour. It's now been confirmed that Blake
Edwards, the man behind both the film version and the proposed new musical, is
ill with mononucleosis and that rehearsals have been postponed indefinitely.


Happy news on or off Broadway is a limited run that turns into an indefinite
one. That's what happened to Sam Shepard's ''Fool for Love,'' which opened last
spring and marked its 500th performance last Tuesday. Aidan Quinn, who starred
in the film ''Reckless,'' and Page Johnson, recently seen on Broadway in ''You
Can't Take It With You,'' have just joined the cast.


''Zorba'' is closing Sept. 1, but Anthony Quinn, who's been starring in it since
January 1983, has signed on for a further year of national touring. The play
will open at the Kennedy Center in Washington on Sept. 5.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sketch

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 4, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WILL WE DESTROY TIMES SQUARE IN ORDER TO SAVE TIMES SQUARE?

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 505 words


To the Editor:


Bickering over the Times Square plan continues. The latest (letter July 25)
proposes to ''Elevate the Times Square Pedestrian'' by a system of bridges,
raised plazas and atriums with walkways stretching up, down and across adjacent
avenues.

At first blush, this seems a logical idea, given the density of the proposed
Times Square towers and the street-level congestion which can be expected, but
it ignores several broader issues.

First is the unfortunate trend in American downtowns toward ghettoization.
Increasingly, center-city developments (including Manhattan's) are taking the
form of large- scale, self-contained complexes walled-off physically and
psychologically from the surrounding city fabric. To be sure, there is much ado
about pedestrian access above, below and at street-level, but the results more
often have been a function of security rather than amenity.

The danger of the Times Square development is that it, too, could become an
enclave connected by sanitized pedestrian links to other ''safe'' enclaves,
existing or proposed. It is somehow reminiscent of the strategic-hamlet program
of the Vietnam era, where isolated villages were occupied with the belief that,
like a spreading inkblot, control of the surrounding countryside would
eventually be won.

The analogy is not so farfetched, for there is an element of us-versus- them in
the Times Square plan. The ''us,'' of course, are the respectable white-collar
workers, tourists and visitors; the ''them'' is the unseemly street life we wish
to eliminate. I suspect that, as the strategy for the Times Square redevelopment
now stands, it will be successful in occupying the hamlet but not in pacifying
the countryside.  A second (and related) issue is that of scale. Simply put, the
plan is huge and will

replace

 Times Square, not rehabilitate it. At the risk of pushing the Vietnam analogy
too far, it brings to mind that young lieutenant who gave the order to ''destroy
the village in order to save it.'' With few exceptions, as we learned from the
experience of urban renewal, the answer to urban blight is small-scale,
incremental growth - not large-scale bulldozing. To be sure, Times Square is
blighted and has resisted plan after plan year after year. In desperation, it
seems, we once again have turned to the big fix as the only solution.

The Times Square project, no doubt, will be built and be proclaimed safe and
successful. But in the process the distinctive scale and character of a historic
area will have been lost and been replaced by an ''Anywhere U.S.A.''
supercenter.

And when all is done, it will still be a case of us-versus-them. The uneasy
proximity to the surrounding environment can be hidden or resolved by the latest
in surveillance, security and controlled access. But the remaining blight,
pushed beyond the limits of this new cordon, will become the problem of yet
another generation.

H. ALAN HOGLUND Director, Public Environment Center New York, July 25, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 4, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS PEOPLE;
Still Gaining

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 111 words


Having starred as the Lonesome End of the 1959 Army football team,

Bill Carpenter became a battlefield hero in Vietnam and then continued working
his way up the military ladder. As a 46-year-old brigadier general, he is known
more formally these days as

William S. Carpenter Jr. , and it was in this capacity that he was cited
yesterday in an announcement from the Department of the Army. General Carpenter,
a New Jerseyan, has been chosen to command a new 17th Division, a light-infantry
outfit whose base has not yet been determined. Accompanying the command comes
some other happy news: he has been selected for another promotion, to major
general.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Capt. William S. Carpenter Jr.

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS' FOREIGN POLICIES VEER AWAY FROM PAST LINE

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2045 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 4


The foreign policy line that emerged from the Democratic National Convention is
less militant and interventionist than the policies of such Democratic
Presidents as Harry S. Truman, John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, but more
assertive than that of George McGovern, the party's 1972 nominee.

In interviews, former officials from Democratic and Republican administrations
singled out Walter F. Mondale's ardent advocacy of a negotiated, verifiable
freeze on the production, testing and deployment of nuclear arms as the most
significant departure from past election-year platforms.

Other specialists cite a plank pushed through by Senator Gary Hart of Colorado
and some of Mr. Mondale's comments about Central America as signals of a less
assertive American role in the world than in the Truman, Kennedy and Johnson
Administrations.



Previous Involvements

Under those Democratic Presidents, the United States took on the defense of
Korea, Greece, Turkey and Vietnam, and President Carter declared protection for
the Persian Gulf.

The Hart amendment, eventually accepted by the Mondale camp, emphasized the
Democratic Party's general reluctance to involve American combat forces in
third-world troublespots like the Persian Gulf, except in limited circumstances.

In a similar vein, Mr. Mondale pledged ''to stop the illegal war in Nicaragua''
within his first 100 days in office and to work ''for the removal of all foreign
forces'' from Central America.

In the current campaign environment, the Democratic Presidential nominee has
sought tactical advantages by purposely casting himself as more dedicated to
arms control than President Reagan and less likely than Mr. Reagan to involve
this country in a foreign war, Mr. Mondale's aides say.

But against the sweep of postwar history, the former officials say, the Mondale
approach illustrates how much the attitudes of mainstream Democrats have
changed, particularily since the American involvement in Vietnam, and even how
the two political parties have switched roles since the Truman Presidency.
''There's been a big change in the approach of both parties,'' commented Charles
William Maynes, a Carter Administration official who is now editor of Foreign
Policy magazine. ''If you go back to the platforms of the 1950's, there's been a
radical change.''

After World War II the Democrats were promoting a larger American role in the
world. Republican conservatives led by Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio opposed
President Truman's moves to station American troops in Western Europe, and
Dwight D. Eisenhower campaigned in 1952 with a pledge to end the war in Korea.
Now, Democrats accuse the Republican White House of overzealous intervention
abroad and promise peace negotiations.

The Democratic stance this year, the specialists suggest, is particularily
striking in contrast with Mr. Kennedy's. In the 1960 campaign, he charged the
Republican Administration with allowing American defenses to suffer ''a missile
gap'' with the Soviet Union and pressed for a military buildup, and in 1961 he
approved an invasion of Cuba by exile forces armed by the Central Intelligence
Agency.

''There's no clear thread that links the Kennedy campaign of 1960 with the
Mondale campaign of 1984,'' said William Hyland, editor of Foreign Affairs
magazine, who was a policy adviser in the Nixon and Ford administrations. ''With
Kennedy talking about 'our bearing any burden and paying any price' for defense,
that was a different era.

''As a nation we crossed the watershed in the 1970's,'' Mr. Hyland added.  ''For
the Democrats, it came with the nomination of McGovern.  For the country as a
whole, it came in 1975 when we came out of Saigon in humiliation.

''About that time, we also discovered that detente wasn't going to save us with
the Russians,'' Mr. Hyland added. ''Since then, both parties have had difficulty
dealing with the post-Vietnam world and the world of nuclear plenty.''

To the 'Left' of Carter


Zbigniew Brzezinski, who was national security adviser to President Carter,
suggested that the positions taken at the Democratic convention were to the
''left'' of Mr. Carter in his final two years in office. In that period, Mr.
Carter imposed a grain embargo against the Soviet Union and sought financing for
the MX missile, two positions that Mr. Mondale has said he privately opposed.

''We never had a major party before advocating a hoax as foreign policy,'' Mr.
Brzezinski asserted. ''I think the nuclear freeze is a hoax. It's not
achieveable. It's not verifiable.

''Yet we're committed to it because of an activist wing of the party,'' he said.
''It degrades the quality of our foreign policy discourse and diminishes our
standing internationally because others would view it as a sign we're not
seriously committed to it as policy.''

Some Mondale advisers contend that the party platform - and Mr. Mondale
personally - were driven toward more liberal positions by the early withdrawal
from the Presidential race of conservatives like Senator John Glenn of Ohio and
former Gov. Reuben Askew of Florida.  The remaining competitors at the end of
the nomination campaign, the Rev. Jesse Jackson and Senator Hart, were both
advocates of restraints on American use of force.  ''In the primaries and at the
convention, the fights came from the left,'' one Mondale campaign official said.
''We had to defend ourselves.''

The 'Scoop Jackson' Democrats


More broadly, some of what became known as the ''Scoop Jackson'' wing of the
Democratic Party, foreign policy conservatives who clustered around Senator
Henry M. Jackson of Washington, defected to the Reagan Administration before
this year's Presidential race. Among them were Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, chief
United States delegate to the United Nations, and Richard Perle, an Assistant
Secretary of Defense. He was a longtime aide to Senator Jackson, who died last
year.

Although Mondale lieutenants acknowledge a policy shift from earlier Democratic
eras, they reject any notion that Mr. Mondale is a neo-isolationist. At the
convention, they note, Mr. Mondale resisted Jesse Jackson's call for unilateral
renunciation of the first use of nuclear weapons, and Mondale forces defeated
Mr. Jackson's drive to record the party in favor of an absolute cut in the
Pentagon budget.

''There is no new isolationism in Walter Mondale,'' said Barry Carter, a senior
Mondale adviser on foreign policy. ''He's for strengthening conventional forces,
including the readiness and mobility of our forces and our reserves.''

Mr. Mondale, with his advocacy of steady, moderate increases in military
spending, has taken a different position from Mr. McGovern in 1972 and Mr.
Carter in 1976, both of whom, as candidates urged cuts in military spending.
Moreover, in the primaries Mr. Mondale resisted pressures to endorse a
unilateral moratorium on American missile deployments in Western Europe, a
contrast with Mr. McGovern's advocacy of reductions in American forces in
Europe.

Among Democratic at the convention, the McGovern legacy of resistance to
military spending and American involvement abroad was apparent in the Hart
plank, in signs calling to ''end the war in Central America'' and in the
opposition of Mr. Mondale and his running mate, Representative Geraldine A.
Ferraro, to developing the MX missile, the B-1 bomber, nerve gas and
antisatellite weapons.

This year, Mr. Brzezinski suggested, the clash between Republicans and Democrats
over foreign policy issues is pulling ''the center of gravity in both parties
toward extremes, in the Democratic Party toward naive escapism and in the
Republican Party toward militant interventionism.''

Other former officials say the nuclear freeze movement is the most important new
influence on foreign policy.

''You see the impact of the freeze movement on both parties, with Mondale's
advocacy of the freeze and the Administration working to make sure it does not
look anti-arms control,'' said Mr. Maynes.  Conservative Democrats like Mr.
Brzezinski and Horace Busby, an official in the Johnson Administration and now
the author of a political newsletter, suggested the party was heading toward a
politically risky position. In Mr. Busby's words, ''It does not appeal to the
concern of the bulk of the country about strength against the Russians and
standing up against them.''

Nonetheless, Mondale strategists believe their approach will exploit a major
vulnerability of Mr. Reagan and appeal to the public mood. They reckon that
Democrats can score strongly on the broad issue of war and peace, especially
nuclear arms control.

Polls Show Fear of War


The private opinion surveys supplied to Mr. Mondale and his advisers have
indicated that among voters, the greatest single worry about a second Reagan
term is the risk of war and the fear that the Republican White House will enmesh
this country in conflict.

One survey taken by Peter D. Hart, the Mondale poll taker, showed that in the
politically pivotal state of Illinois, nearly three-fourths of likely voters
expect American troops to be sent into combat over the next five years and
one-fourth consider nuclear war likely within five years.

''There is a clear consensus that in the past few years the U.S. has been
drifting closer to war,'' Mr. Hart said. He said his Illinois survey found that
57 percent believed that in spite of the Reagan-led arms buildup, the United
States was less safe today than four years ago, and only 22 percent said they
believed it was safer.

The poll was taken June 6-9 among 755 registered voters. Since then President
Reagan has eased his public conditions for a summit meeting with the Soviet
leader, Konstantin U. Chernenko, and agreed to enter into talks this fall on
limiting antisatellite weapons. But Mr. Hart, the pollster, said he had detected
no significant change in public uneasiness.

Robert S. Strauss, a former chairman of the Democratic Party, said: ''Reagan's
foreign policy stuff frightens people.  I think Reagan's vulnerable politically
in the world being less safe than three years ago.''

Throughout the primary campaign, Mr. Mondale preached that message.  In San
Francisco in May, for example, he warned that the Reagan policy in Central
America would lead to involvement of American combat troops in the region.

''I predict that if Ronald Reagan is re-elected, he will present the American
people with a 'December surprise,' '' Mr. Mondale said. ''His policies will
continue to fail, and at some point after the election American boys would well
be fighting and dying in Central America.''

Mr. Mondale pledged to end American military exercises in Honduras and to
withdraw ''our combat forces from Honduras,'' but to continue training and aid
for both the Honduran and Salvadoran armies.

The contrast Mr. Mondale has deliberately struck is not with the Democratic past
but with the Republican present. Arms control offers his central line of
challenge to the President. In effect, he is resuming the policy debate of the
1980 campaign, when Ronald Reagan attacked President Carter for being too soft
on the issue.

'He's Dead Wrong' ''Mr. Reagan has now wasted over three precious years in the
illusion that an arms race leads to arms control,'' Mr. Mondale said in one
critique of Reagan policy. ''As he should have known, and as we're finding out,
he's dead wrong. An arms race leads to an arms race.''

Mr. Mondale has ridiculed Mr. Reagan's decision to pursue research for a space-
based defensive shield for this country, a scheme nicknamed ''Star Wars'' by
critics. Mr. Mondale called this idea ''a hoax'' that would costs hundreds of
billions of dollars and open a new front in the arms race without offering real
protection because it is based ''on flawed scientific premises.''

Soberly, Mr. Mondale has said, ''There are many, many other issues, but that's
the only one that counts.''

''There are nearly 50,000 nuclear warheads on the planet,'' he said in a
Cleveland address. ''The most solemn responsibility of a President is to do all
that he can to freeze their production, reduce their numbers, and prevent a
single one of them from ever being used.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPER ASSAILED FOR EXPOSING FAULTY ARMY COPTERS

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 933 words


The Army has grounded 600 Huey helicopters and ordered a new part for 4,500
other Hueys and Cobras to fix a safety problem that The Fort Worth Star-Telegram
brought to public attention four months ago,

But the managers and many employees of Bell Helicopter Textron, which built the
planes, say they were right in their first response to the news articles, which
was to attack the newspaper rather than the problem.

Protesting what they termed ''sensationalism,'' union members flooded the paper
with letters saying the paper should boost the local economy instead of
criticizing one of the city's biggest employers. Some letter writers threatened
economic reprisals. The Star- Telegram lost 1,200 subscriptions, out of daily
sales total of 250,000.

In one dramatic gesture, Bell Helicopter prevented the paper from servicing its
vending machines at Bell's Fort Worth plant.

Union Official Accuses Reporter


Perry Cheatham, president of the 750-member Bell Office Workers Union, an
independent union, said the organization led a drive urging its members to
cancel subscriptions on the ground that the original articles were ''not based
on fact.'' He conceded that the articles ''may have had some influence'' in the
Army's decision to take corrective measures, but insisted that the reporter was
''out to get Bell, and I don't like that kind of reporting.''

Many believed the newspaper had made cases of pilot error seem to be a design
flaw that was being deliberately and carelessly ignored.

Dwayne Williams, a Bell test pilot, said in a telephone interview recently that
the Army's confirmation of the reporting ''got me between a rock and a hard
place.'' He conceded that the newspaper initiated potentially life- saving
action but said it could have been accomplished without denigrating the
company's reputation for safety, which he took as a personal affront.

Jack B. Tinsley, executive editor of The Star-Telegram, said many of the critics
of the original articles worried that bad publicity could cut Bell's sales and
diminish jobs. Instead, he noted, the Army gave Bell contracts for more than $11
million to repair the problem.



250 Servicemen Killed


The articles were written by Mark Thompson, who reports Defense Department
matters for The Star-Telegram from its Washington bureau. In a five- part series
that began March 25, he wrote, ''Nearly 250 U.S. servicemen have been killed
since 1967 aboard Bell helicopters that crashed because of a design flaw that
remains largely uncorrected even though the Army discovered it in 1973.''

The accidents happened when the planes, military workhorses in the Vietnam War,
were put under unusual stress by turbulent weather or the vigorous maneuvers
typical in combat, he wrote. The design, intended to let the main rotor blades
adjust to different flying conditions, also allowed them to bump against the
mast, tearing the blades off the plane.

The articles said that some Bell officials and Pentagon safety experts wanted to
make the masts thicker and add a spring that would stop the rotors from hitting
the mast, but that the Army chose to give pilots a written warning about the
potential danger of ''mast bumping'' and to prohibit maneuvers that exceeded the
limits of the design. The families of servicement killed in ''mast-bumping
incidents'' are suing Bell for a total of $250 million, he wrote.

The report gained national attention in early April, when The Associated Press
ran a 2,500-word article based on The Star-Telegram series and CBS News carried
a five-minute report on its evening news program. Three weeks later, after three
servicemen died in the crash of a Huey in Alabama, the Army named a special
panel to study the issue.



Catalyst for Military Action


The panel's report, issued in early June, agreed closely with Mr. Thompson's
articles. ''I wouldn't have any substantive quarrel with his facts,'' said
Richard J. Trainor, the panel chairman, adding that publicity about the problem
had been the catalyst for action by the military.

Two weeks ago, the Army grounded 600 Hueys until they could be equipped with the
stronger masts that have already been installed on 3,100 other Hueys. The Army
and the Navy have also ordered construction of ''hub springs'' intended to
prevent the mast- bumping on Hueys and Cobras.

The military response contrasted with the reaction from Bell management and its
unions when the articles were published.

''I consider The Star-Telegram's conduct unconscionable and believe that you owe
an apology to all employees, past and present, of Bell Helicopter,'' wrote
Leonard M. Horner, the company's president, in a letter to the newspaper that he
also distributed to Bell subcontractors and suppliers urging them to protest the
series.



Vending Ban Termed Symbolic


He declined to comment on whether the Army's action had changed his view about
the need for an apology. A spokesman, Carl L. Harris, said the company had ''a
specific problem over a specific series'' and that its relations with The
Star-Telegram were otherwise normal.

Company officials will not talk to Mr. Thompson, however, and the newspaper
vending machine ban is still in effect. ''It's not a strike against freedom of
the press,'' Mr. Harris said. ''It's a symbolic way to say we think we were
abused.''

Mr. Thompson said that when he started reporting and writing the series, the
company and the military insisted that he was on the wrong track. ''I think the
series has held up better under the Army's scrutiny than the helicopter did,''
he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER DECADE, NIXON IS GAINING FAVOR

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1692 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 4


When Richard M. Nixon resigned as President on Aug. 9, 1974, he left the White
House physically ill, emotionally drained, publicly reviled and facing the
probability of both criminal prosecution in the Watergate scandals and personal
bankruptcy.

A decade later he has emerged at 71 years of age as an elder statesman,
commentator on foreign and domestic affairs, adviser to world leaders, a
multimillionaire and a successful author and lecturer honored by audiences at
home and abroad.

Yet, despite his remarkable recovery, much of it a result of his fierce
determination to survive as a respected public figure, friends and foes alike
agree that his rehabilitation has not been complete and that substantial
barriers remain to his ever again holding high office, either elective or
appointive.

For example, his recent decision not to attend the Republican National
Convention in Dallas later this month was welcomed by most party leaders. Lyn
Nofziger, the political adviser to President Reagan, who had served Mr. Nixon in
the same capacity, said some of the animosity toward Mr. Nixon among Republicans
had ''faded with time'' but some remained. Mr. Nofziger said he thought Mr.
Nixon made ''a smart decision'' not to attend and risk embarrassment for himself
and trouble for Mr. Reagan.

Watergate Made Lasting Impact


Mr. Nixon's inability to totally shed the stigma of Watergate after 10 years is
one indication of the lasting impact of the scandals that infested his
Administration. According to a range of academic and political authorities,
Watergate in its broadest sense made a major mark on American politics and
government.

The former President declined to be interviewed for the 10th anniversary of his
resignation, but interviews with his friends, associates and others and a
reading of the voluminous Nixon literature that has been published since 1974
provide a portrait of Mr. Nixon and the impact of his Presidency a decade after
his tearful departure from the White House.

Mr. Nixon, who had served two terms as Vice President and was elected to a
second term as President by a landslide in 1972, resigned with two and one-half
years remaining in his term rather than face impeachment, which was imminent. He
stood accused by the House Judiciary Committee of crimes that included
attempting to cover up the burglary of the Democratic National Committee's
headquarters on June 17, 1972, by men employed by Mr. Nixon's Committee to
Re-Elect the President.

Tape recordings released to Congress and prosecutors by Supreme Court order,
involving conversations between Mr. Nixon and his aides, showed that he ordered
payment of money to those accused in the burglary to keep them from implicating
the White House, and that he tried to halt the Federal investigation of the
crime.

19 Served Prison Terms


More broadly, Mr. Nixon was accused of illegal abuse of power by setting up
groups that carried out burglaries, tapped telephones of Government employees
and private citizens, performed ''dirty tricks'' against opponents in political
campaigns, tried to get the Internal Revenue Service to punish through tax
rulings the President's political enemies, put campaign money to illegal uses
and other acts that added up to pervasive corruption in American government.

Nineteen officials and campaign workers in the Administration, including the
President's two top aides, served prison terms for the various crimes involved.

Public reaction to the resignation was immediate and drastic. Republicans on
Federal, state and local levels were swept out of office. Mr. Nixon's successor
in the White House, Gerald R. Ford, was defeated by Jimmy Carter in the 1976
Presidential race by a margin smaller than the number of voters, about 7
percent, who told pollsters they did not vote for Mr. Ford because he pardoned
Mr. Nixon of the Watergate crimes. Mr. Ford announced the pardon a month after
Mr. Nixon's resignation. The Republicans did not recover at the polls until 1980
with the election of Mr. Reagan.

Series of Laws Enacted


Congress enacted over several years a series of laws and regulations to prevent
abuse of authority. A number of these have been watered down or declared
ineffective. But the bulk of them remain intact in some form.

Daily events continue to be shaped by the fallout from Watergate. A few days
ago, for example, the House of Representatives voted to condemn Representative
George Hansen, Republican of Idaho, for covering up his financial affairs even
though many members who voted against him were privately opposed to the move.

Mr. Hansen had been convicted under one of the laws passed as a result of
Watergate, the Ethics in Government Act, for failure to fully report outside
income. Despite feelings by many members that the law is unfair, public
sensitivity to corruption in government remains so strong, said Representative
Bill Frenzel, Republican of Minnesota, that elected officials ''are afraid of
it.''

''It would look like we were covering our tracks if we made a change,'' Mr.
Frenzel said.

The role that Mr. Nixon has carved out for himself since his resignation,
primarily that as commentator and adviser on foreign affairs, has been
accomplished, his associates say, entirely separately from his efforts to
overcome the Watergate stigma.

He Compares Himself to Hoover


And his long roller-coaster career of victory, crisis, defeat, revival, triumph,
ruin and, finally, resurrection as an elder statesman continues to whet public
curiosity about him. Recently, according to associates, he has been comparing
himself to Herbert Hoover, the President widely blamed for the Great Depression
of the 1930's. In a book entitled ''Leaders,'' published in 1982, Mr. Nixon
wrote that Mr. Hoover was ''viciously villified, deserted by his friends and
maligned by his enemies'' but, ''in the twilight of his life, stood tall over
his detractors.'' Mr. Hoover, however, was never accused of unethical or illegal
abuse of power, only of adhering to faulty policy.

When Mr. Nixon left the White House for exile in his native California, he was
suffering from phlebitis, a vein inflammation, in his leg. In addition, Federal
prosecutors were preparing to seek an indictment against him for the Watergate
crimes and his friends feared that heavy legal fees would reduce him to poverty.

The long road back began on Sept. 8, l974, when Mr. Ford granted him an
unconditional pardon on the ground that a protracted criminal trial of a former
President could only distract the nation from its healing process after long
preoccupation with the scandals. Later that month, Mr. Nixon underwent surgery
for a blood clot connected with his phlebitis.

The operation was followed by an episode of near fatal shock. And his recovery
was slowed by high blood pressure and pneumonia, but he finally returned to good
health and set about writing his memoirs from his home in San Clemente.
Gradually he came out of seclusion.

Memoirs Became Best-Seller


His two-volume memoirs, completed in 1977, became a best seller despite many
negative reviews. Two other books followed and he is now finishing another, ''No
More Vietnams,'' to be published next spring. He said recently that although he
was not a wealthy man, he made money on the sale of his homes in Florida and
California.

His current worth has been reported well in excess of $3 million, and he now
lives in a million, 15-room house in Saddle River, N. J., one hour from his
Manhattan office.

Since his re-emergence he has made three trips to China as a guest of the
Government in celebration of his opening American relations with that country in
1972. On frequent trips abroad, he conferred with various foreign leaders and
quietly reported his obversations to Washington officials on his return.

At home, the kinds of audiences he can appear before without arousing hostility
have widened. Just this year he was warmly received in Washington by one group
that he had branded as an enemy in the past: the American Society of Newspaper
Editors.

At his insistence, he has received regular security briefings from Washington
since his resignation. He offers frequent advice to Mr. Reagan, oral and
written, mostly on foreign policy. He successfully lobbied for the appointment
of Alexander M. Haig, his former top assistant, as Secretary of State in l980,
and tried unsuccessfully to keep Mr. Reagan from dismissing him in 1982.

For that and other reasons unconnected to Watergate, some on Mr. Reagan's staff
have been opposed to any suggestion of recognition of the former President. He
remains anathema to the conservative right that embraces Mr. Reagan.

Noting that Mr. Nixon describes himself as a conservative, Richard A. Viguerie,
a leading fund- raiser for conservative causes, disagreed. He accused the former
President of expanding Lyndon Johnson's domestic programs and making
''sweetheart deals'' with the Soviets.

In appearance, Mr. Nixon is not greatly changed from his Presidential years. His
jowls are a little heavier, the lines in his face a little deeper, his hair a
little thinner and grayer. He tells friends he has changed and mellowed.



Same Say He Is the Same

But some who have known him over the years say he is still the same person with
essentially the same traits and opinions he displayed in public life. In
numerous public appearances he has steadfastly refused to admit guilt in the
Watergate crimes, attributing his behavor to faulty judgments. In private, he
still talks about his enemies: liberals, academics, the press, Easterners in the
Ivy League.

Yet he is constantly reminded of Watergate. His appearance at Republican
fund-raisers have frequently caused some party leaders to boycott them.
Officials in high office rarely want it known when they solicit his advice.

His health, he has told recent visitors, is excellent for a man his age and he
hopes he lives to see the 21st century. And he is fond of quoting Sophocles:
''One must wait until the evening to see how splendid the day has been.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Richard M. Nixon

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOME VIDEO;
NEW CASSETTES: FROM A DAVID RABE DRAMA TO THE KIROV

BYLINE: By Benedict Nightingale

SECTION: Section 2; Page 22, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 242 words


Streamers Starring Mathew Modine, Michael Wright, Mitchell Lichtenstein, David
Alan Grier, Guy Boyd, George Dzundza; directed by Robert Altman, 1983 Media Home
Entertainment 118 minutes. $69.95

David Rabe is enjoying something of a revival among the opinion-mongers right
now, thanks to the arrival in New York of his new play, ''Hurlyburly.'' This
video cassette is a reproach to those who allowed his reputation to slide in the
first place. How trenchantly he explored the subject of Vietnam in the 1970's.
How especially well he did so in ''Streamers.''

Mr. Altman's film is remarkably faithful to the original stage play. This, you
feel, is the very army base Rabe imagined, with its restless G.I.'s and its
drunken sergeants, blundering in and out with nostalgic memories of massacres
long ago. The action begins with a botched suicide and ends with a murder,
committed by a black soldier who sees his coming tour of duty in Vietnam as an
extreme instance of the waste that has marked his whole life to date. In
between, one learns much about friendship, nerves and the art of intimate
acting.  The film never ventures beyond the barracks' all-engulfing walls. The
world outside is glimpsed only through panes of glass, wire, cracks; the result
is a feeling of entrapment, claustophobia, that fits both script and small
screen. Rarely can a play have made a more sensitive movie, and a movie proved
better suited to television.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from film

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING TRIES AN END RUN AND WOOS SOVIET ALLIES

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 906 words

DATELINE: PEKING


Following their great ideological rift a quarter century ago, China lumped the
Soviet Union and its Communist allies together as apostates beyond the pale of
Marxist salvation. Today, Peking still blames Moscow for blocking normal
relations, but it has no such complaints about Eastern Europe.

Last week, China announced that President Li Xiannian would visit Rumania and
Yugoslavia in the next month, following in the steps of party chief Hu Yaobang
last year. The destinations were not surprising. Both countries represent a
posture China would like the rest of Eastern Europe to adopt - less subservient
to Moscow and more appreciative of Peking's independence.  The trip is just one
more sign that China is stepping up its courtship of Eastern Europe. Deputy
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, Peking's negotiator with Moscow, added Bulgaria
and Czechoslovakia to his trip to the Soviet Union in June and July. A few weeks
before, Chen Muhua, China's Minister for Foreign Economic Relations and Trade,
made the rounds of Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia. Nor have the overtures
been confined to Eastern Europe. Last week, the Assistant Foreign Minister, Zhu
Qizhen, was in Havana for what was ostensibly an inspection tour of the Chinese
Embassy, although a spokesman here made clear that he was also available to
exchange views with the Cubans. This week, Prime Minister Kang Sung-San of North
Korea, which China has tried to keep out of the Soviet orbit, will arrive in
Peking as an official guest.

China used a visit here last May by Dragoslav Markovic, chief of the Yugoslav
Communist Party, to state its case for ideological independence. True Marxists
must formulate policies consistent with the reality of their countries while
respecting the reality of other countries and their parties, said Deng Xiaoping,
China's top leader. He could not resist a swipe at the Kremlin: He told Mr.
Markovic that those who pick holes in other parties and try to order them about
are bound to make mistakes.

China's official discussions on normalizing relations with the Soviet Union,
which got under way in October 1982, are stalled. Mr. Qian reported no progress
on his latest trip to Moscow. Peking insists that relations cannot improve until
the Soviet Union sharply reduces its forces along China's northern frontier,
pulls its troops out of Afghanistan and stops supporting Vietnam's military
occupation of Cambodia. Even then, the Beijing Review said last month, it is
unrealistic and impossible to expect a return to the friendship of the 1950's,
when Moscow called the shots.

Neither has Peking restored the party-to-party ties it severed with the Soviet
bloc in the big freeze. It has links only with the ruling parties of Rumania,
Yugoslavia and North Korea, though not evidently for lack of probing. There were
reports here this year that China had made overtures to East Germany about
resurrecting party ties, but that the East Germans backed off when the Kremlin
objected. The Chinese think their efforts haven't progressed faster because the
Russians don't want their allies too far out in front.

More Comings and GoingsHowever, the continuing coolness in Chinese- Soviet
relations has not prevented an expansion of China's unofficial contacts with
both the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. Last month, nine Chinese agronomists
toured the Soviet Union. This autumn, Moscow and Peking will each send 72
exchange students to the other's universities, according to a Soviet source.
Diplomats expect such steps to lead to widening contacts between China and
Eastern Europe, although Soviet bloc responses so far seem calibrated to
Moscow's own contacts with Peking. In May, the Soviet Union scrubbed a visit by
Deputy Prime Minister Ivan Arkhipov to China, possibly because of new fighting
on the Sino-Vietnamese border. But plans for the aborted trip paved the way for
a visit last month by Poland's Deputy Foreign Minister Ernest Kucza, who in Mr.
Arkhipov's absence became the highest ranking Soviet-bloc official to come to
China in two decades.

Similarly, China's substantial expansion of bilateral trade with the Soviet
Union, to about $1.2 billion this year, has been accompanied by a rise in its
trade with Eastern Europe. Last April, a Chinese economic delegation visited
Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and East Germany and returned to
report that trade with the five Soviet allies would total $900 million this
year. China's commerce with Poland alone has risen 25 percent and will exceed
$211 million, which the New China News Agency called a record.

Peking has looked to the West not only for the advanced technology it needs for
modernization but also for the hard currency it receives for Chinese goods. The
Soviet bloc offers neither. But China made deals last spring to have the Eastern
Europeans help renovate some Chinese factories built with Soviet assistance in
the 1950's. China also plans to coproduce harvesting machines with East Germany,
trucks with Czechoslovakia, buses with Poland and Hungary and forklifts with
Bulgaria.

China has also signaled its readiness to help Communist countries that want to
go it alone. It has supplied jet fighters and other hardware to North Korea and
oil to Rumania. Last year, Mr. Hu confirmed that the tight-fisted Chinese had
even made a modest loan to Yugoslavia. Yugoslav sources understood that it
amounted to about $150 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Shanghai Harbor

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'THE KILLER DECADE'

SECTION: Section 7; Page 23, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 427 words


To the Editor:


It's puzzling that Benjamin DeMott can write so confidently about American
fiction of 10 to 20 years ago without mentioning Barth, Coover, Pynchon,
Vonnegut or Ronald Sukenick. He remembers only James Baldwin and Philip Roth.
Can it be that ''experimentalism'' is so discredited now that it's distasteful
even to talk about?

Mr. DeMott's shuddering memories of that era - ''the killer decade'' - are
remarkably selective. For his generation, perhaps, it was a time of ''shock,
guilt, hatred, repugnance.'' But I will remember, with pride, that my generation
showed enviable unity in standing up against the insanity of the Vietnam War.
Our values were clear and honorable. We valued peace over war, naive love over
the quagmire of ''interpersonal relationships,'' spiritual discovery over
financial success, life over death. And our cultural spokesmen - Philip Roth was
hardly the only one - reflected that optimistic vitality with their
imaginations.

For the record, let's recall that the 60's and their rejection of the bad old
politics and moribund morality that got us into the Vietnam nightmare generated,
for one brief season, a flowering of spontaneity, irreverence and just plain joy
in not being dead that seems lacking in our culture nowadays.

But that spring was quickly followed, somehow, by another winter, a second cold
war, a new literary ice age. The playful fantasies and sweeping social satires,
the mesmerizing language trips of late 60's and early 70's American fiction are
less than footnotes now. We are back to the straight and narrow: here-and-now
realism, unrelieved seriousness. The unobtrusive, uninflected style of
delicately ''moral'' fiction.

Once it was possible to write about a whole society, or even all of mankind. But
that was also a passing fad. Now we have rediscovered the traditional nuclear
family. We're up to our necks in family novels, so many sensitive tales of
domestic tragedy - divorce and cancer, failure and abandonment, the deaths of
grandparents and children - that such morbid preoccupation with other people's
misfortune is bound to have a numbing effect on the most sensitive among us. No
wonder the talents of even Bellow, Roth, Mailer and Updike cannot take root in
the stark terrain Raymond Carver has staked out.

If Mr. DeMott deplores the sense of disillusionment and loss he finds in current
fiction, he'd best not blame it on the 60's. Blame it on that spirit in the 70's
and 80's that wanted the 50's back again.

DENNIS MATHIS, Provincetown, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

A LIFE OF PASSIONATE COMMITMENTS

BYLINE: By Robert Gorham Davis; Robert Gorham Davis, a professor emeritus of
English at Columbia University, was active in left-wing organizations in the
1930's and was chairman of the executive committee of the American Committee for
Cultural Freedom in the early 50's.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2565 words


JOSEPHINE HERBST By Elinor Langer.  Illustrated. 374 pp. Boston: Atlantic/Little
Brown & Company. $19.95.

FOR understanding what it was like to live to the full the turbulent American
literary life of the 1920's and 30's as it moved from bohemianism to radicalism,
there could be no more revealing figure than Josephine Herbst, a novelist who,
strange as it seems now, was ranked in the 30's with Ernest Hemingway and John
Dos Passos. She knew everyone and was in all the right places at the right
historic moments - Greenwich Village, the Left Bank, Russia, Germany, Cuba and
Spain. She captured the times in her fiction, her reporting and what Alfred
Kazin called her ''incomparable letters, of the sort no one even thinks of
writing any more.''

After 1940, when her reputation and income shrank almost to nothing, Herbst went
obsessively back to the past in notes, journals and constantly revised memoirs,
of which only three fragments were published. She was still working on them a
few hours before her death, in 1969, at the age of 77.

Drawing on a mass of unexamined material in the Yale University library and
seven years of interviewing, Elinor Langer has written a dramatically revealing
biography. She gives us new and often startling views of such figures as Maxwell
Anderson, Hemingway, Nathanael West and Katherine Anne Porter. Josie, as Miss
Langer always calls her, carried on a frequently stormy 30-year dialogue with
Porter. ''The two talkingest women I have ever met,'' Malcolm Cowley called
them.

In 1973 Miss Langer had not even heard of Josephine Herbst. She was teaching in
a small college in Vermont and wondering at the sudden collapse of the student
rebellion of the 60's, a time when, as a member of a peace delegation, she had
met in Budapest with representatives of North Vietnam. Now, for comparison, she
was studying the stronger and longer-lived left movement of the 30's. On
discovering Josephine Herbst's trilogy (''Pity Is Not Enough,'' ''The
Executioner Waits'' and ''Rope of Gold''), she felt she had come home. The
identification was complete: ''It was Josie and I against the world.''

How could such a writer be forgotten? Miss Langer was indignant and resolved to
restore Herbst's reputation. As a radical feminist, she knew what her thesis
would be: Herbst was destroyed by the cold war and the silent conspiracy of men
who resented her independent spirit as a woman. Miss Langer despised the
characteristic Existentialist biographies of the 50's and after, which put their
emphasis not on writings and ideas in their social context but on the private
life - sex, drink, disorder. Her book would be different. But it did not turn
out that way. Herbst and her private life were more than she had bargained for.

Herbst's three major love affairs, all with people much younger than herself,
two women and a man, showed the same pattern - appalling to a feminist - of
abject dependence. When her three lovers cooled, as all of them did, she poured
out endless desperate appeals and recriminations. In one, written to her husband
long after he had remarried, Herbst said, ''You wrote my name in your own hand,
not typed. I just licked every letter.'' Such correspondence survived for Miss
Langer's eyes in packets insincerely marked ''DESTROY.''

Born in Iowa of a family that had come from Pennsylvania, Josephine Herbst
achieved literary sophistication early, discovering in the Sioux City public
library D. H. Lawrence, Mikhail Artzybashev and, amazingly enough, files of The
Masses and The Little Review. She did not graduate from the University of
California at Berkeley until she was 26 - from adolescence she had earned her
own living - and when her awed writing teacher introduced her to the radical
literary community in San Francisco, she was accepted as an equal.

In New York in 1919, she shared an apartment in Greenwich Village with Genevieve
Taggard and Jessica Smith (later editor of Soviet Russia Today) and saw a good
deal of Max Eastman, Floyd Dell and Mike Gold (an editor of The Masses). Her
first literary job was with H. L. Mencken on The Smart Set. Her first love
affair, which occurred when she was 28, was with Maxwell Anderson, a married man
with two children. He made her pregnant and persuaded her to have an abortion,
which haunted and saddened her all the rest of her life. A man's freedom, Miss
Langer observes, was worth more than a woman's maternity. Herbst's suffering was
sharpened by the death of her beloved younger sister, an equally free spirit and
successful journalist, after an abortion that Herbst felt she should have
discouraged. In 1922, trying to escape her misery, she fled to Germany.

From there she went on to Paris, where in 1924 she was gaily received by the
circle around Hemingway and fell in love with the beautiful John Herrmann, who
was 23 (she was 32). Though he was fickle, dilatory and alcoholic - in
Hemingway's words, ''a genial drunk'' - she adored him, and they remained
together, unmarried and married, for the next 10 years.

After Mike Gold had impulsively sent her and Herrmann to the International
Conference of Revolutionary Writers at Kharkov in 1930, she came home, where the
Depression was deepening, to work with Dreiser, Dos Passos, Malcolm Cowley and
others on behalf of striking miners and dispossessed farmers. She made blazing
public speeches, and her name appeared on innumerable Communist-front
committees. And Herrmann, after very slight success as a writer, showed
unexpected talent as a speaker and organizer when he joined the Communist Party.
In 1931 Herbst went with him to Washington, where he was sent to help Hal Ware
in organizing Communist underground groups among the New Dealers. There she met
Whittaker Chambers.


HERBST'S political involvement had a powerful effect on her writing. In a flash
of revelation, she conceived in Marxist terms novels that would deal not only
with this experience but with her total family history, which she knew so well
from stories told in her childhood. It was as if her mother and Marx had met and
were shaking hands.

When Herrmann finally left Herbst to marry someone else, she threw herself into
a series of foreign assignments - solitary, risky, inadequately financed. In
Cuba she witnessed Fulgencio Batista's bloody counterrevolution of 1934-35 and,
ignoring danger, visited a resistant commune in the hills that called itself the
first soviet of the Western world. In Germany she saw Hitler at the height of
his power. In Spain during the Civil War, she was constantly with Hemingway.
Eight years earlier in Key West, his mean bullying and Herrmann's acceptance of
it had made her finally lose respect (but not her dependent love) for her
husband. In Spain Hemingway was like a feudal prince with his perquisites and
retainers. Inadvertently, Herbst was the first journalist to learn of the secret
execution by the Communists of Gil Robles, an Anarchist leader who was a close
friend of Dos Passos. Hushed up generally by the left, it made a final breach
between Hemingway and Dos Passos. ''In a sense my most vital life ended with
Spain,'' Herbst later said.  Miss Langer thinks that the memoir fragment ''The
Starched Blue Sky of Spain'' was the best writing she ever did. After she
returned from Spain, the Communist Party treated her with suspicion and kept her
at a distance, but even after the Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939, she did not break
with it publicly.  It would have meant repudiating, she thought, the best of her
past, even the best of herself.  When the United States entered World War II,
Herbst went to work for the Office of the Coordinator of Information but
suddenly lost her job. Miss Langer says that while one may not be able even now
to cite a precise cause for her dismissal, there was a Federal Bureau of
Investigation security check of Herbst going on and that it is difficult to
avoid the conclusion that the investigation, although it ''cleared'' her long
afterward, had something to do with the firing. The most shocking document in
the F.B.I.  files unearthed by Miss Langer is a field agent's report on
conversations with a confidential source convincingly identified by Miss Langer
as Katherine Anne Porter. The report is filled with fantastic lies describing
Herbst as a dangerous international agent, lies invented maliciously and
gratuitously by Porter to regale the F.B.I., an act of perfidy that Miss Langer
reveals here for the first time. Thereafter, though she wrote as persistently as
ever, Herbst published less and less - her two later novels were not well
received - and participated less in public events, though when aroused, she
could hit hard.


WHEN the Hiss case broke in 1948, Herbst, still eager to protect John Herrmann,
cooperated to a degree with the Hiss lawyers and not at all with the F.B.I. But
what Miss Langer learned as she investigated Herbst's role was as shattering to
her deepest political convictions as some of Herbst's behavior in love had been
to her feminist principles. Herrmann's second wife told her, entirely
convincingly, that Mr. Hiss and Herrmann had been friends and that it was
Herrmann ''who had first introduced Hiss to Chambers, at lunch in a Chinese
restaurant near Dupont Circle in 1934.''

''Reader,'' Miss Langer writes: ''if your peace of mind is still dependent on a
sacrosanct version of the Hiss case, this is not the chapter for you.'' Mr.
Hiss's innocence had been a cardinal act of faith for Miss Langer; her whole
sense of recent history required it. Only a short time before, Mr. Hiss himself
had written to her that he had never known Herrmann in Washington. ''If Hiss had
lied to the world at the time of the trials,'' she writes, ''I had no way of
knowing about it, but if he was lying to me personally in the present, perhaps I
did.'' And her personal identification with Herbst made her discovery even more
upsetting, for what Herbst ''was in a position to know,'' she writes, ''was
whether Alger Hiss had met Whittaker Chambers in 1934 and had lied about it, and
that is what she believed. She protected the secret out of a combination of
loyalties, especially loyalty to John, and she paid a price for it later.''

In later years, though she wrote persistently, Herbst published less and
participated less in public events, though she could hit hard when aroused.
During her last years, she enthusiastically supported the civil rights marches
of the 60's and the student protests against the war in Vietnam.

In 1954 Herbst published ''New Green World.'' Appalled by the way Americans have
greedily laid waste to their environment, she celebrated the 18th-century
botanist William Bartram, an unmythical Paul Bunyan. During the years she spent
in a primitive farmhouse at Erwinna, Pa., her love of nature became almost
pantheistic. With practically no income in her later years, Herbst lived at
Erwinna, at Yaddo, the writers' colony, and gypsylike in the apartments of her
friends. What did not change was the quality and intensity of her friendships,
with such writers as Saul Bellow, John Cheever, James Farrell, Eleanor Clark,
Alfred Kazin and Hilton Kramer. Years later they would keep Miss Langer on the
phone for hours talking about Herbst's spirit and her love of fun and argument.
About her writing they were more reticent.

Miss Langer got the impression, stated by some early reviewers, that although
Herbst used a natural speech mode in her fiction, it was not nearly as lively as
her own talk. Long before he knew her, Alfred Kazin had written about her
trilogy in ''On Native Grounds,'' dismissing it as ''desperately pedestrian.''
Now, at last, this work is being appreciated again for the homely, loving
intimacy with which it invokes the American past, and it is being brought back
into print in the ''Rediscovered Fiction of American Women'' series edited by
Elizabeth Hardwick.

Curiously, though Miss Langer deals fully with the autobiographical elements in
the early fiction, she does not make the obvious comparison of it with Dos
Passos' ''U.S.A.'' Indeed, she does not use either analysis or quotation to give
us any real sense of the qualities of Herbst's writing. Instead, we get detailed
accounts of Herrmann's and Herbst's financial relations with his disapproving
Middle Western parents, material of engrossing human interest intrinsic to the
kind of book that Langer was determined not to write and that she has so
splendidly written.


DESPITE her own past, Miss Langer does not take sides on the moral and political
issues that were fiercely debated during the decades of Herbst's activism. She
is content to be a meticulous historian and let the reader do the judging. And
the book is almost entirely free of doctrinal feminism. Herbst is such a mixed,
intractable personality that that kind of interpretation would have to be either
absurdly reductionist or take over the whole volume. Miss Langer's
accomplishment is to treat objectively and perceptively the amazing cast of
characters, complex in themselves and especially complex in their relations with
Herbst. About Josephine Herbst herself, she tells the truths Herbst could not
bring herself to tell but clearly wanted known.

Sometimes impressionistically, usually in straightforward and scholarly prose,
Miss Langer's book heightens our sense of the 20's and 30's. And through its
extraordinary detail, it makes us confront the passionate, destructive
obliquities of human nature, even in the best and most sensitive, those who
would ameliorate the human lot or teach us wisdom by their words.B

Lunch at the Three Steps Down

When Josie had been in the city about four months, she was invited by an
acquaintance named Margaret Anderson to spend a weekend with her family at their
house in the country. . . . She met Margaret's husband at Grand Central Station
on Saturday, February 28, 1920, to ride up to Croton in company. . . . Maxwell
Anderson, the future playwright, was a soft- faced, round-shouldered
curly-haired boyish- looking young man, thirty-two, who had been married to
Margaret, his high school sweetheart, for nine years. . . .  When they got back
to the city his notes started coming. . . . Lunch at the Three Steps Down? . . .
By coincidence it was her twenty- eighth birthday. At lunch they dished out to
each other the appropriate philosophies. He had never done this before in all
the years. . . . Neither had she, but she let him think she had. It was vital to
the onset of the affair. It was, of course, to be a free affair. There were to
be no attachments. Maxwell and Margaret had even agreed in principle. . . . For
Josie it was going to be free or it was going to be nothing. ''We are all alone
anyhow.'' Life is impermanent, love is impermanent, a ''blinding exquisite
moment of companionship'' is all you can expect. She flicked her cigarette into
the ashtray in a way that made him see the ashes of a thousand cigarettes before
it growing long and cold and finally forgotten on the ashtrays of a thousand
tables while the lovers swooned passionately on a nearby couch. Her imaginary
experience made him bold, he nodded, she nodded, he reached for his hat. They
went to her apartment and made love, Josie for the first time in her life. When
it was over, she was in love and he was worried.  So much for the ideology of
the 1920s.  - From ''Josephine Herbst''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
In a review of Elinor Langer's ''Josephine Herbst'' (Aug. 5), the year when Miss
Herbst went to Washington with her husband, where he was sent to help organize
Communist underground groups among New Dealers, was incorrectly given. It was
1934. Also, the name of a friend of John Dos Passos who was executed by
Communists in Spain was incorrect. It was Jose Robles, a language professor.

GRAPHIC: photo fo Josephine Herbst

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS Aug. 5, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1256 words


Fiction1

18

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932.  2

27

LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency.  3

322

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  4

411

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.  5

617

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  6

510

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.  7

721

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  8

811

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.  9

910

THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch.  (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The legends
of an old manor haunt four generations of an English family.  10

124

THE GREMLINS STORYBOOK, by Mary Carey.  (Golden Books, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the current film ''Gremlins.'' 11

1010

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Three witches wreak
havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town.  12

1118

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  13

138

POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A
woman discovers the truth about her husband after he disappears.  14

158

HIM WITH HIS FOOT IN HIS MOUTH AND OTHER STORIES, by Saul Bellow. (Harper & Row,
$15.95.) A novella and four short stories by the Nobel laureate.  15

1

FIRST AMONG EQUALS, by Jeffrey Archer.  (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
Four young men vie to be chosen Prime Minister by the Queen of England.





  Nonfiction1

16

THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and David Horowitz. (Summit,
$20.95.) The dark as well as the glamorous sides of four generations of a
prominent family.  2

38

WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The troubled life of the
late entertainer John Belushi.3

25

IN GOD'S NAME, by David A. Yallop. (Bantam, $16.95.) A British journalist argues
that Pope John Paul I's death in 1978 was a case of murder.  4

49

THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent.  5

512

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  6

77

GOOD MORNING, MERRY SUNSHINE, by Bob Greene. (Atheneum, $14.95.) The syndicated
columnist's journal of his child's first year.  7

622

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard, $10.) The novelist recalls
her childhood in Mississippi.  8

113

D.V., by Diana Vreeland. Edited by George Plimpton and Christopher Hemphill.
(Knopf, $15.95.) Memoirs of the one-time ''Empress of Fashion.'' 9

846

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  10

913

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  11

2

REGGIE, by Reggie Jackson with Mike Lupica.  (Villard Books, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the controversial baseball player.  12

1221

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  13

108

POWERPLAY, by Mary Cunningham with Fran Schumer. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster,
$16.95.) The rise and fall of a woman executive at the Bendix Corporation.  14

1414

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.  (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  15

152

AT SEVENTY: A Journal, by May Sarton. (Norton, $15.95.) The veteran
poet-novelist grapples with new and old personal problems.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

119

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

284

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  3

38

BOOK WITHOUT A NAME, by Kit Williams.  (Knopf, $10.95.) New picture story by the
author of ''Masquerade,'' offering a prize for the finder of the book's true
title.  4

418

WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard work updated in 1983.  5

3

GO FOR IT! How to Win at Love, Work, and Play, by Irene S. Kassorla. (Delacorte,
$13.95.) Advice from a psychologist.  The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all bookstores. In
Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that point, sales in
this category are not generally large enough to make a longer list statistically
reliable.  *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted
to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.




AND BEAR IN MIND

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)



ARCHDUKE OF SARAJEVO: The Romance and tragedy of Franz Ferdinand of Austria, by
Gordon Brook-Shepard. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The first biography in English of
the Austrian whose assassination ushered in World War I.



THE QUALITY OF MERCY: Cambodia, Holocaust and Modern Conscience, by William
Shawcross. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A report on the world's response to
disease and famine in the wake of Cambodia's civil war.



THE SECOND SELF: Computers and the Human Spirit, by Sherry Turkle.  (Simon &
Schuster, $17.95.) A study of the effects of computers on American society, by
an M.I.T. sociologist and clinical psychologist who worked with both children
and adults.



SOMETHING OUT THERE , by Nadine Gordimer. (Viking, $15.95.) A distinguished
collection by the South African writer. A novella about a marauding baboon and
four terrorists, metaphors for her country's political troubles, and nine
stories.



TO A DISTANT ISLAND, by James McConkey. (Dutton, $13.95.) A highly original
novel about Chekhov's trip in 1890 to Sakhalin Island, Russia's penal colony at
the time, interwoven with emotionally parallel aspects of Mr.  McConkey's own
life.



TOUGH GUYS DON'T DANCE, by Norman Mailer. (Random House, $16.95.) A murder
mystery set in Provincetown, Mass. Seven corpses, booze, sand dunes, along with
such Mailer obsession as God, the Devil, magic and assorted strange voices.



THE WEIGHT OF THE WORLD, by Peter Handke. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $16.95.) The
Paris journals of 1975-77 kept by the avant garde Austrian playwright, novelist
and poet, full of day-to-day observations charged with a tragic sense of life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT BOOKS

BYLINE: By Shirley Horner

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 11, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1121 words


EVEN summer reading runs political these days, reflecting campaign excitement,
the platforms, polls and party rhetoric.

 ''Exile: The Unquiet Oblivion of Richard M. Nixon,'' by Robert Sam Anson (Simon
and Schuster, New York, $17.95), is one of the most recent books on the
country's 37th President.

It begins soon after July 24, 1974, the day of the ''discovery by White House
lawyers of a taped conversation'' containing ''explicit instructions from Nixon
on how the F.B.I.'s investigation (of the Watergate break-in) was to be
terminated.''

Mr. Nixon has been a resident of the Bergen County community of Saddle River
since 1981,

Of the more than 330 interviews that Mr. Anson conducted has come a revealing
and often fascinating book about Mr. Nixon's activities in the last decade.

Among other things, one learns more about the former President's trips to the
Middle East in 1981. For example, after attending the funeral of President Sadat
of Egypt in Cairo, Mr. Nixon went on to Morocco, where he ''provided tips on
investing in New Jersey real estate to King Hassan.''

*



''The Neoliberals: Creating the

New American Politics,'' by Randall Rothenberg (Simon and Schuster, New York,
$16.95), is a significant book, a comprehensive assessment of major political
trends.

''Disregard the Democratic Party as you've known it,'' writes Mr. Rothenberg, a
resident of Hoboken. ''Whatever its fortunes in 1984, the old liberalism has
already begun a slow, inexorable fade. The future belongs to the neoliberals.''

Mr. Rothenberg, a contributing editor to Esquire magazine and a former editor at
New Jersey Monthly, describes the ideology of neoliberalism in terms of its
departure from ''the great issues of the past, like school busing, national
health insurance, welfare . . . The new issue, the only issue, it seemed, was
economics.''

The author defines neoliberals as ''insurgents'' trying ''to change the ideas
that underlie Democratic politics.'' Among the insurgents' ''core group'' he
cites Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of Denville, ''now a major player in
Democratic economic thinking'' and one of a group ''prepared to leave the
mechanism of the New Deal behind.''

*



''The Fair Tax,'' by Senator Bradley (Pocket Books, New York, $3.95), was
written, he explains, ''in hopes of rallying support'' for the tax-reform plan,
known as the Fair Tax, that he and Senator Richard A. Gephardt, Democrat of
Missouri, are proposing.

The book, both lucid and provocative, contends that the present tax system is
''unfair, complex and inefficient.''

''Unfair,'' Senator Bradley writes, because ''people with vastly different
incomes often end up paying the same amount in taxes;'' ''complex'' because
''millions of Americans, at an estimated cost of professional assistance of well
over $1 billion a year,'' cannot ''figure out their own tax liabilities'' and
''inefficient'' because ''it encourages people to lose money for tax purposes.''

In replacement, the Fair Tax program calls for ''loophole closing and tax-rate
reduction'' in one package. The three tax rates proposed for individuals are 14
percent, 26 percent and 30 percent (80 percent of the taxpayers will pay a flat
14 percent); for corporations, the tax rate would be 30 percent.

*


''The magnitude of the black vote,'' says Henry E. Dabbs, ''means that blacks
are finally expressing pride in their identity.''

Mr. Dabbs is the author of

''Black

Brass: Black Generals and Admirals

in the Armed Forces of the United

States'' (Afro-American Heritage House, 100 Craig Road, Freehold, N.J. 07728;
$14.95 postpaid). The introduction is by Vice Adm. Samuel Lee Gravely Jr., the
first black admiral in United States history.

Mr. Dabbs, a specialist in black history and a former officer in the Army Corps
of Engineers, writes that ''black Americans and Americans at large can take
pride in the fact that, although blacks have paid dearly, there has been
progress.''

''As the first work on America's highest ranking black officers,'' Mr. Dabbs
said, ''my book is intended to close the gap on the reference shelves.''

''Black Brass,'' an impressive record of black achievements, includes, in
addition to its biographical entries (many with photographs), a spirited essay
about the history of ''the black commander tradition;'' a chronology, ''Major
Events in Black Military History, 1492-1984''; a list of black Congressional
Medal of Honor recipients (Civil War to the present) and an extensive
bibliography.

Among the prominent officers cited is Brig. Gen. John H. Voorhees of the Air
Force, a native of New Brunswick and a veteran of 176 combat missions, including
100 over Vietnam.

*


What impact will the selection of Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro as the
Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee have on the status of women in American
politics? Each of the following two books, both candid and engrossing, adds new
insights to the discussion.

''Revolutionary Women: Gender

and the Socialist Revolutionary

Role,'' by Marie Marmo Mullaney (Praeger Publishers, New York, $32.95; $14.95,
paperback), cites in its discussion of five remarkable European women of the
last century, including Dolores Ibarruri, ''the fiery heroine of the Spanish
Civil War,'' the ''continuing legacy'' of idealism that they have ''bequeathed
to today's world.''

Dr. Mullaney, a professor of history at Caldwell College in Caldwell, is a
resident of Livingston.

''In the Running: The New Woman

Candidate,'' by Ruth B. Mandel (Beacon Press, Boston, Mass. 02108, $9.95),
describes in detail the exhausting experiences of women ''who have been running
for various elective offices across the country in the past 10 years.''

Mrs. Mandel, director of the Center for the American Woman and Politics at
Rutgers University in New Brunswick and a resident of Princeton, writes:

''In political reality, women are outsiders'' confronting ''some closed doors.''
To open them, she says, they must possess ''determination and a will to win.''

''Shy, retiring people do not become candidates,'' one is told in accounts of
how ''campaigns eat up prodigious amounts of time.''

Thus, according to this book, Representative Marge S. Roukema, Republican of
Ridgewood, survived what seems like a grueling seven months when she first ran
for office in 1978. Her full-time schedule each day started with breakfast
meetings at 7 o'clock, followed by walking tours, shopping center visits and
evening appearances.

And Mrs. Ferraro is reported saying about her race for Congress in 1978:

''Every night I shook a thousand hands.''




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of book

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE VANISHING CAMPAIGN BIOGRAPHY

BYLINE: By Ronald Steel

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3579 words


Ronald Steel is the author of ''Walter Lippmann and the American Century.''


FOR a while this spring I watched the Democratic candidates parade their wares
on television. I heard Walter Mondale ask about beef, Gary Hart invoke new
ideas, Jesse Jackson conjure up rainbows and George McGovern tell them all to
calm down. It was very instructive. I felt I was doing my civic duty. But after
a while, I began to suspect I had caught the rerun.

I yearned for more substantial fare - perhaps a serious campaign biography or a
revelation of conscience. Direct exposure has its limits, especially when an
answer to a complicated question can run as long as 40 seconds. I wanted to know
who these gentlemen were behind their masks and images. But I discovered it
would not be easy. Few candidates are writing books anymore. Nor are their
admirers writing books about them.

It was two elections ago that Jimmy Carter presented himself in a chatty memoir,
''Why Not the Best?'' Ronald Reagan's charming account of his life and good
times, ''Where's the Rest of Me?,'' dates back to 1965, when he was running for
Governor of California. Although Walter Mondale has not written about himself, a
four-year-old book, ''Mondale'' by Finlay Lewis, has been updated and reissued.
Gary Hart tried to outline his new ideas in ''A New Democracy,'' but it read
less like a credo than a party platform. The two most interesting campaign books
deal not with the Democratic contenders but the incumbent - Robert Dallek's
''Ronald Reagan: The Politics of Symbolism'' and Ronnie Dugger's ''On Reagan.''
But they tell why you should not vote for President Reagan rather than why you
should.

Campaign biographies seem to have fallen on hard times. Yet it was not so long
ago that we learned about Presidential candidates through the printed word. They
wrote or had others write for them books explaining who they were, what they
believed in and what they would do if elected. They laid out their political
goals for all to see and occasionally even let us look into their hearts. At
least since the election of 1852, when Nathaniel Hawthorne extolled his friend
Franklin Pierce as a man uniquely qualified to be President, campaign
biographies have been a key part of every election.

This was true even as recently as 1960. That contest was marked by two ardent
books by distinguished scholars explaining why a young Senator from
Massachusetts could save the country from mediocrity or worse. James MacGregor
Burns's ''John F. Kennedy: A Political Profile'' and Arthur Schlesinger Jr.'s
''Kennedy or Nixon: Does It Make a Difference?'' were classics of the genre.
People talked about these books. They read them. They may even have voted in
part on the basis of them. But 16 years later, when Mr. Burns brought out a
biography, ''Edward Kennedy and the Camelot Legacy,'' the genre itself had
fallen by the wayside. The public's images of the younger Kennedy were formed
not from books analyzing his abilities but from the direct impact of headlines
and television images.

Currently the two most successful books by politicians are those that espouse no
program at all. They are also by officeholders who profess, for the time being,
at least, to have no aspirations for higher office. We read Mario Cuomo's
''Diaries'' to be reassured that one can be a successful politician and at the
same time a sensitive person and loving family man. We read Edward Koch's
''Mayor'' to be titillated by the political equivalent of Joan Rivers - a person
who takes enormous pleasure in saying something nasty about almost everyone he
has ever known.

Most campaign books have died with the election that spawned them. A few,
however, remain, and one stands out. It is not well written. It tells us nothing
about the loves and tribulations of the man himself. It is humorless and devoid
of charm. It is awkward and even crude. But it is powerfully stated, and it has
had a lasting impact on the vocabulary, and even the direction, of American
politics.

The book is, of course, Barry Goldwater's ''Conscience of a Conservative.'' It
was published in 1960 by an obscure press in Kentucky. Its tone is strident, its
manner defensive, its underlying motif one of resentment. It got buried in the
trough of two candidates - John F. Kennedy and Richard Nixon - who were
desperately trying to pre-empt the middle of the road. But it set the agenda for
the 1964 Republican convention, at which Senator Goldwater seized the nomination
from Nelson Rockefeller and dealt a blow to the liberal internationalist wing of
the Republican Party from which it has yet to recover. Even though Senator
Goldwater was crushed by Lyndon Johnson in the Presidential election that year,
his ideas reverberated through America's political consciousness. In 1980 they
found their triumphant affirmation in the collapse of the old liberalism and the
triumph of Ronald Reagan.

''I have little interest in streamlining government or in making it more
efficient, for I mean to reduce its size,'' Senator Goldwater declared in words
that only recently have lost their shock value. ''I do not undertake to promote
welfare, for I propose to extend freedom. My aim is not to pass laws, but to
repeal them.'' In that little book of only 123 wide-margin pages, he came out
against Federal intervention to integrate public schools, farm subsidies, the
graduated income tax, Federal welfare programs and diplomatic relations with
Communist governments.

Senator Goldwater's problem was that he was too rigid, too incapable of bending,
to win the centrist voter on whose support every successful Presidential
candidate depends. He was strident and irresponsible, as in suggesting that the
United States use nuclear weapons to support anti-Soviet dissidents behind the
Iron Curtain. He frightened even those who basically agreeed with him. Lyndon
Johnson, promising bounty, brotherhood and peace, flattened him. But two years
later, Ronald Reagan, running for Governor of California, put Senator
Goldwater's message into a box of Girl Scout cookies.

The most interesting thing about Senator Goldwater's candidacy - reflected only
partially in his book - was the way he focused on a national spiritual malaise
to which both Democrats and Republican moderates, with their belief in eternal
progress, were oblivious. For Senator Goldwater, there was in this country ''a
virtual despair among the many who look beyond material success to the inner
meaning of their lives.'' The fact that he had no answer for them other than,
presumably, letting the Invisible Hand guide them to prosperity does not
diminish the importance of his perception. He sensed a yearning for something to
believe in. One felt it in the crowds that followed Robert Kennedy in 1968 and
in the millions who anguished over the fate of the American hostages held in
Iran. This is what gave Senator Goldwater's book, as it did his candidacy, a
meaning not fully grasped at the time.

Campaign literature has changed almost totally since Barry Goldwater tried to
explain his philosophy.  Books telling us whom to vote for have given way to
those explaining what went on behind the scenes at elections.  Such books are
not about the candidate we ought to choose but about how we chose the one we
did. They are about the candidate as part of the process. The process itself
takes center stage. Politics as battle has given way to politics as spectacle.

There are a number of reasons for this. One is that Presidential campaigns
themselves have changed. Within the memory of anyone under 35, they were
quadrennial affairs with perhaps a six-month warm- up just before the big event.
Now a campaign is like Mardi Gras in Rio - it seems to go on forever.

Blame it partly on the primaries. In the old days, we had a quick, effective and
sensible nominating process. It took place where it should - in a smoke- filled
room on a sweltering July night once every four years. It produced candidates
like Woodrow Wilson, Franklin D. Roosevelt, Adlai Stevenson and Dwight
Eisenhower.

No more.  Now anyone who is physically strong, reasonably well-off and, above
all, unemployed can run for President.  All he has to do is to spend years on
the rubber chicken circuit massaging local politicians. If successful at fund
raising and backslapping, he will then go on television to ''debate'' other
aspirants.

Some politicians make a career of running for President. And I don't mean Harold
Stassen. Jimmy Carter and Walter Mondale each spent four years making himself
available. Ronald Reagan spent at least eight.

The perpetual campaign would not be possible without the kind of journalism we
have. Every campaign, primary or national gets overreported. The public soon
gets saturated, and its attention strays to other matters. To stimulate interest
in the sort of election other countries manage to plan, organize and hold in a
few weeks, the news media desperately try to capture the public's mind. Having
learned of journalism's fascination with headline-grabbing events, candidates
fashion their campaigns accordingly. Consider Jesse Jackson's trips to Syria and
Central America. The problem for any candidate, particularly if not well known,
is to captivate the news media.

Unquestionably, elections are spectacle, and the most successful recent books
have treated them as such. Behind the noble speeches, inspiring platforms and
transcendant visions lie dirty deals, shabby compromises and colossal mistakes.
The great election story is the one that goes on backstage. Until Theodore H.
White brought out ''The Making of the President, 1960,'' nobody knew quite what
to do about it. In his account of the Kennedy-Nixon campaign that year, Mr.
White changed the way people write about elections. His innovation was to turn a
chaotic and often boring campaign into a focused drama. He threw out the canned
speeches, moved up backroom deals and crowd scenes to center stage, paced the
campaign like a newsreel.

For Mr. White, the campaign was certainly not about who won, which everyone
knew. Nor did he analyze why they won. Rather, he dramatically recounted how the
event unfolded. He stuffed his books with statistics, puffed up his characters
to make them worthy of his story and bestowed accolades for good perfomances.

Part civics teacher, part political junkie, part grizzled newsman, Mr. White
breathed drama into an event that lacked form and defied rational understanding.
He made an adventure story out of a tedious succession of speeches, primaries
and caucuses. Readers loved it, even those who hadn't bothered to vote. They put
it on the New York Times best- seller list and kept it there many months. The
book made Mr. White rich and famous. It also made him the confidant of
politicians the country over - all of whom were concerned about how he would
treat them in his next book. And it spawned a whole school of successors - most
of them younger journalists who lacked his reverence for the electoral process
and soft spot for politicians.

By 1968 three British journalists, Godfrey Hodgson, Bruce Page and Lewis
Chester, saw the elections as ''An American Melodrama.'' Knowledgeable about the
American scene and viewing politicians as only slightly less disreputable than
cattle rustlers, they treated the principals with ill-concealed contempt. Hubert
Humphrey, in their words, ''flew to Los Angeles - or rather he slid into the
third city in the country like a thief in the night. Moving like a jolly zombie,
still shaking hands and chattering compulsively, the candidate on that day in
Los Angeles carried a stench of disaster with him.'' For the irreverent Britons,
the campaign marked the ''survival of the unfittest.'' Richard Nixon won his
party's nomination because he was the ''lowest common denominator,'' Humphrey
because he had ''accepted the loss of his own political identity.''

Optimism had vanished by 1968. It fell victim to the Vietnam War, the failure of
Lyndon Johnson, the collapse of his Great Society and the murders of Robert
Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. For millions of Americans, the only political
hero at the Democratic convention was Senator Eugene McCarthy, who defied Lyndon
Johnson in the primaries and thereby persuaded him not to run for re-election.
Irreverence, if not disgust, had become the dominant mood. A host of young
reporters entered the fray, almost all of them hostile to the Vietnam War and
deeply suspicious of politicians.

Joe McGinniss, a young Philadelphia journalist, exemplified the new mood by
treating the 1968 campaign as essentially an exercise in marketing. In doing so,
he also testified to the growing influence of the media, especially television,
on major elections. In a clever examination of Richard Nixon's advertising
campaign, complete with a dust jacket photograph of a smiling Mr. Nixon on a
pack of cigarettes, Mr. McGinniss threw the spotlight on political consultants
and their marketing techniques. In deliberate parody of Mr. White's title, he
called his book ''The Selling of the President.'' In contrast to Mr. White, who
tipped his hat to ''the politicians of America,'' Mr. McGinniss observed, as if
it were almost too obvious for elaboration, that ''politics, in a sense, has
always been a con game.''

While Theodore H. White was a product of the New Deal by way of Time-Life and
Henry Luce's American Century, Mr. McGinnis was a child of Marshall McLuhan.
Rather than dramatizing the electoral process as though it were a Shakespearan
pageant, he viewed it as a colossal hustle. He was not concerned with the
candidate's policies or his backroom deals but with how his media consultants
formed, marketed and sold an image. ''It is not surprising, then, that
politicians and advertising men should have discovered one another,'' Mr.
McGinniss wrote. ''And, once they recognized that the citizen did not so much
vote for a candidate as make a psychological purchase of him, not surprising
that they began to work together.''

Four years later, Timothy Crouse, another young journalist, took the evolution
one step further by ignoring the politicians completely. His 1972 book, ''The
Boys on the Bus,'' covered the reporters who covered the campaign. The campaign
itself became little more than a backdrop, the ostensible issues merely a
background hum. It was like paparazzi photographing each other instead of the
celebrities - which is what Hunter S. Thompson's ''Fear and Loathing on the
Campaign Trail'' was mostly about. But, of course, journalistic image makers are
themselves celebrities - especially if they appear on television.

Mr. Crouse dramatized the curious relationship between a candidate and the
reporters who cover him. It can be affected by small things like a competent
press staff, enough seats, sandwiches and briefings and the ability to
understand deadlines. But even when a candidate is uncooperative or his campaign
badly managed, the press will respect him if he handles himself like a pro. This
has less to do with the substance of his campaign than with the authority and
professionalism he displays. Ronald Reagan is, of course, a consummate
theatrical professional. He provides both qualities while manipulating the image
he means to convey. One who fully understands the system is able to control it.

Those who cannot master it, by contrast, are treated mercilessly. Consider the
case of Edmund Muskie, who shed a tear during the 1976 primaries, found it
bloated into a page 1 story and was laughed out of competition. Or George
Romney, who confessed to a talk show host that he had been ''brainwashed'' by
American officials during a visit to Vietnam. The story first appeared in a
local paper but quickly worked its way up to the major dailies. Mr. Romney soon
found himself a former candidate.

Why? What is wrong with shedding a tear in frustration or pointing out that
United States Government aides tried to prevent outsiders from knowing what was
really happening in Vietnam? Nothing, of course, and more adept politicians
would have got away with it - or even turned it to their advantage. Ronald
Reagan has more than once been photographed with a tear dripping down his cheek,
and it is described as a sign of his compassion. The difference is that
reporters respect Mr. Reagan, whatever they may think of his policies, while
they considered Mr. Muskie and Mr. Romney lightweights. ''A lightweight, by
definition, is a man who cannot assert his authority over the national press,
cannot manipulate reporters, cannot finesse questions, prevent leaks or command
a professional public relations operation,'' Mr. Crouse explained. ''The press
likes to demonstrate its power by destroying lightweights, and pack journalism
is never more doughty and complacent than when the pack has tacitly agreed that
the candidate is a joke.''

The press operates within a system that puts the emphasis on news event and
image. Politicians supplement this increasingly with advertising - and in
today's political world, that means television. The candidate who can outspend
his rivals can more often than not outpoll them. We have reached a point where
candidates spend most of their time raising money to pay for television
commercials. The 30-second spot has become the equivalent of the whistle- stop
tour and the political rally.

In a forthcoming study, ''Packaging the Presidency,'' Kathleen Hall Jamieson
shows not only how candidates get their desired message before the public but
also how advertising permits distortions and innuendoes that would not be
tolerated in campaign speeches. Television allows the greatest freedom of all,
as she demonstrates in describing a 1968 Republican commercial directed against
the Democratic candidate, Hubert Humphrey. It juxtaposed shots of rioters at the
Democratic convention in Chicago that summer, wounded soldiers in Vietnam and
hungry farmers in Appalachia with that of a smiling Humphrey. In the background
a band played ''A Hot Time in the Old Town.'' The only verbal message came at
the end: ''This time vote like your whole world depended on it: Nixon.'' The
implifed message - that Humphrey was responsible for riots, war and poverty -
would have been ridiculed if it had been made in print. Television advertising
got the message across without ever explicitly saying it.

Until recently, such manipulation of images was largely confined to advertising.
But President Reagan has demonstrated that a skilled practitioner of image
making can use news events as a form of political advertising. Each appearance
is carefully planned for maximum visual impact. During public appearances, print
journalists are kept at a discreet distance and are often not even allowed to
ask questions. The purpose of the event is to secure the maximum amount of
visual coverage. Thus the message that is conveyed when President Reagan visits
a wildlife refuge or a national park is that he cares about the environment.
Often this is the most powerful message that a voter will get about the
President's policies. The subliminal message becomes the statement.

Blunt messages like those in ''Conscience of a Conservative'' are not being sent
today. Republican conservatives do not need to, for such messages are inherent
in President Reagan's policies. Democrats are not doing so, for they have not
figured out a coherent alternative philosophy.

The last ''Making of the President'' dealt with the 1972 election, and there are
no sequels on the horizon. This is largely because newspapers and magazines
caught on to what Mr. White was doing and began doing it themselves. They were
not so thorough and perhaps not so thoughtful. But they were just as colorful,
and they did it a good deal faster. Behind- the-scenes reporting and analysis is
a staple of campaign coverage today. So is a certain cynicism of the kind that
Mr. White, with his love for politicians and his excitement over the election
ritual, could never feel.

Yet we are not a cynical people. The will to believe lingers on. We like to
think that heroes can emerge from obscurity, as they sometimes do; that
elections do matter, even though the process is at least part hokum; that
through politics we can change our society and maybe even find a cause to
believe in. There is an element about politics that is a con game. Books that
treat it as such can be both entertaining and a needed corrective to
sentimentality or civics- book na"ivete. Yet there is another element to
politics that has to do with how we think of our society and ourselves as
members of it. That is not always so entertaining.

Campaign books, in all their curious guises, reflect how we think about
policies. The fact that the focus is now on the process, and even the
manipulation of the process, reflects two things. First, in most elections we
are no longer sure it makes a serious difference which candidate is elected.
Otherwise we would vote. As it is, we abstain at a higher level than almost any
other Western democracy. Second, the triumph of the image maker has persuaded
most candidates to camouflage rather than parade their true agenda. In the land
of the subtle sorcerer, only the most intrepid crusader can hope to be heard.

When elections become spectacles, campaign literature is necessarily
entertainment. The books we get reflect the politics we have. Having had our
living room war, we now have our living room campaign.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 6, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RICHARD BURTON, 58, IS DEAD; RAKISH STAGE AND SCREEN STAR

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 2129 words


Richard Burton, a Welsh coal miner's son whose celebrity was defined as much by
his rakish personal life as his remarkable acting skills, died of a cerebral
hemorrhage yesterday in Switzerland. He was 58 years old.

His family said the British actor, staying at his villa in the village of
Celigny outside Geneva, complained of feeling ill in the morning. He died late
in the afternoon at a Geneva hospital. His wife, Sally Hay, was with him when he
died.

The death stunned the actor's family and friends, who reported that he had been
looking tan and healthy and feeling sanguine about his busy work schedule.

''It was very sudden,'' said Mr. Burton's brother, Graham Jenkins, in London.
''He has been in tremendous form recently.''

One of Britain's greatest Shakespearean stage actors by the age of 27, Mr.
Burton offered rugged good looks, a magnetic stage presence and an incomparable
voice, as John McPhee once wrote in Time magazine, ''with a tympanic resonance
so rich and overpowering that it could give an air of verse to a recipe for
stewed hare.'' Even Mr. Burton himself was wont to refer to ''the Burton
voice.''

He was remembered by friends as ''a monstrous perfectionist'' and a ''troubled
spirit.''

Sir John Gielgud said that Mr. Burton should have been in the same rank as
Laurence Olivier, ''but he was very wild and had a scandal around him all the
time and I think in theater circles that would not be approved of.''

It was a note that was often struck in the reactions to Mr. Burton's death, and
it was an albatross he had carried with him for two decades: his lost promise,
or as was said about Hamlet, one of his most famous roles, ''what a falling-off
was there.''

His career was dazzlingly erratic. He was the most nominated actor who never won
an Oscar and the most famous British actor who was never knighted.

He made more than 40 movies, ranging from such classics as ''Who's Afraid of
Virginia Woolf,'' ''The Spy Who Came in From the Cold,'' and ''Becket'' to
multimillion-dollar blockbusters like ''Cleopatra'' to a string of forgotten
failures.  He was nominated for seven Academy Awards.

On Broadway, his performances in ''Hamlet'' and ''Camelot'' - each twice - and
his ''Equus'' were greeted enthusiastically by critics. He was last seen on
Broadway starring with Elizabeth Taylor in ''Private Lives,'' a play that many
critics found too close to their own stormy romance for comfort.

Miss Taylor, who was married to Mr. Burton twice and worked often with him in
films and plays, was told the news in California, where she was staying with
their adopted daughter, Maria Burton, age 23.

''They are extremely, extremely upset,'' said Miss Taylor's spokeswoman, Chen
Sam, weeping.

Sir John Gielgud, who last worked with Mr. Burton two years ago on the film
''Wagner,'' called him ''a born actor.''

''He was serious, charming, with tremendous skill,'' he said. ''I feel nothing
but sadness. He chose a rather mad way of throwing away his theater career but
obviously he became very famous and a world figure through being a film star. He
was awfully good to people and generous.''

Many in his profession felt that his tragedy was that he was one of the finest
young actors of his generation who squandered his energy on second-rate films,
five marriages and legendary bouts with the bottle.

He boasted, earlier in his career, about being able to drink half-gallons of
cognac or 100 proof vodka during stage performances, and he was renowned as a
womanizer. ''He has a terrific way with women,'' Fredric March once said. ''I
don't think he has missed more than half a dozen.''

Known for Humor and Wit

A combination of peasant and poet, he was known for his brilliant conversation,
punctuated with Shakespeare, bawdy humor and self-deprecating wit.

''If I had a chance for another life,'' he once said, ''I would certainly choose
a better complexion.''

When he reached the age of 50, after a five-year career slump, he called his own
life the best role he had ever played: ''I rather like my reputation, actually,
that of a spoiled genuis from the Welsh gutter, a drunk, a womanizer; it's
rather an attractive image.''

In an interview two years ago, Mr. Burton said he did not regret the roller-
coaster route he had taken. ''I can only say with Edith Piaf, 'Je ne regrette
rien.' '' he said.

He said then he thought he was coming out of a slump. ''You reach the top of the
heap, but it's a circle, and you slip on the down side; maybe for years. You get
scared.''

Although he liked to say he was in semi-retirement, his work schedule was heavy.
Mr. Burton recently played a small role as a rich congressman alongside his
26-year-old daughter Kate in the CBS television series ''Ellis Island.''

He was to go to Europe soon to work on a sequel to ''The Wild Geese,'' a film
about mercenary soldiers, and then to India to star in a new film version of
Graham Greene's Vietnam War novel, ''The Quiet American.''

'A Fine Actor'

Lord Olivier, one of Mr. Burton's idols who was also cast in ''The Wild Geese
II,'' said from his home in Sussex: ''Richard was a very fine actor and his
early death is a great tragedy to the theater world, the film world and the
public.''

Mr. Burton was born Richard Jenkins on Nov. 10, 1925, the 12th of 13 children of
a hard-drinking but charming coal miner in the village of Pontrhydfen, South
Wales, whose chief possessions were a No. 6 shovel and a gift for words. His
mother died when he was 2 years old, and the family borrowed £10 pounds to pay
for the funeral.

A plump, roughshod primitive who spoke no English up to the age of 10, Mr.
Burton was educated under the tutorship of a schoolmaster named Philip Burton.
Mr. Burton became his guardian and young Richard took his name.

Philip Burton taught the boy to speak, to hold a knife and fork and to study the
classics.

Philip Burton also spotted an advertisement for Welsh-speaking youngsters for an
Emlyn Williams play, ''The Druid's Rest,'' and Richard won the role in which he
made his London debut at age 18. ''In a wretched part, Richard Burton showed
exceptional ability,'' wrote the weekly New Statesman, in a line that presaged
later criticism.

Scholarship to Oxford

He won a scholarship to Oxford University, where he learned literature and how
to drink a sconce of beer in 10 seconds. He joined the Royal Air Force and
served as a wartime navigator.

After his discharge in 1947, he quickly appeared in three plays and in his first
motion picture as a Welsh shepherd boy in ''The Last Days of Dolwyn.''

In 1949, he first attracted serious attention from British critics who praised
his performance in Christopher Fry's verse play, ''The Lady's Not for Burning.''
New York got its first look at Mr. Burton in that play, and the critics were
beguiled.

In 1949, Mr. Burton married Sybil Williams, a Welsh actress with whom he had two
daughters with Shakespearean names, Kate and Jessica.

In Hollywood, he starred with Olivia de Havilland in ''My Cousin Rachel'' and he
was one of the stars in the first Cinemascope production, ''The Robe.''

Joined the Old Vic

Back in England he joined the Old Vic Company. His ''Hamlet'' was considered
second only to Sir John Gielgud's.

He appeared with the Royal Shakespeare Company in a notable series of roles. He
repeated his ''Hamlet'' on Broadway and co-starred with Helen Hayes in ''Time
Remembered.'' He appeared in the British film ''Look Back in Anger.''

But it was the 1960 production of ''Camelot'' that was the turning point of Mr.
Burton's life. His performance as the king impressed 20th Century- Fox, which
signed him for the movie ''Cleopatra'' opposite Miss Taylor.

Soon after his first movie love scene with the glamorous actress, who was then
married to the singer Eddie Fisher, rumors spread that the couple were not
acting.

Liz and Dick, as Hollywood's most famous on-again, off-again couple became known
in sensational international headlines, returned to London in December 1962 to
find a throng waiting at Victoria Station. No one had been there to see Mr.
Burton off. But now the great actor had become a great celebrity, and Mr.
Burton, who had been getting $150,000 a film, ascended to the million-dollar
class enjoyed by Miss Taylor.

Lord Olivier had once warned him: ''Make up your mind. Do you wish to be a
household word or a great actor?''

Later, as his stage career atrophied, it seemed that Mr. Burton had decided in
favor of being a household word. ''I'm so weak at saying no,'' he once said of a
film career that careened between genius and junk, from ''Who's Afraid of
Virginia Woolf'' to ''Exorcist II.'' But he often mocked his image. Asked why he
refused to see ''Cleopatra,'' he replied, ''Well, I don't want to kill myself.''


'Sinatra of Shakespeare'

Miss Taylor dubbed him ''the Frank Sinatra of Shakespeare.''

In April 1963, his wife, Sybil, got a divorce, and so did Miss Taylor.

Mr. Burton and Miss Taylor were married on March 15, 1964, and the shock of
their liaison became so epic that the chairman of the House Immigration
Subcommittee asked the State Department to revoke Mr. Burton's visa because he
was ''detrimental to the morals of the youth of our nation.''

The couple lived extravagantly. They bought a yacht for $500,000. Mr. Burton
bought his wife a 33-carat Krupp diamond for $305,000, the $1 million, 69-carat
Cartier diamond, and the Peregrina Pearl that King Philip of Spain gave Henry
VIII's daughter Mary Tudor in 1554.

But the marriage was as tempestuous as it was public, scarred by Mr. Burton's
drinking and womanizing, and it ended in 1974.

But soon it was on again.

They were married for the second time in Botswana Oct. 10, 1975, but divorced
again in July 1976.

He said he felt eternally bound to Miss Taylor. ''I might run from her for a
thousand years and she is still my baby child,'' he said. ''Our love is so
furious we burn each other out.''

The pair teamed for nearly a dozen films between 1962 and 1972, most memorably
in 1966 in ''Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf,'' the scalding Edward Albee drama
that earned Oscar nominations for both as a boozing, brawling American couple.
Miss Taylor won, but Mr. Burton lost. The Burtons then teamed up for another
bawdy brawl in Shakespeare's ''Taming of the Shrew'' in 1967. Then came five
movies that failed to attract the public, concluding with ''Hammersmith Is
Out.''

Along the way, Mr. Burton nurtured a self-destructive streak that manifested
itself in bouts of prolonged drinking. By 1981, when his career had revived with
the film ''Equus'' and a triumphant stage revival of ''Camelot,'' he stopped
drinking for a time, calling his affliction ''as bad as cancer.'' He was
encouraged by Suzy Hunt, a former model whom he married in 1976.

''The learned doctors told me if I continued to booze I should be prepared to
welcome the end,'' he said.

In July 1980, Frank Rich, drama critic of The New York Times, confirmed that the
Burton magic was still there when he opened in the revival of ''Camelot.'' ''The
actor doesn't merely command the stage,'' Mr. Rich wrote, ''he seems to own it
by divine right.''

But during another performance of ''Camelot'' in New York, in acute pain from
his spinal problems, Mr. Burton took drugs that made him appear drunk on stage
and he had to be replaced by an understudy.

In Los Angeles, he dropped out of the successful play and underwent surgery on
the vertebrae in his neck.



On Broadway in 'Private Lives'

He returned to Broadway in the spring of 1983 to costar in a revival of No"el
Coward's ''Private Lives.'' During the run of this play, quashing rumors that
his romance with Miss Taylor was going to have a third act, Mr. Burton married
for the fifth time, taking Sally Hay as his bride.

Despite his stiff gait from his injuries, Mr. Burton received better reviews
than Miss Taylor, but both were castigated by the critics for titillating the
public with their willingness to blur the line between the amours of the former
Burtons and the amours of Coward's Elyot and Amanda.

In 1982, he seized an opportunity to rehabilitate his film career with the
starring role in ''Wagner,'' a film about the great composer that starred all
three of his heroes: Sir Ralph Richardson, Sir John and Lord Olivier.

In his most recent interview, in London in June, where he was finishing up a
British production of ''Nineteen Eighty-Four,'' Mr. Burton spoke with dignity,
and a touch of Weltschmerz: ''I don't have tremendous physical vitality since I
had a neck operation, and I'm more aware than I used to be of the tedium of
acting.''

Mr. Burton is survived by his wife, Sally, and three daughters, Kate, Jessica,
and Maria.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Richard Burton in various roles

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 6, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
ISRAEL ON TISHA B'AV

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 795 words


JERUSALEM

Don't believe the guff you've been hearing from defeated doves in Israel and
disappointed liberals in the U.S. and in our State Department about what they
claim is the failure of Israel's voters to choose a direction for their country.

The Israelis seemed to have every incentive to reject the policies of the right:
galloping inflation, dissension about the war in Lebanon, the retirement of
Menachem Begin and the exhortation of a media eager for the triumph of Labor's
Shimon Peres.

Despite all these pressures, most Israelis refused - for the third time in a row
- to turn back to Labor. Instead, the voters sent the message to the politicians
that the leadership offered by both major parties was unacceptable, and that the
politicians should choose a government of all the parties to get the nation's
act together.

The same sources who predicted this unexpected outcome in this space two months
ago now tell me that the voters' refusal to give power to either side could not
have been more timely. The right-wing Likud had failed to bite the bullet on the
economy; at the same time, dovish Labor had misread the mood of the country and
of the armed forces after the war.

What was needed was precisely what happened: Israelis gave a swift kick in the
teeth to the Old Order, to both the Government and its opposition. Now a
chastened Mr. Peres will meet with the Likud's lame-duck leader, Prime Minister
Shamir, either to divvy up offices and waste time wrangling until the next
election, or to use this brief respite from partisanship to heed the voice of
the people.

To the limping left, that Israeli voice is saying: Cut out the hand-wringing
about a ''Vietnam syndrome'' after Lebanon; although most generals voted with
Labor, the privates went 55 percent to 45 percent for the Likud. Stop
negotiating with phantoms over the West Bank and start dealing with the rights
of Arab Israelis. Stop blaming an erosion of Labor support on the new political
clout of Jews from Arab lands, and wake up to the hardening of Labor's political
arteries - eight of the Likud choices for the Knesset are under 40 years old,
while only one of the new Labor members can make that claim.

To the rigid right, the voters are saying: Stop relying on your religious party
connections to form a government and start reaching out for biggest party
status. Recognize that Israel's greater danger now is economic weakness, and
that the Begin-Shamir Government was too fearful of unemployment to deal with
inflation, for which it deserved to be rejected.

To both parties, the voters' message should be clear: Use this time for economic
austerity leading to recovery, and no one side will be blamed for the necessary
pains and cuts in spending that such austerity must entail. Beyond that, both
parties must pick better candidates for the next campaign.

Personalities count. Mr. Peres tells me he plans to choose ''a government of
wide shoulders, to bear a heavy burden.'' Obviously Yitzhak Rabin, the former
prime minister who turned out to be Labor's most effective campaigner, will be
important to such a ''ministry of all the talents.''

In the Likud, behind Mr. Shamir stand Moshe Arens, David Levy and Ariel Sharon.
There is talk of the dreaded Mr. Sharon for the Finance Ministry, because his
opponents hope he would dig his political grave while getting the tough job
done. Another possibility for the role of Dr. Gloom is party-switcher Ezer
Weizman, the Jewish John Connolly.

Mr. Shamir seeks a rotation of top offices, but that may be too
discombobulating. Mr. Peres is trying to upgrade the Foreign Ministry into the
No. 2 job for Mr. Shamir, so that Labor's Mr. Rabin can get the usual No. 2, the
Defense portfolio. Mr. Levy cannot be eager for any wide coalition since it will
surely rehabilitate his chief rival within the Likud, Mr. Sharon. And Labor's
left wing hopes the attempt at unity will fail so that a narrower deal can be
cut between the left and the religious parties. The maneuvering is politics at
its most delicious.

The game of musical chairs will get the attention here this week, but the
underlying story is the politicians' grudging response to the voters' demand for
a deep breath and a new start. Labor's leader has been forced to offer to share
power with his strongest rival and the Likud cannot honorably refuse that offer.
The splinter and religious parties will no longer wield inordinate power.

On the eve of Tisha b'Av, anniversary of the destruction of the Temple, Mr.
Peres and his political foes have been given the historic role of reconstructing
Israel's stability. They will come together to share the unpopularity, and will
then step aside for a return to healthy partisanship in a robust democracy.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IMPROPER TESTING OF DRUG IS DENIED

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 421 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 6


The A. H. Robins Company today denied a report that it had asked a top Army
doctor to perform unauthorized experiments on unconscious patients.

The doctor, Col. Robert Watson, was suspended from his post last year as chief
of anesthesiology at Walter Reed Army Medical Center after pleading guilty to
taking $4,000 from A. H. Robins and another drug company, Hoffmann-LaRoche Inc.

A secret Army Inspector General's report said that Colonel Watson had conducted
''unauthorized testing of new and or experimental devices that either had not
been approved or exceeded the established protocol,'' according to United Press
International. The report said that no patients were injured.

The report said that the tests were sponsored by A. H. Robins, according to
U.P.I. It quoted unnamed officials as saying that Colonel Watson administered
drugs to several unconscious patients and used breathing devices on them without
their consent or knowledge.

An Army spokesman, Maj. Robert Mirelson, said that he could not discuss the
report while the matter was under investigation.

Allegations 'Completely Untrue'


Colonel Watson's military lawyer, Capt. Anthony Underwood, said that the
allegations against his client ''are completely untrue.'' Captain Underwood said
he could only issue a ''general denial of all the charges,'' but would issue a
more detailed statement about the allegations on Tuesday.

Tom Poe, an A. H. Robins spokesman, said in a telphone interview today that the
company had paid Colonel Watson to test epidural morphine, an anesthetic, on 13
patients, all of whom gave prior written consent, in 1980. The drug, often
injected through the skin around the spinal column, had been used by Colonel
Watson to treat soldiers suffering ''severe trauma'' from wounds inflicted
during the Vietnam War, said Mr. Poe.

He said the allegations made in the Inspector General's report, as described by
U.P.I., were not related to the morphine tests or to any study sponsored by A.
H. Robins. The company paid Colonel Watson $2,500 to carry out the morphine
tests, Mr. Poe said.

Colonel Watson, 53 years old, was sentenced last year to five years' probation
and fined $5,000 by a Federal District Court for the District of Columbia after
pleading guilty to misdemeanor charges of improperly supplementing his pay by
taking $2,500 from A.H. Robins and $1,500 from Hoffmann-LaRoche. Mr. Poe said
that he did not know if that $2,500 payment was the same one made to Colonel
Watson for the morphine tests.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Medals Honor Those Missing in Action in Vietnam

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Senator Bill Bradley presenting a medal to Mrs. John Schroderer at
ceremony yesterday at the Main Memorial Park in Clifton, N.J. The medals were
author- ized by Congress to honor 28 people from New Jersey who are missing in
action, including Mrs.  Schroderer's son, Eric John. At right is Senator Frank
Lautenberg. The New York Times/Jim Wilson

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 8, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PRESS FOR PHILIPPINE REFORMS

BYLINE: By Stephen J. Solarz ;
Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of New York, is chairman of the House Foreign
Affairs Committee's Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1154 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A year after the assassination of opposition leader Benigno S. Aquino Jr., the
Philippines is in the midst of its most severe economic and political crisis in
decades. Yet the attention focused on the vast capital flight and foreign debt
burden, the May parliamentary elections and the investigation of the Aquino
assassination has obscured a development that may have far more significant
long-term consequences for that country and for America's position in Asia: the
rapidly expanding strength of the Communist-dominated New People's Army.

Instead of waiting until the New People's Army is on the verge of winning power,
the United States should press for political and economic reforms now, while
there is still time to prevent a guerrilla victory.

During recent years, the New People's Army has expanded beyond the island of
Luzon and established itself as a truly national insurgency. It has 10,000 to
20,000 men under arms, who collect taxes and dispense ''justice.'' They exert
substantial or even controlling influence in roughly one-fifth of the barrios,
the country's smallest political unit. The insurgents' front group, the National
Democratic Front, can mobilize tens of thousands of people - mostly
non-Communists - for anti-Government demonstrations.

There are several reasons for the dramatic increase in opposition to the
Government and support for the New People's Army. Real wages have fallen by more
than one-third in the past decade. The country is groaning under a $25 billion
foreign debt. Through the establishment of monopolies and the centralization of
corruption - what Filipinos call

''crony capitalism'' - the country's top leadership has siphoned off the
nation's wealth on a vast and unprecedented scale.  The combination of economic
deterioration and political repression has created a situation in which more and
more people see the rebels as an alternative to the regime of President
Ferdinand E. Marcos. The widespread belief that the Government was responsible
for the Aquino assassination has greatly accelerated these trends. Compounding
the problem, many units of the Philippine Constabulary and Army are often brutal
and corrupt. Their actions probably do as much to fuel the insurgency as to
control it.

Thus, the Philippines bears a certain resemblance to South Vietnam in the late
1950's. Once again, the United States appears tied to a corrupt and inefficient
Government that has lost the confidence of its people.

There are, to be sure, important differences between the two situations. The New
People's Army has no sanctuaries in neighboring countries and, unlike the
Vietnamese Communists, is not receiving any outside support. It has not yet
succeeded in seizing the nationalist banner as Ho Chi Minh did in Vietnam, and
it must contend with the democratic tradition of the Philippines. There is
little prospect of a Communist takeover in the next several years, but such a
threat could easily materialize by the early 1990's without fundamental
political and economic reforms.  A Communist victory in the Philippines could
have extremely adverse consequences for the United States. The flickering flame
of democracy, which we helped kindle, would be permanently extinguished. We
would almost inevitably lose our air and naval bases at Clark Field and Subic
Bay, which greatly facilitate our ability to preserve the peace and maintain a
balance of power in Asia. Their loss would also shake the confidence of our
friends in the area in our ability to fulfill our commitments to them.  The best
way to forestall the further growth of the New People's Army would be to restore
democracy, giving the democratic opposition a genuine opportunity to compete for
power and providing an alternative to violence as a way of bringing about
fundamental change. Some have hailed the opposition's gains in the recent
elections and the emergence of a freer press as evidence of significant
political liberalization. But what the tremendous turnout at the polls really
indicated is that the Filipino people want democracy - not that democracy has
been restored.  The National Citizens Committee for Free Elections, which
mobilized 150,000 volunteer poll-watchers, estimates that the elections were so
fraudulent in one-quarter to one-third of the races that the opposition rather
than the Government would have won a majority in the National Assembly if the
vote had been honest. Moreover, all television and most radio stations - the
main source of news for Filipinos - are controlled by Marcos supporters and
allow the opposition limited access.

What can the United States do? We must distinguish between support for the
Filipino people and support for Mr. Marcos. An alliance with the Filipino people
is essential to preserving our long-term relationship with the country.
Identification with the Marcos regime must be avoided if we are to escape
political disaster.

Some would argue that we should suspend our present aid program to the
Philippines unless basic reforms are made, or even end our aid in an effort to
force President Marcos from office on the grounds that no solution to the crisis
is possible as long as he holds power. Yet given the limited size of our aid
program - $240 million a year - such a cutoff could easily backfire. Mr. Marcos
might make a bid for popular support by adopting a rabidly nationalistic,
anti-American stance. Nor can we be sure, in those circumstances, that his
sucessor would be better. Finally, ending American aid could jeopardize our
access to the bases.

Given the deteriorating situation and the limits of American power, we are faced
with extremely difficult choices. Yet the American stake in stability and
democracy in the Philippines requires that Washington use all its influence to
persuade Manila to make essential reforms.

Our leverage would be the offer of a large-scale economic assistance program -
separate from the bases agreement - and cooperation with the International
Monetary Fund's efforts to reschedule the country's huge foreign debt. This
should be granted only on two conditions. The first would be a return to
full-scale democracy, including genuinely open press and broadcasting and the
abolition of Mr. Marcos's power to legislate by decree. The second would be the
elimination of widespread corruption and a restructuring of the economy -
including dismantling the sugar, coconut and grain monopolies - in order to
reverse the country's economic decline and growing income disparities.

There is no guarantee that such a strategy would work. But against the
background of economic crisis, public pressure on Mr. Marcos might become so
strong that he would accept the offer. Even if he did not, we would have sent a
powerful message to the Filipino people that the United States cares about their
future and wants to preserve the historic ties between our two nations. B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 9, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR ARMS-AID CHARGES DETAILED

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 892 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 8


Government officials made public today photographic and other evidence that they
said supported contentions that the insurgents in El Salvador get most of their
weapons, ammunition and equipment from Soviet-bloc nations through Nicaragua.

Gen. Paul F. Gorman, commander of the United States Southern Command in Panama,
said the evidence showed that El Salvador was ''the victim of a pernicious form
of aggression by Nicaragua.'' General Gorman conducted a briefing with Thomas
Pickering, the United States Ambassador to El Salvador.

Mr. Pickering said the briefing contained about 95 percent of the material the
two officials had been using in recent weeks in secret briefings for members of
Congress.

The Salvadoran insurgents contend that they obtain most of their weapons by
capture or purchase on the black market, but General Gorman said shipments from
Nicaragua were the main source.

Aerial Photography Cited

The briefing leaned heavily on a number of recent incidents in which United
States AC-130 reconnaissance planes sighted trawlers or shrimp boats apparently
discharging cargo into smaller boats near the Salvadoran coast and in which the
smaller craft ran into the beach.

In one case, television tape showed what seemed to be pack animals, such as
mules, then being led into the coastal forest.

The AC-130's are four-engined planes that fly intelligence patrols over or near
El Salvador from Howard Air Force Base in Panama. They are equipped with cameras
that can detect faint infra-red heat given off by human beings and animals;
low-light television cameras and night vision scopes manned by crew members.

General Gorman said that in at least one incident a Salvadoran Army unit had
captured a number of weapons at a guerrilla base near where the beach landings
had taken place. He cited captured maps that seemed to mark transport routes. He
also said that serial numbers on United States AR-15 and M-16 rifles captured
from the guerrillas showed that in one batch 73 percent of the rifles had been
sent to Vietnam during the war there and had presumably fallen into Communist
hands.

Ambassador Pickering said:

''As in most cases, it is the accumulation of evidence, not a single incident
alone, that provides the basis for the conclusions. No single piece of evidence
presented here could in any sense be called a smoking gun or a silver bullet.''

He urged journalists to believe that the case for Nicaraguan logistical support
of the Salvadoran rebels also rested on a ''great deal of additional sensitive
information'' that could not be made public.

Photo too Blurry for Detection

In most cases the television tapes and still photographs displayed were too
blurry for journalists to detect the unloading of equipment from larger ships to
smaller canoes. But in one piece of high-resolution video tape a crate appeared
to have been landed by one of the canoes.

General Gorman asserted that overland shipments of weapons also occurred.
Nicaragua does not have a common border with El Salvador, since southeastern
Honduras intervenes. But the Salvadoran guerrillas' influence has been strong in
southeastern Honduras.

The Gulf of Fonseca is one possible route for sea-borne infiltration, but the
location of the reconnaissance photos would seem to indicate that the ships
stood out to sea and sailed a considerable distance along the Salvadoran coast
beyond the gulf, in one case as far as the mouth of the Lempa River.

This activity was said to have occurred mostly in June and early July in such
beach areas as Espino, Cuco and Icacal and in Jiquilisco Bay.

The charges of Nicaraguan involvement in the Salvadoran insurgency were more
sweeping when General Gorman spoke than in some of the written material
provided.

For instance, photo caption material prepared by United States military officers
described some of the scenes as ''suspicious'' activities and ''probable''
logistical infiltration.

General Gorman also used the discussion of possible Soviet-bloc aid to the
Salvadoran guerrillas to stress the view that more and faster United States
assistance was needed for the Salvadoran Government.

A House subcommittee today approved most of what the Administration has asked
for fiscal year 1985, which does not begin until Oct. 1, but supplemental aid
requests for summer and early fall have been bogged down.

 General Urges More U.S. Aid General Gorman said that ''a guerrilla offensive is
imminent'' and additional military aid was needed before ''the summer is out.''
Assistance given in ''dribs and drabs'' makes systematic planning difficult and
threatens to stifle what he said were increased tactical boldness and better
fighting ability by government forces.

Mr. Pickering added that the ability of the small Salvadoran Navy to interdict
waterborne supply routes was ''a function'' of more aid to the navy.

General Gorman said the Salvadoran Army had performed well recently and had
captured some of the arms displayed because it had begun to receive more
intelligence from guerrilla defectors and peasants.

''That was not happening last year,'' he said.

The officials asserted that of about 36,000 M-16 rifles sent to the Salvadoran
Government only about 2,000 had been lost, adding that this would arm only about
one-fifth of the guerrilla forces.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Paul F. Gorman

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 9, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS SPEAK OUT ON AGENT ORANGE

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 891 words


In camouflage fatigues and pin- striped business suits, veterans of the Vietnam
War flocked to a Federal courtroom in Brooklyn yesterday to speak out on the
proposed $180 million settlement of the Agent Orange lawsuit.

It was the first day of a nationwide series of hearings on the fairness and
adequacy of the landmark settlement of the herbicide liability suit.

At times it was as much a forum for opinion on the suit as it was an opportunity
for veterans and family members to relive some of their wartime traumas.

For some, it was a chance to vent their frustration and anger over the Vietnam
War itself.

''I thought the enemy was throwing gas at us,'' one veteran, Ramon T. Suarez,
testified, recalling a search and destroy mission in Tay Ninh Province nearly 20
years ago. ''When I got home,'' he said, he learned that ''it was the U.S.''

The hearings were called by Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District
Court in Brooklyn before his final certification of the proposed settlement,
which was reached May 7.

Dow and 6 Other Companies


Under the agreement, the Dow Chemical Company and six other manufacturers of the
herbicide Agent Orange contributed $180 million to be distributed among veterans
claiming injury. In return, lawyers for the veterans dropped a
multibillion-dollar damage suit against the companies.

One of the more emotional moments of the day came in testimony by a veteran's
wife, Rena Kopystenski of Manalapan Township, N.J.

Strongly opposing the settlement, she said that her husband, John, was crippled
by the effects of Agent Orange and that her 6-year-old son, Alexander, was
''severely neurologically impaired'' as a result of her husband's chemical
exposure.

Compensation is not the issue, Mrs. Kopystenski said. She said veterans opposed
to the settlement ''do not ask for money, but for the truth, for someone to
admit what has been done, and to try to stop what shall prove to be the
beginning of a nation of mutations.''

''Our sons and daughters shall join their mutated and damaged chromosomes with
those perfect and pretty little offspring of you who went to law school or into
corporate employ instead of to Da Nang, An Khe and Quang Tri,'' she said, ''and
we shall then be vindicated when our daily existence becomes your greatest
nightmare.''

Unless something unforeseen happens at the hearings here and in Chicago,
Houston, Atlanta and San Francisco, it is widely expected that Judge Weinstein
will approve the settlement. He took a strong hand in forging the accord in
round-the-clock negotiations that succeeded hours before the Agent Orange trial
was to open.

Judge Weinstein, flanked by 15 empty judges' chairs and two American flags, sat
facing banks of combat-garbed veterans, family members, associates and lawyers
in the rose-carpeted courtroom. Eight marshals, some with pistols strapped to
their ankles, provided special security.

Outside the courthouse, in a throwback to the turbulence of the protest era,
veterans gathered in knots to hand out leaflets supporting or opposing the
settlement and giving their views to reporters.

''They're focusing a lot of hatred on the military-industrial complex that is
really at fault here,'' said Bobby Sutton, a 38-year-old former Navy Seal from
Babylon, L.I., now crippled from what he asserted was exposure to Agent Orange.

As for the settlement, he said, it may not be all that he and others want but he
will not oppose it because too many veterans can use the money.

Support for the Settlement


Speaking strongly in favor of the settlement was David Dean, a Long Island
lawyer who is spokesman of the Veterans Management Committee, the steering panel
of the attorneys representing veterans in the litigation.

He outlined the legal problems of litigating the case. Among them, he said, was
the difficulty of proving which product caused which ailment and which law of
the 50 states to apply.

The fund, which is accumulating interest, has already grown by about $6 million.

How the money will be distributed and how many claimants there will be are among
the many unresolved questions. Many witnesses argued that the settlement could
not be properly judged in the face of such huge uncertainties.

The Veterans Management Committee and scientific experts are currently devising
a system under which ailments would be weighted according to the likelihood of
their stemming from dioxin contamination of the defoliant, a mixture of the
herbicides 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D.

14,000 Claims Filed


About 14,000 veterans and family members have so far filed claims for
compensation. Those with ailments that have already manifested themselves have
until Oct. 26 to file their claims with the court. There is no cutoff for those
who may develop symptoms in the future.

Veterans' children born before Jan. 1, 1984, are automatically covered by the
settlement. Those born afterward may be included or not, at their parents'
option.

About 2,000 veterans have ''opted out'' of the settlement and remain free to sue
the chemical companies individually for damages.

The hearings will continue Thursday and Friday in Brooklyn. From there Judge
Weinstein will move to Chicago on Aug. 13 and 14, Houston Aug. 16 and 17,
Atlanta Aug. 20 and 21, and San Francisco Aug. 23 and 24.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietnam veterans Bobby Sutton and Louis Huffman; Photo of Rena
Kopystenski; Courtroom sketch

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE MYOPIA OF HUMAN RIGHTS ADVOCATES

BYLINE: By Elliot Abrams ;
Elliott Abrams is Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs.

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1310 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In my post, I constantly encounter representatives of human rights groups whose
strong feelings about human rights abuses in the world is manifest and at times
moving. Too often, however, the depths of their analysis does not match the
depth of their emotion - and the consequences can be harmful to human rights.

In a trip to Turkey last month, I saw a typical outcome of human rights
activists' inability to combine the heat of moral passion with the light of
intellectual insight: Not only Turkish generals and politicians but also many
journalists and intellectuals have little sympathy for those Western human
rights groups who claim to speak for them.

Turkey's treatment at the hands of its critics demonstrates the major
shortcoming of far too many human rights groups: an appalling shallowness of
analysis. The unique historical, social and geopolitical conditions of a
particular country are often simply ignored. The most difficult problem - what
will be effective in a particular case - is rarely addressed. And in many cases,
as in Turkey, this intellectual failure is matched by political failure. Not
only have many human rights groups been

unable to fashion policy recommendations that offer a prayer of being effective
but the people they claim to champion frequently resent the activists' shrill
and uninformed criticisms of their country.  Understanding modern Turkey
requires an appreciation of the historical achievement of Kemal Atat"urk, who in
1923 created the Turkish Republic and laid down its philosophic foundation -
secular civilian rule, an independent judiciary and parliamentary democratic
government. Turkey is the only country with an Islamic culture that can truly be
called a democracy, and its success or failure at democracy has enormous
ramifications for democratic prospects throughout Southwest Asia and the Middle
East.  A loyal member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Turkey has had
rough going. Bordered by Bulgaria, the Soviet Union, Iran, Iraq and Syria, it
has been subverted almost constantly by those who seek to exploit every
weakness. Instability and anarchy have three times caused the military - the
traditional guardians of Atat"urk's principles - to move in to restore order.
The last time was in September 1980 - and there is no question that there was a
broad public consensus for the takeover.  In the late 1970's and early 1980, the
civilian Government was paralyzed, inflation raged at 400 percent and virtually
every institution in the country was sharply polarized into rightist and leftist
factions. Political killings averaged more than 20 per day. Terrorists, often
with foreign complicity, were smuggling in tons of arms and explosives. The
universities became battlegrounds, with leftist students calling in leftist
factions of the police to attack rightist students and rightist students
responding in kind. Only those who wished to see Turkey further destabilized
objected to the takeover.

The military's pledge to restore order and return to democracy is being kept. A
new Constitution was adopted by national referendum in 1982, national and local
elections have been held and journalists and generals alike expect that martial
law will gradually be lifted in all provinces.

But to listen to many of Turkey's Western human rights critics, especially in
Europe, you would think none of them had ever consulted a map to learn Turkey's
location, opened a history book to learn of its past or read a newspaper during
the crisis years of the late 1970's. These groups raised no clamor when
terrorists roamed the streets threatening every Turk's human rights. With the
notable exception of Amnesty International, none said very much about torture
during the ''progressive'' reign of the Socialist Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit.
Most of the loud and public Western criticism of Turkey has taken place only
since 1980.

Helsinki Watch, for example, predicted that the election of November 1983 would
be a farce, claiming that the Motherland Party, which is hardly the favorite of
the generals, would be forced into a coalition with one of the military's
favored parties. When the Motherland Party won an overwhelming victory, Helsinki
Watch then claimed, with bizarre logic, that the results demonstrated the
Turkish people's lack of confidence in the return to parliamentary democracy.
Nor is Helsinki Watch the only group to make such errors. Recently, a Council of
Europe delegation visited Diyarbakir prison and saw prisoners whom Amnesty
International had listed as dead. Nevertheless, the delegates refused to
acknowledge the possibility that they were ill-informed about the human rights
picture in Turkey.  Let there be no doubt: Turkey is a country with serious
human rights problems. Martial law regulations limit freedom of the press, free
speech and trade union activity. Conditions in Turkish prisons are often utterly
unacceptable by Western standards. Torture occurs with apparent regularity.
These problems are not in dispute: The real issue is what causes such human
rights violations and what will cure them.

Regarding martial law, Turkish journalists with whom I spoke resented the
current restrictions but said they had been steadily reduced in the past few
years and were confident that they would be eliminated.

As for prison conditions, these have not changed for years, and one is entitled
to wonder why the great clamor about them is so recent. In any event, berating
the Turks will not improve conditions. One high Turkish official, when asked
about the prison situation, responded, ''Have you seen our hospitals?'' His
point was that Turkey is a developing country with a per capita income one-third
that of Portugal or Greece.

The most egregious human rights violation in Turkey is the existence of torture.
Again, this abhorrent practice was not unknown under prior Turkish governments,
and one may wonder why so many human rights activists chose to make it an issue
only after the military takeover of 1980. Their silence then and vociferous
criticism now persuades many Turks that they are concerned less with eliminating
torture than with making a political point.  Unlike its predecessors, the
current Turkish Government has acknowledged the existence of torture, and dozens
of officals have been prosecuted - and convicted. One prison warden was
sentenced to death for participating in the torture of a prisoner and most
recently, in late July, a prison doctor and an army captain and sergeant were
sentenced to 25 to 32 years by a criminal court in a torture case. It appeared
to me during my visit that the military has made a firm decision to eliminate
torture by military personnel and to stop torture in military prisons.

The more serious problem is the police. Police forces are decentralized, very
poorly trained and lacking in discipline. We would do well to consider helping
the Turks raise the level of education and professional training of their police
forces. Unfortunately, the United States is precluded from helping in this
effort by Vietnam-era legislation that prevents us from training foreign police
forces. This section of the Foreign Assistance Act, hailed as a great human
rights advance, bars a sensible and active approach to the elimination of police
human rights abuses. The Turks need our help in this more than they need our
lectures.

Turkey is at a crossroads. Whether it remains an integral part of the West,
committed to democracy and strategically allied with those nations that seek to
defend freedom depends not only on Turks but on the West. Turkey is not Sweden,
nor should we expect it to be. The clamor of ill-informed and self-righteous
critics does not help but hinders in the building of the modern,
Western-oriented Turkey in which human rights will be fully guaranteed. B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
'YOU WILL!' 'I WON'T!'

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 751 words


President Reagan and the Democratic candidate, Walter Mondale, have established
the first subject for campaign debates, which the White House must know cannot
be avoided.

But they haven't gone beyond setting the topic. So far, their exchange on
whether there will have to be a tax rise after elections has had a through-
the-looking-glass unreality. ''You will!'' ''I won't!'' They both know that is
not the choice.

They both acknowledge that the deficit has to be reduced, and that the only way
is to increase Government revenues and cut Government spending. Incredibly, the
biggest economy in the world is getting into the debtor situation of a
developing country. As anybody trying to buy a house knows, if mortgage payments
are too high, there isn't enough for maintenance and other needs.

So the choices have to be how to boost income and where to save. The public
needs a full exposition of their calculations from both candidates even before
the debates, so conflicting claims can be assessed. Failure to provide it will
diminish their credibility.

Mr. Reagan says recovery will generate enough tax money to reverse the
burgeoning debt without slashing vital needs, providing Congress agrees to pare
away fat. The one thing economists agree on now is that their crystal balls are
cloudy. But they don't even venture the hope that such a huge boom as this would
require wouldn't lead to another bust.

Wall Street takes that seriously. It spurted upwards with the news that growth
was slowing down, because that improves the chance it can be sustained.

Mr. Mondale says more money will have to be raised, but he won't put the burden
on the middle classes and the poor. Soak-the-rich by itself wouldn't be enough
either, and frightening business out of domestic investment with too much tax
would send unemployment back up.  This means there will also have to be ceilings
on big spending. The mounting debt service cannot be lowered without dropping
the deficit. Mr. Reagan has already chopped at social services, but his cuts
haven't begun to deliver the budget balance that he promised. On the contrary.
What more has he in mind? Social Security? Education? Farm subsidies? Definitely
not defense, he says; that must continue to rise.  Mr. Mondale has been brave
about taxes, never music to a voter's ear. But he has been coy about spending.
He too would have to propose cuts. He has probably read the electorate's mood
correctly in promising not to weaken defense. Mr. Reagan's record shows,
however, that vast military spending means vast debt, whether with more growth
and lower taxes or, as Mr. Mondale suggests, more taxes and slower growth.  The
lesson of the Vietnam War is often cited in terms of military adventure. But
there was another lesson, in terms of economic adventure. The stimulus of
military expenditure is an illusion. It may prime the pump for awhile, but it
depletes the well. The cost will eventually be extracted by printing money -
inflation - or constricting it - recession.

The defense issue has been aggravated by the foolish idea that security is
measured in dollars. President Lyndon Johnson made the mistake of thinking
social problems could be solved by ''throwing money'' at them. It is as much of
a mistake to think ''throwing money'' buys strength.

Despite Administration denials, there is strong evidence that American combat
readiness has deteriorated. The New York Times defense correspondent, Richard
Halloran, rooted out studies to show that the United States has bought a lot
more weapons but not the capacity to use them. Since 1981, the Administration
has had authority to spend $888.8 billion on defense. But the Joint Chiefs,
senior field commanders, officers down the line and House investigators say
current deficiencies could leave the forces unable to fight a major enemy.

Taxes and the deficit can't be addressed without questioning the defense budget.
And the real security issue can't be judged without a close look at where the
military's money goes. Senators Gary Hart and Sam Nunn and Representatives Les
Aspin and Albert Gore Jr., all experts on and outspoken in their criticism of
the nation's military machine and defense policy, have some good ideas on the
subject and should be listened to.

The way we are spending our money for America's defense should be the subject of
the second debate; then other subjects should follow. If the candidates are made
to explain facts, this should be an enlightening campaign. B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOAT PEOPLE PROTECTED AND AIDED BY THAILAND

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 345 words


To the Editor:


Your July 4 news article ''Vietnamese Refugees Face an Increasing Savagery''
requires clarification:


* Since 1975, approximately 100,000 Vietnamese boat people who reached Thai
shores have been given protection and assistance by Thai authorities. It has
always been and continues to be the policy of the Thai Government to assist
these hapless people in ways that are commensurate with Thailand's limited
resources and capabilities.


* The Gulf of Thailand covers an area of approximately 120,000 square miles and
is bound by four states; it is not Thailand's exclusive domain. Your article
unfairly places the blame for piracy in the gulf solely on Thailand.


* Long before the boat people became an international issue, Thai authorities
provided them with protection and assistance. The Royal Thai Navy set up an
anti-piracy unit in 1981. A year later, the Thai Government commenced an
anti-piracy program in cooperation with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
that, however, because of financial and territorial constraints, could cover
only 18,000 square miles, or 15 percent of the Gulf of Thailand (which also
includes parts of the high seas). According to the High Commissioner's own
statistics, since the program's inception the number of attacks on the boat
people has decreased significantly.

* While harsh conditions in Vietnam which force people to flee their own country
by any means available are the root cause of the problem, the tragedy of the
boat people could be eradicated if the Vietnamese Government would work more
closely with the High Commissioner and the international community in the
Orderly Departure Program for the prospective refugees.  As its executor, the
High Commissioner must seek to make the program effective and to see to it that
prospective Vietnamese refugees are assured of resettlement and therefore do not
have to risk their lives on the high seas.

 M. L. BIRABHONGSE KASEMSRI Permanent Representative of Thailand to the U.N.
New York, July 20, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
Veterans DebateHerbicide Accord



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 173 words


Emotions continued to run high yesterday as Vietnam War veterans urged a Federal
judge in Brooklyn to protect their interests in the legal battle over Agent
Orange.

While many veterans in the second day of hearings in Federal District Court
urged the judge, Jack B. Weinstein, to reject the proposed $180 million
settlement with seven chemical companies that manufactured the herbicide, others
told the judge that he should approve the agreement.

Many veterans now blame Agent Orange, a defoliant used in the Vietnam War, for
ailments ranging from skin rashes to cancer, as well as for their wives'
miscarriages and their children's birth defects.

The chemical companies ''could give $180 million out of their lunch money,''
said one veteran, Lawrence Smith of Brooklyn.

But Mike Patterson, a worker in a veterans' program in Flint, Mich., said the
settlement offered veterans ''a lot more than they ever had 10 years ago.'' He
said, ''The people I've talked to, about 1,500 people, they're all in support of
the proposal.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 11, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
Judge Weighs PactOn Agent Orange



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 172 words


A Federal judge in Brooklyn said yesterday that he would decide by mid-September
whether to approve a $180 million settlement in the Agent Orange lawsuit.

In three days of hearings that ended yesterday, scores of Vietnam veterans went
before Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court, mostly to denounce the
settlement of their class-action suit against seven chemical companies. Some
said $180 million was not enough money, and others said they wanted to put the
companies on trial as having made a dangerous product.

Judge Weinstein said he would make his decision after completing public hearings
nationwide, and would rule by mid-September.

Agent Orange was a herbicide sprayed over wide areas of Southeast Asia during
the Vietnam War as a defoliant. It was found to have been frequently
contaminated with dioxin, a highly toxic substance.

The veterans say the dioxin caused them to suffer ailments ranging from skin
rash to cancer, and caused miscarriages by their wives and birth defects in
their children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 11, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

2REPORTS SAY H.R.A. DID NOT SEEK TO HINDER INVESTIGATION OF CHILD ABUSE;
MAYOR ORDERS A REVIEW OF THE AGENCY, AND PICKS MANHATTAN LAWYER TO DO IT

BYLINE: By MICHAEL GOODWIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1125 words


Mayor Koch yesterday ordered a review of the ''structure and function'' of the
Human Resources Administration, which lost its commissioner and a top deputy to
resignations this week.

The Mayor appointed Richard I. Beattie, a lawyer who served in the Carter
Administration, to conduct the review, which Mr. Koch said would include the
question of reorganizing the huge agency and making some of its divisions
independent.

Mr. Beattie, 45 years old, is now a partner in the Manhattan law firm of Simpson
Thacher & Bartlett.

''He will be given every financial resource,'' the Mayor said at a City Hall
news conference. ''He will not lack for staff or funding.''

No Deadline Is Set


Mr. Koch said he expected the report to be done quickly, but set no deadline.

Mr. Beattie, who served in the Marines Corps in Vietnam and received degrees
from Dartmouth College and the University of Pennsylvania Law School, was said
by his office to be on vacation in Europe and was unavailable for comment.

''I reached him as he was about to go hiking in the Alps,'' Deputy Mayor Stanley
Brezenoff said. ''He's willing to do it. He'll be back in about a week.''

Mr. Koch, after considering for several days suggestions that the agency be
studied and reorganized, decided yesterday morning that a review was needed,
according to aides.

Looking for the Designee


At the same time, he decided that Mr. Beattie was the best person for the task
and attempts to reach him began. Mr. Brezenoff said that he succeeded several
hours later, and that Mr. Beattie agreed to take the unpaid job.

The agency has been the subject of much criticism, most recently involving
assertions that the agency hampered an investigation into charges of sexual
attacks on children in city-financed day-care centers. In addition to the
review, Mr. Koch also ordered several other actions that he said would help the
agency do its jobs better. Among them are these:


- Modifying contracts with private, nonprofit groups that run day-care centers
to have the names of all current and prospective employees cleared by the State
Central Register for Child Abuse. Governor Cuomo signed into law last week a
measure that requires such screening for future employees and permits it for
current employees.


- Setting up meetings with the city's five district attorneys to develop a
protocol of cooperation in cases of abuse reports.


- Making more frequent unannounced inspections of all centers that are
city-financed but run by outside groups.


- Introducing several bills in the State Legislature that would, among other
things, give law enforcement authorities the right to check the backgrounds of
employees in children's programs, public and private.

The Mayor's announcement came during a week of upheaval for the agency, which
has 25,000 employees and whose many programs serve more than a million New
Yorkers.

Two Officials Resign


On Wednesday, James A. Krauskopf, its Commissioner for the last three and
one-half years, resigned. The day before, Gail M. Kong, a top deputy of his who
was in charge of the Office of Special Services for Children, also quit.

Their resignations came amid charges by the Bronx District Attorney that the
agency had hampered an investigation of allegations of sexual attacks on
children at a day-care center. Miss Kong was not involved in that case at all,
and Mr. Krauskopf insisted from the outset that he personally had ordered his
subordinates to cooperate.

Yesterday, reports released by both Mayor Koch and Governor Cuomo supported Mr.
Krauskopf's contention.

Yet there had been considerable criticism of Mr. Krauskopf, Miss Kong and the
agency for some time over many issues, and the critics included Mr. Koch. Last
week, he wrote harsh letters to both, admonishing them as having responded too
slowly to a report that the agency was negligent in cases of abuse that resulted
in the deaths of nine Brooklyn children.

Mr. Koch, when he accepted Mr. Krauskopf's and Miss Kong's resignations, accused
unnamed public officials and news organizations of ''pillorying'' the two.

Agency Created in 1966


The Human Resources Administration, which runs the welfare and food stamp
programs and shelters for the homeless, investigates child abuse reports, and
contracts with nonprofit groups to run centers for children and the elderly, was
created in 1966 to help consolidate services to the poor and needy. Since then,
it has been suggested periodically that the changing natures of some social
problems were arguments for reorganizing it.

Such suggestions were made most recently by Council President Carol Bellamy, who
said that at the very least an outside independent investigator should look at
the agency.

Also, Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin said the recent reports of sexual attacks
on children in day-care centers, as well as physical abuse of children in
private homes, could best be dealt with by an independent agency.

Although Mr. Koch said several times since that both Miss Bellamy and Mr. Goldin
had political motivations, he also stressed that he was not ruling out their
ideas.

Issue of 'Changed Circumstances'


''When H.R.A. was put together, there were reasons for it to be structured the
way it is,'' Mr. Brezenoff said yesterday. ''The question is now being framed as
to whether it now makes sense to make it adapt to changed circumstances in the
world.''

After deciding to do something, he said, the Mayor then wrestled with whether to
appoint a panel of people in or out of government, or a combination of the two,
or to appoint an individual.

Mr. Koch, asked why he had chosen Mr. Beattie, said ''I know him,'' and added
that Mr. Beattie had been a ''distinguished lawyer.'' In addition, Mr. Beattie
is heading a mayoral group studying the city's special education program. The
Mayor said that the duties would not conflict and that he expected ''first
rate'' jobs on both issues.

Jet Pilot in Vietnam


A native of New York, Mr. Beattie joined the Marines after graduating from
Dartmouth in 1961 and served as a jet pilot in Vietnam until 1965, reaching the
rank of captain. He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania Law School
three years later, and joined Simpson Thacher & Bartlett in 1968. He became a
partner in 1975, specializing in corporate law.

In 1977, he became deputy general counsel in the Federal Department of Health,
Education and Welfare and 18 months later became executive assistant to its
Secretary. He served as general counsel for six months in 1979. He rejoined his
law firm in 1980.

Mr. Beattie lives in Manhattan with his wife and two children, according to a
friend at the firm.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

R.O.T.C. BOOMING AS MEMORIES OF VIETNAM FADE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN , Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1596 words

DATELINE: FORT KNOX, Ky.


Squads of college men and women charged through the leafy woods and across the
rolling hills of this military post, their faces smeared with mud and camouflage
grease and their green fatigues soaked with rain as they skirmished to the
rattle of rifle fire, the burp of machine guns and the boom of cannon.

The guns fired blanks, but the rest of it was strenuously real as cadets of the
Reserve Officer Training Corps scrambled through the brush under the stern eyes
of drill sergeants and tactical instructors.



Enrollment Has Been Climbing


By the end of summer camp, 2,807 men and 823 women will have completed six weeks
of training in this basic summer camp, the only one run by the Army. Most of
them will enter the Army as second lieutenants two years from now, the latest
recruits in the resurgence of the R.O.T.C.

Enrollment in the corps, according to the Army, has more than doubled since the
end of the military draft in 1973. It hit bottom after the war in Vietnam, with
33,220 cadets in 1974, but has since climbed almost steadily, to 72,823 this
year.

A prime reason for that expansion has clearly been the fading of the memory of
Vietnam. In the antiwar battles on college campuses starting in the late 1960's,
many of which were in opposition to R.O.T.C., some of the young men and women
now at Fort Knox were in diapers.

Moreover, as faculty opposition to the corps has declined, the number of units
at universities or nearby off-campus centers and affiliated colleges has also
expanded. In 1978 there were 955 units, as against 1,520 today and 1,620
projected for the coming academic year.

The young men and women in training, most headed for their junior year in
college, gave a raft of reasons for coming to camp.



College Financial Help


Through participation in the corps, students can earn significant financial help
for college. Thare will also be a stint as an Army officer, perhaps leading to a
lifetime career, and many cadets here cited the experience the corps provides in
leadership, in discipline and in working with others.

Anyone at camp here could leave at any time. About 7 percent dropped out and 3
percent could not meet physical standards. The Army has quietly asked a few to
leave, usually for failing to display leadership.

Few of the cadets mentioned the word patriotism, but several said they had a
sense of duty. ''I feel some sort of duty to my country,'' said Keith D. Reagan
of Centenary College in Louisiana, ''not necessarily to go to war, but just to
serve.''

Many are competing for financial aid to help meet the cost of education. John F.
Kope of Ohio State said, ''I'm here trying for a scholarship.'' The R.O.T.C.
will offer 8,500 scholarships for the coming school year under 16 different
plans.  By the end of the summer the corps will have awarded up to 350 two-year
scholarships to top cadets at this basic camp, each paying full tuition, book
costs and laboratory fees plus $100 a month. Other scholarships range from four
years of tuition to those that pay only $100 a month for 10 academic months.

Cadet Kope echoed another theme often heard here: ''The leadership training
gives you a background for dealing with people. They teach us to handle anything
that comes along.''

Several cited having a job in the Army right after college and experience that
would be useful when they returned to civilian life. Daniel E. Campbell of
Towson State in Maryland said, ''Lots of people here are career oriented.''

He hopes to get into the military intelligence branch, which he said ''would be
more useful than the infantry in the real world.'' Cadet Campbell said that
after four years of active duty he would revert to the reserves as a captain,
''which will look good on a resume.''

Some Want Army Careers


Others, including some with fathers who served, leaned toward careers as
officers. Phillip E. Rice of James Madison University in Virginia, who grew up
near the Marine Corps base at Quantico, Va., said, ''I've always wanted to be in
the service.'' He favors the infantry because ''I like dealing with people and I
love the outdoors.''

Still others came for the discipline. Robert W. Hayworth of East Carolina
University said he had done ''too much partying'' in his first two years in
college and was worried about his physical condition when he arrived here. The
physical training, he said wryly, ''has been very challenging.'' But, he added,
''I feel more confidence in my physical shape now and I feel more confidence in
myself.''

Some were curious about military service, having never been near the Army until
they arrived here and heard drill sergeants shouting. ''I haven't worn a
uniform,'' said Joseph N. Gaines of Salisbury State in Maryland, ''since I was
in the Boy Scouts.''

For the women, who lived in separate barracks but took the same training as the
men, the primary motive was clearly the challenge. Rebecca A. Ellingwood of the
University of New Hampshire said the training ''was one of the few fields where
women haven't yet broken the barriers.'' Barred by law from combat, she hoped to
go into the intelligence branch for the ''intrigue.''

Catherine F. Delgadillo of Colorado State University said that job opportunities
for women after college were not so good, adding, ''In the Army, I could start
out at a decent salary.''

Second lieutenants are paid about $19,000 a year.

Women Faced Restrictions


She said that the women, unlike the men, faced restrictions here, such as not
being allowed out alone at night. ''They really watch out for us,'' she said.
''But in training, they expect the same from us. They don't want us wimping
out.'' Cadet Delgadillo also said she found most of the male cadets ''really
supportive and encouraging.''

Second Lieut. Angela M. Asti, who was commissioned in June after graduating from
the University of Wisconsin, was one of the female officers and female drill
sergeants assigned to each company to help female cadets.

She said some of the women ''found it a little hard to stand up in front of the
troops and say 'do this now.' '' She said, ''It's also hard for some of them to
learn to live in a barracks with 52 other women.''

Lieutenant Asti, who studied criminal sociology, is headed for the military
police.

The R.O.T.C. seeks students of engineering, science and business but accepts
students from all disciplines. About 25 percent come from engineering and
science, another quarter from business and a quarter from social science. The
rest include students in nursing, medicine, law and the humanities.

With competition getting tougher, the Army has insisted on higher grade point
averages to qualify for R.O.T.C. The minimum is 2.0 on a scale of 4.0. This
summer 60 percent of the cadets here had averages higher than 2.5 and 27 percent
were above 3.0.

Growth Leveling Off


That competition, along with an improved civilian job market, may have caused
growth in the R.O.T.C. to level off. This year, for the first time since 1974,
enrollment slipped. It was at a post-Vietnam peak of 73,819 last year.

Army officials are not sure why, or whether the slippage is temporary. In any
event, the Army had room on active duty for only 6,300 of the 9,000 R.O.T.C.
officers commissioned this spring. The rest went into the reserves.

Within the Army officer corps today, 75 percent received their commissions from
the R.O.T.C., the others from West Point or Army officer candidate schools. The
senior R.O.T.C. graduate on active duty is Gen. Maxwell R. Thurman, the Vice
Chief of Staff, the second-highest officer in the Army.

At this camp the training includes drills, marksmanship, tactics,
communications, bivouacs and physical training, with the emphasis on doing
rather than sitting in a classroom. The corps also seeks to motivate the cadets
by showing them what it means to be an officer.

Next summer those who chose to go on will be required to attend one of three
advanced camps at other posts where the emphasis will be on leadership.
Meantime, they will take two year-long courses in military science at college.

After being commissioned, second lieutenants who had scholarships must serve on
active duty for four years, plus two years in the reserves. Those who did not
receive scholarships must serve for three years, plus three years in the
reserves.

A tactical instructor, Sgt. 1st Class Edward A. McDonald, said that cadets
aborbed the training well, despite the compressed schedule. ''They learn fast,''
he said, ''but no one is going to learn tactics in eight hours or eight days or
eight weeks.''

A drill sergeant, Staff Sgt. Robert R. Collins, who trains recruits the rest of
the year, said the cadets differed in at least one respect. ''When I tell them
to do something,'' he said, ''they always ask me why. Why, why, why; I'm not
used to being asked why.''

When the camp newspaper asked cadets for comments on summer camp, some
complaints were as old as the army of Alexander the Great.

Kevin Preston of George Washington University in Washington said ''The food is
constantly being repeated.'' Thomas Briggs, from the University of Missouri,
repeated the lament that 10 percent of the troops never get the word: ''We had a
few problems with cadet leaders not knowing what to do because of this lack of
communication.''

Reiterating the age-old Army cry of ''hurry up and wait,'' William Donegan of
the University of Tennessee said, ''There's a lot of hurrying to get somewhere
and then waiting.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of cadets during training

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUNDAY, AUGUST 12, 1984;
 International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 538 words


Iraq said it had destroyed five ships and shot down three Iranian F-14 jets near
the Strait of Hormuz in the Persian Gulf. A military spokesman in Baghdad said
five ''large naval targets'' had been left blazing in the sea and three planes
that had been protecting an ''enemy naval convoy'' had plunged into the gulf.
There was no immediate comment from Iran. (Page 1, Column 6.)

Abortion should not be promoted as a family planning method, it was decided by
delegates to the United Nations International Conference on Population in Mexico
City. The language was accepted by the conference's main committee after the
delelgates turned back a more restrictive proposal by the Vatican, which urged a
recommendation that ''abortion should be excluded as a method of family
planning.'' (1:1.)

A desire for better U.S.-Soviet ties has been reaffirmed by President Reagan and
Konstantin U. Chernenko, the Soviet leader, in separate letters, according to
copies of the letters released in Dublin. The two leaders were replying to
letters written by Sean MacBride, winner of the Nobel and Lenin peace prizes and
currently president of the Geneva-based International Peace Bureau. (1:5.)

Zimbabwe's ruling party adopted a new party constitution calling for the
creation of a Marxist-oriented, one- party Government. (10:3.)

The Games of the XXIII Olympiad are expected to close tomorrow in the same
atmosphere of euphoria that has prevailed in Los Angeles since they opened July
28. They have been the largest, best-attended Games in history, and for the
United States, the most successful. They were also the first privately financed
''free enterprise'' Games. (1:3.) National

President Reagan signed into law a measure prohibiting public high schools from
banning student gatherings outside class hours for religiious or political
purposes. (1:2.)

John R. Block's business ventures that won him instant credibility after he was
appointed by President Reagan as Secretary of Agriculture have made him a target
for Farm Belt Democrats. Candidates in several states have been using Mr.
Block's financial involvements as anecdotal evidence that the Administration is
out of touch with the farmer. (1:1.)

The Reserve Officer Training Corps maintained by the Army has more than doubled
its enrollment among college men and women since the end of the military draft
in 1973. After hitting bottom after the Vietnam War with 33,220 cadets in 1974,
enrollment has climbed almost steadily to 72,823 this year. The main reason for
that climb has been fading of the memory of Vietnam. (1:2.) Metropolitan

Alfred A. Knopf, the publisher whose list included more Nobel laureates than
that of any other American house, died of congestive heart failure at his home
in Purchase, N.Y. He was 91 years old. Since the publishing house's founding in
1915, its authors have bridged the history of modern literature. (1:5.)

An end to the hospital strike in New York City seemed in sight yesterday,
Federal mediators said as negotiations were intensified to reach agreement on
the main issue of wages. Both sides said they were under strong pressure to
reach a tentative agreement. (32:1.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
A SERIAL ABOUT THE MILITARY GAMBLES ON PATRIOTISM

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 999 words


''Call to Glory'' is as ambitious a television series as you are likely to see
this season.  Considering the supporting players in the opening episode alone -
the real John F.  Kennedy, the real Adlai Stevenson, even, briefly, the real
Fidel Castro - it is as ambitious a series as you are likely to see any season.
In its heart this fictional drama, which mixes in news footage with a story
about the Air Force, may be only a soap opera, but in its outer wrappings,
lavishly appointed, is the stuff of high drama. ABC, whose production this is,
has decided that patriotism is back, and ''Call to Glory'' shows us military men
who act while nations tremble and the flag flies over a moderately idealized
America. In fact, this isn't bad television at all. The series, making its debut
in a two- hour presentation, starts tomorrow at 8 P.M.; future Monday-night
episodes will be an hour long.

In general, television drama has been ambivalent about what the military has
been up to in recent years. ''M*A*S*H'' was not so much about the Korean War as
it was about camaraderie in an Army hospital. The sense of place was so slight
that any number of viewers thought that Hawkeye and Trapper John were practicing
medicine in Vietnam. Vietnam itself has never been much of a subject for
television drama, and the war there has been recognized mostly by telling us
that Magnum and the members of the A-Team are combat veterans.

''Call to Glory,'' however, gets around the problem of unpopular wars. It is set
in the early 1960's: a time of no real wars, but the threat of wars, and plenty
of good men left over from Korea and World War II to avert them. Meanwhile,
''Call to Glory'' borrows heavily from ''The Right Stuff'' and also appeals to
nostalgia. Was America a better place in the early 1960's? Maybe it was; maybe
it wasn't, but clearly there was much then that seemed simpler.

Thus, the dramatic opening of ''Call to Glory'': The words ''Air Force'' appear
on the screen, superimposed on what turns out to be a pilot's face mask. The
pilot is flying a U-2, sun glistening off the cockpit. The pilot photographs the
country far beneath. An instant later, a grim Air Force officer develops the
film, and a general flies off to Washington. Then, in black-and-white footage
from a news conference on Sept. 13, 1962, President Kennedy appears on screen.
He is making his opening statement:

''Ever since Communism moved into Cuba in 1958,'' he says, ''Soviet technical
and military personnel have moved steadily onto the island in increasing numbers
at the invitation of the Cuban Goverment. Now that movement has increased.''

It is the start of the Cuban missile crisis, of course, and, as Mr. Kennedy
continues to speak, we see the credits for ''Call to Glory.'' Already reality
and fiction are blending, just as they will throughout much of the program. Mr.
Kennedy appears several times, along with other prominent figures from his time.
After the Air Force heroes of ''Call to Glory'' have produced evidence that
missiles are being placed in Cuba, for example, we see Mr. Stevenson challenging
the Soviet Ambassador to the United Nations. Mr. Stevenson asks him to confirm
or deny the American charge, and when the Ambassador waffles, Mr. Stevenson
gives his then celebrated rejoinder. ''I am prepared to wait for my answer,'' he
says, ''until hell freezes over.''

The leitmotif running through all this is patriotism and popular Americana. The
hero, played by Craig T. Nelson, is Col. Raynor Sarnac. It is a nicely ethnic
name, but not so specifically ethnic that we can connect it with any one
nationality. (At the same time, Mr. Nelson, brown hair, blue eyes, could also be
a WASP.) When he comforts his 8-year-old son, who seems fearful about his
flying, Colonel Sarnac says: ''My country needs me, and I'll never turn my back
on my country.'' When the son attends a funeral for one of the Colonel's fallen
comrades, he stands at attention and salutes, precisely the way we remember John
F. Kennedy Jr. doing at his father's funeral. The scene resonates with
remembered emotion.  ''Call to Glory'' also gives us lots of scenes of Americans
at home, at play and attending to family matters.  For the most part, the men
are members of the Air Force. The women are the wives they leave on the ground.
Tom Wolfe's book ''The Right Stuff'' has some memorable pages on the deaths of
military pilots in peacetime; they seem to have inspired a sequence in ''Call to
Glory.'' Meanwhile, there is a great deal of footage of real Air Force jets,
much of it absolutely spectacular. The U-2's, in particular, the so-called spy
planes, are almost beautiful. Flying far above the horizon, carried on long
graceful wings, they look like heroic giant birds.  Where will ''Call to Glory''
go next? The first episode plants seeds for future development. Will Colonel
Sarnac's daughter defy her mother and learn to fly? Will the Colonel leave the
Air Force to make big money in the aerospace industry?  Will the 8-year-old son
overcome his psychological problems? On the other hand, will anyone care about
these things one way or the other? ''Call to Glory'' works best when it is
aloft, and even Keenan Wynn, playing Colonel Sarnac's father, makes a wonderful
entrance in an old open-cockpit biplane, lovingly restored, shiny red, with an
aluminum spinner.  And a larger question, too: How will patriotism play in 1984?
Recent television images - crowds chanting ''U.S.A. all the way'' at the
Olympics, Democratic delegates waving flags during their convention - suggest
that it may play very well indeed. It is possible that ''Call to Glory'' is
reflective of the national mood. If it is, and if it stays in the air, not on
the ground, it may be around for a while.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MUSIC;
OPERAS THAT AREN'T BROKEN SHOULD NOT BE FIXED

BYLINE: By Donal Henahan

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1266 words


Folk wisdom, the sediment of centuries of trial and error, tends to settle into
terse commands.  ''Close cover before striking.'' ''Refrigerate after opening.''
''Face ladder descending.'' ''Dont (sic) walk.'' ''Yield.'' ''Call your
mother.'' Man never thinks so clearly, it seems, as when he is in an imperative
mood. Consider the simple beauty of the pragmatist's motto, ''If it ain't broke,
don't fix it.'' That's a warning that should be printed on the title page of
every opera in the standard repertory, right there where stage directors might
read it, if they should ever happen to open the score.

There are, granted, operas that seem to require some sort of fixing at certain
stages of their histories. Raymond Leppard did a service to Monteverdi and
Baroque opera in general back in the early 1960's when he revised and prettied
up the score of ''L'Incoronazione di Poppea'' for a Glyndebourne production
that, in recorded form, brought a neglected masterpiece wide public attention.
Nowadays, more faithful versions of ''Poppea'' are current throughout the opera
world, but the Leppard arrangement served a purpose as a bridge between
Monteverdi's time and ours.

Richard Strauss had a similar aim in 1930 when he made his modernized version of
''Idomeneo,'' which is to be dusted off on Friday and Saturday evenings at the
Mostly Mozart Festival under Gerard Schwarz's direction. Strauss explained in a
letter to his stage director, Bruno von Niessen, that he had ''always
entertained the idea of bringing the eternal beauty of this work of Mozart's
closer to the really serious, art-loving audience,'' but that ''because of its
diffused and unclear text 'Idomeneo' cannot be performed anymore in its original
form.'' Strauss felt that merely cutting out the ''endless'' recitatives and
''too-long musical sections'' was not enough to bring the work closer to the
audience. So Strauss had Lothar Wallenstein work up a completely new libretto
and he himself recomposed all the recitatives and added a few musical numbers of
his own.

In our Mozart-worshipping time, Strauss's tinkering with the holy writ may smack
of vandalism. After all, ''Idomeneo'' can now be heard both on records and in
many opera houses in something reasonably near to Mozart's version. But it may
be argued that ''Idomeneo'' was virtually unknown to the public when Strauss
undertook to rescue it from history's trash pile. A practical man of the
theater, he could not believe that Mozart's opera was merely out of fashion. He
thought it was broke and that he could fix it.

There are many other examples of such well-meaning updating and modernizing,
some of them by artists of Olympian stature. At the Waterloo Festival recently,
Mr. Schwarz revived the adaptation of ''Iphigenie in Aulide'' that Wagner made
in an attempt to popularize Gluck's opera. Wagner also hoped, with his usual eye
for public relations, to identify his own reforming efforts with the work of
Gluck, the great opera reformer. Berlioz, another crusader and Gluck admirer,
drastically rearranged both ''Orfeo'' and ''Alceste,'' ostensibly to accommodate
the mezzo-soprano Pauline Viardot-Garcia, but probably with motives as mixed as
Wagner's.

In our day, the task of fixing supposedly broken operas has passed out of the
hands of great composers. Now it is the stage director who undertakes the job.
Rather often, he becomes all too truly the undertaker. The perplexing difficulty
is that the hand of the adapter and modernizer is now usually turned to the most
popular works in the repertory rather than to neglected masterpieces. We have
clearly passed beyond the rationale of artistic need. And so we have Patrice
Chereau's ''Ring,'' Jonathan Miller's ''Rigoletto,'' Joseph Losey's ''Don
Giovanni,'' Ken Russell's ''Madama Butterfly,'' and a dozen touched-up
''Carmens,'' including Peter Brook's shrunken version and Frank Corsaro's new
updating of Bizet for the City Opera. These are productions of varying
intelligence and perspicacity, but they share one quality: they propose to fix
what isn't broken. With the way the ''Ring'' has been faring lately at Bayreuth,
perhaps caution must be exercised in its case, but no one pretends that
''Carmen'' or ''Butterfly'' or ''Rigoletto'' needs to be rescued from oblivion.

What must be hoped for from such drastic adaptation, then, is some fresh insight
into the work, achieved without tearing it apart in the process. The recent
Peter Sellars butchering of ''Cos i Fan Tutte'' at the Castle Hill Festival
showed how far this director, at least, is prepared to go in recasting a great
work in his own image. The elaborately inapt choreography, seemingly a
conflation of ideas derived from Kabuki and Ken Russell's ''Boy Friend,''
achieved the seemingly impossible: it turned one of Mozart's most emotionally
potent works into vaudeville. And pointlessly dull vaudeville, at that.
Allusions in the staging and in the program notes (though not in the musical
performance itself) to Vietnam, Nicaragua and war protests were offhand and
superficial, never pursued seriously. The point of the production was simply to
let Mr. Sellars show off his now-familiar repertory of campy gestures and
marionette tricks. His way of making fun of the music by accompanying it with
incessant hand gestures was particularly revealing. Mr. Sellars is clearly not
ready to approach anything so many-leveled as ''Cos i,'' except perhaps on the
level of collegiate parody.



Making a silly joke of ''Cos i'' is particularly unfortunate, since it is one of
those undisputed masterpieces that the general operagoing public never has taken
to. Some sort of discreet updating might be justified, therefore, though only if
the work's wonderful symmetry and subtle irony of spirit could be kept intact.
That said, I must add that the most intellectually satisfying and emotionally
nuanced production of the work that I have ever encountered was Jonathan
Miller's 18th century Rationalist version for Opera Theater of St. Louis two
summers ago. Here was a fresh look at an old score, but a reasoned one.

''Cos i,'' however, has been revised, readapted, retreaded and reclaimed so
often during the 194 years of its existence that it surely can survive even the
indiscretions of a Sellars. Because of its partner-trading theme, it used to be
considered too spicy to be played in the original form. In fact, the history of
''Cos i'' is the history of its bowdlerizations. In England, it first appeared
in timid and unsuccessful recastings as ''Tit for Tat, or the Tables Turned''
(1828) and ''The Retaliation'' (1841). The Germans, equally leery of the
volatile subject matter, began to revise ''Cos i'' immediately after the first
performances there. Some versions used a totally different libretto, others
toned down or reshaped the text to avoid the taint of immorality and
promiscuity. In the 1941 Peters edition, inexpensively available now in the
Dover score series, the editor mentions a few landmarks along the opera's way in
Germany. In one version, the two duped males appear as mere friends of the
ladies, not their sacredly pledged fiances. Every moralist and philosopher from
Treitschke to Devrient seems to have taken a shot at it. ''Cos i'' once turned
up, for instance, in a version drawn by Karl Scheidemantel from Calderon's ''La
Dama Duende.'' But all of these experiments and many similar ones were failures,
George Sch"unemann writes: ''It was only the restoration of the original form in
the version by Karl Niese (1871) that gave new impetus to the opera.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Anthony Newman

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA'S ACTIVIST BISHOPS

BYLINE: By Eugene Kennedy; Eugene Kennedy is a professor of psychology at Loyola
University in Chicago. His next book, ''The Now and Future Church,'' will be
published in September.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6058 words


WHY DOESN'T A NICE MAN LIKE ARCHbishop Weakland stick to his prayers and leave
business affairs to us?'' asks a Milwaukee jeweler. Throughout the country,
similar questions float on a rising tide of apprehension about what Archbishop
Rembert G. Weakland of Milwaukee and the committee of bishops he heads are up to
as they compose a set of religious reflections, or pastoral letter, on Roman
Catholic social teaching and the United States economy.

Accustomed to episcopal letters that have been as forgettable as Sunday sermons,
many American Catholics were surprised, even thunderstruck, last year by their
bishops' letter on ''The Challenge of Peace: God's Promise and Our Response.''
Not only was its development as public as a space launching but its challenge to
the Reagan Administration and its advocacy of a nuclear freeze provoked heated
debate far beyond the borders of the Catholic community.

The news that the bishops are turning their attention to examining the free
market has alarmed bankers and businessmen and disturbed many of the faithful.
What next? Catholics and others hesitantly ask. A letter on the status of women
is next. And some knowledgeable observers predict that America's increasingly
activist bishops, moving into what they consider the vacuum left by the decline
of moral influence of the mainline Protestant churches, will continue to probe a
wide variety of sensitive social issues. Even before its completion, the letter
on the economy has stirred up Vatican misgivings about the American bishops'
self-confident independence in dealing with subtle contemporary issues and has
renewed the European bishops' skepticism of many of their American colleagues'
theological sophistication (box, page 17).

The pastoral letter now in preparation was proposed at a November 1980 meeting
of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops by Peter A. Rosazza, the
Auxiliary Bishop of Hartford, a member of the first generation of bishops formed
by, and imbued with the spirit of, the Second Vatican Council, which
legitimatized bishops as sources of moral reflection in their own cultures.
Bishop Rosazza says he was stimulated in part by the questions of European
priests critical of American economic imperatives. The letter on the economy was
viewed initially as a sequel to ''Marxist Communism,'' a largely theoretical,
little-noticed ''Christian reflection on the Marxist world view'' which the
bishops had just issued. But in the aftershocks of the nuclear pastoral, the
letter on the economy has become the subject of such intense and ambivalent
anticipation and debate that its all-but-finished first draft will not be
released until Nov. 12, the week after the Presidential election, so as to avoid
even the appearance of interference in campaign politics.

Some Catholics applaud the entrance of their religious leaders into sensitive
social and political areas, but others are concerned that through these pastoral
letters the bishops seem to be revising the traditional experience of
Catholicism to the point that many of the faithful will no longer feel
comfortable in the church. Others balk at being prodded to examine their
consciences on every current issue. They long for the pre-Vatican II days when,
as one big-city layman puts it, ''the bishops were like Dallas Cowboys coach Tom
Landry - they sent in the plays and we carried them out.''

Critics of the Catholic hierarchy speculate about the bishops' motivations. Are
they, like shrewd politicians attuned to their times, merely searching for a new
constituency among the poor, the powerless and liberally disposed intellectuals,
on which to consolidate their own positions of influence in American life? Has
the cohort of American bishops, mostly conservative Republican in pre-Vatican II
days, begun to flirt, like priests in the hills of the third world nations, with
Marxist solutions to social problems?

One White House adviser, fearing the worst, suggested that the Reagan
Administration, tardy in developing a response to the nuclear letter, had
''better be out front on this one,'' and that perhaps prosperous Catholics
should ''take a bishop to lunch.''

Administration aides concerned about the need to improve relations with the
Catholic hierarchy were disappointed when they were not able to assemble the
bishops for an en masse White House luncheon last November, during the prelates'
annual meeting in Washington. And negotiations early this year for a
Presidential luncheon and a briefing by Government officials for the newly
appointed Archbishops Bernard Law and John J. O'Connor, of Boston and New York,
large Catholic centers traditionally supportive of government policies, were
successful only when the invitation was broadened to include the four
administrators of the bishops' conference and the three incumbent active
American Cardinals: John Krol of Philadelphia, Joseph Bernardin of Chicago and
Timothy Manning of Los Angeles (who could not, finally, attend). The Reagan
Administration could take only minimal comfort from the meeting since the
churchmen voiced clear, though gentlemanly, dissent with the mining of
Nicaraguan waters directed by the Central Intelligence Agency.

THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN CENTRAL AMERICA and Vietnam is that the Catholic Church
stands between us and Central America,'' is how one Washington journalist
analyzes the Government's perception of the bishops' current moral influence.

William E. Simon, former Secretary of the Treasury, and Michael Novak, resident
scholar in religion, philosophy and public policy at the American Enterprise
Institute in Washington, have formed a lay group of influential believers to
write a defense of the American economic system. They are operating under the
aegis of the American Catholic Committee, a fluid grouping of traditional
Catholics concerned with what they perceive to be the liberal distortions of
Vatican II. The newly formed group, which also includes former Secretary of
State Alexander M. Haig Jr., former Ambassador to Italy Clare Boothe Luce and
former A.T.& T. president William Ellinghaus, has begun consulting with business
and economic experts in the preparation of its counter-pastoral letter. There
are reports of a division between those committee members who fear the bishops'
letter will be a ''hatchet job'' and so want their letter to be an outright
celebration of capitalism, and those who would rather not directly confront the
bishops but simply offer a parallel laymen's view.

Late last month, several committee members, including Mr.  Simon, J. Peter
Grace, chairman of W.R. Grace & Company, and former Secretary of the Interior
Walter Hickel, now a businessman in Alaska, flew to Milwaukee to assure the
chairman of the bishop's committee that theirs is a loyal opposition. In summing
up the meeting, Mr. Novak said, ''We are eager to cooperate with the bishops.''
He then went on to note that the lay committee's letter would be ''in the form
of an advisory rather than of a comment'' on the bishops' pastoral. To emphasize
this, the lay committee plans to release its letter a bit before the bishops
make their first draft public, but also after the Presidential election.

Several business magazines have already previewed the anticipated tone of the
bishops' letter in harsh terms. Fortune predicted that the bishops will opt for
socialistic measures because ''socialism gives them a role to play, while
capitalism - reliance on impersonal market forces - leaves them out in the
cold.'' Within the church, critics on both the left and right wonder if the
bishops have adequately assessed the vulnerability of their position as leaders
of a church that for centuries has possessed great financial and material
resources, some of which is earning a pleasant return in the capital markets.
And while they're at it, the critics suggest, why don't they ask Pope John Paul
II about the scandal-ridden Vatican bank, formally known as the Institute for
Religious Works?

In Rome, curial officials have expressed concern about the public and widely
consultative manner in which the bishops have been preparing their pastoral
letters. In Belgium, a University of Louvain professor of sociology, Michel
Schooyans, believed to be reflecting the view of Belgian Archbishop Jan P.
Schotte, Secretary of the Pontifical Commission on Justice and Peace and a close
adviser to Pope John Paul II, implied in a recent article in Le Libre Belgique,
that such an approach, precisely because it is the outcome of the cooperative
discussions that characterize the collegial process, weakens the magisterium -
the teaching authority of the church, shared by the pope and the hierarchy - and
runs the risk of ''sowing confusion and division.''

NONE OF THE CRITICISMS SEEM TO BOTHER THE CHAIRMAN OF THE committee preparing
the letter on the economy as he rises to greet a visitor in an office as sparely
and plainly furnished as the cell of his original calling as a Benedictine monk.
Wisconsin sunlight falls gently on a framed quotation that hangs above
Archbishop Weakland's desk, giving a hint of third-world sympathies: ''The cry
of liberation of these people is a clamor that ascends to God nothing nor no one
can stop.'' The words are those of Archbishop Oscar Romero of El Salvador, slain
by a right-wing death squad while offering mass four years ago.

Archbishop Weakland touches a finger to the bridge of his glasses and speaks
reflectively: ''We are living at a time in which we must re-imagine the Catholic
Church. It isn't easy but it is necessary for every Catholic. We must examine
our own moral convictions, work them through in the light of the Gospel so that
we hold them deeply for ourselves.''

As he settles himself back into his chair, Milwaukee's prelate addresses the
controversy surrounding the pastoral letters. The bishops, he insists, ''are not
writing for political reasons. If we were, we would hardly have taken the
positions that we have in defense of human life all across the board. We end up,
after all, with right-wing Republicans in our stand against abortion, and with
left-wing liberal Democrats when we condemn capital punishment. The bishops
aren't staking out political territory. We want to begin serious discussions
from a moral viewpoint on the major issues of our times.'' It isn't easy, he
concedes, but ''being a Catholic in this generation means that you have to think
deeply about all these questions.''

Archbishop Weakland's successful chairing of a committee on liturgy identified
him as a bishop who could work well with his colleagues and that, to Archbishop
John R. Roach, of Minneapolis-St. Paul, then president of the bishops'
conference, made him a highly acceptable candidate to head the committee on the
letter about the economy.

Archbishop Weakland sips a mug of Brim as he continues. ''We welcome the
Catholic members of the business community who want to join the dialogue on the
economy. It's their obligation to take this seriously, to listen to as many
voices, especially the poor, as the bishops have.''

''The business community should not be considered the whipping boy in this
letter,'' the Archbishop says softly, gazing toward Lake Michigan beyond the
windows of his office. ''It is unfair that they be that. We have a long
tradition of social teaching and a succession of papal encyclicals on labor
going back to the last century.'' He recalls an era during which, as Msgr. John
Tracy Ellis, current dean of American church historians, has noted, ''American
workingmen were befriended by the Catholic bishops as by no other group.'' A
prime example was James Gibbons of Baltimore, who used the occasion of being
invested as a cardinal in Rome in 1887 to deliver a defense of the Knights of
Labor, a nationwide organization which aided various groups in strikes and
boycotts. That tradition of support, Monsignor Ellis has pointed out, extended
to priests who led marches for improved wages and working conditions for their
immigrant flocks and included social philosopher Msgr. John A. Ryan, whose
writings on labor influenced the New Deal policies of Franklin D. Roosevelt.

Archbishop Weakland notes that ''the labor encyclicals of Popes Leo XIII and
Pius XI were very significant when labor questions were on the front burner in
this country, but they disappeared as Catholics moved into the professions, the
middle class and the suburbs.'' As they oversaw the vast building of churches
and schools that led to that social ascent by large numbers of American
Catholics, the bishops became more conservative in their financial outlook.
Today's bishops, who came of age during Vatican II, assumed leadership in a very
different set of economic circumstances, and that has caused them to be more
critical of possible flaws in the earlier unquestioned system.

The pastoral on the economy now in preparation, Archbishop Weakland explains,
will draw heavily on the labor encyclicals of John XXIII, Paul VI and John Paul
II, which demanded a broadened frame of reference for making moral decisions on
economic matters, and those of the earlier popes, which addressed the dignity
and rights of workingmen not only to a living wage but to union representation.

WORKING WITH 57-YEAR-OLD ARCHBISHOP Weakland in the formulation of the letter
are committee members Thomas A. Donnellan, the 70-year-old Archbishop of
Atlanta, who began his church career under the financially conservative tutelage
of the late Francis Cardinal Spellman; 72-year-old George H. Speltz, who holds a
graduate degree in economics and social philosophy and serves as Bishop of St.
Cloud, Minn., a heavily Catholic area with a liberal Democratic tradition;
49-year-old Bishop Rosazza, who works with the poor in the Waterbury area while
carrying on dialogues with business executives throughout Connecticut, and
William K. Weigand, 47, who after 10 years as a pastor in Colombia, South ,'' he
declares.

''Our last area is economic planning and policy. Not so much what but who is
involved. If you look at it closely, you recognize that we have a planned
economy. But it's just the Government that does the planning. One of the most
challenging statements in John Paul II's 'Laborem Exercens' is that the dignity
of the workers demands that they have a part in the decisions that affect their
lives.'' The Archbishop's emphasis makes it obvious that the current Pope's
thinking, which some critics label as socialistic in its claims that workers
have a right to share not only in the business profits but in its means of
production as well, will have a strong influence in the letter's development.
''Big business,'' Archbishop Weakland says, ''is very concerned about what we
say in this area.''


In a private room on the second floor in the brick fastness of Milwaukee's
University Club, retired Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt Jr., former Chief of Naval
Operations, now chairman of American Medical Buildings, inspects, from beneath
sprigged brows, the top executives of three local companies, gathered to discuss
the bishops' letter.  ''When the bishops say not to get too excited, that's a
smokescreen,'' Admiral Zumwalt declares in a voice deep and sharp enough to
carry through a hurricane. He accuses the prelates of ''grossly oversimplifying
the issues in their letter on war and peace.'' As he snaps open his napkin, he
adds, ''I hope they do better this time.''

At the far end of the table, William H. Brady Jr., chairman of an adhesive
manufacturing concern that bears his name, leans forward to say that to him
''the fundamental thing is the bishops' elemental competence. I'm a convert to
Catholicism, but may I say that the Catholic Church has a nonrecord - I won't
even say it's dismal - of competence in the discipline of economics.''

Leon T. Kendall, chairman of the Mortgage Guaranty Insurance Corporation, also a
Catholic, speaks carefully as he says, ''The bishops will advocate social
planning that doesn't work. France is our best current example. You must permit,
you cannot order, choice.'' He clears his throat. ''I will read the bishops'
letter respectfully, understand its heritage, and will then go about my
business.''

Though a non-Catholic, William L. Law, president of the Cudahy Tanning Company,
has studied papal statements on capital and labor. ''It may be implicit in the
bishops' approach,'' he observes dryly, ''that the actions of businessmen are
arbitrary. But the businessman cannot be arbitrary. If he pays above the market,
ceteris paribus'' - other things being equal - ''he is expelled. He is not a
captain, he is a pilot. The consumer is the captain.''

Admiral Zumwalt glances at his outsize Navy watch as he rejoins the discussion.
''The bishops seek to appeal to the good in man,'' he says. ''It makes them
unrealistic, as when they called for a nuclear freeze, something that would
increase the dangers of war. They fail to see that what works most efficiently
is that which flows from greed.''

''I'm afraid,'' Mr. Brady says slowly, that ''the bishops don't understand that
real wealth comes from productivity.''

''They don't understand capital formation,'' Mr. Law interjects, ''and if they
perceive wealth, they think it should be distributed. But it is of much greater
value to everybody to increase it.''

''I don't go to mass,'' Mr. Brady says, ''to get a social message from the
priest.'' Laughter erupts when he concludes with, ''I go there to be pulled up
short.''

Mr. Kendall's smile fades. ''The bishops' capacity to impact on men in business
is slight, but they can have a real impact on those passing through their
Catholic schools.''

''The Pope has infiltrated me from below,'' Admiral Zumwalt says good-naturedly.
''I'm not Catholic, but I have four Catholic grandchildren. They may learn to
despise the system I'm a part of.''

Mr. Kendall touches his finger to his jaw. ''Archbishop Weakland's monastic
background affects his view of the economic system. In a monastic community, you
have a vow of poverty. Reasonable harmony comes out of the system - somebody
cooks, somebody sews, everybody has something to do. Now that's the system that
Weakland selected and grew up in. That's socialism. It doesn't train you to see
the virtues of the market system.''

The Milwaukee businessmen consider themselves inheritors of a long, pragmatic
yet moral tradition that bases its operation on the principle, accepted by St.
Thomas Aquinas, that the conditions of supply and demand in an open market
determine a ''just price'' and, as a common estimate of value, exclude
exploitation.

A few days later, 90 miles south along Lake Michigan, Walter E. Auch looks down
from another private luncheon club at the sparkling towers of Chicago. Mr. Auch,
chairman and chief executive officer of the Chicago Board Options Exchange,
speaks as a bittersweet Everyman for Catholic businessmen uneasy about the
pastoral letter in progress.

''This won't be a document presented by the bishops, but a document presented by
the media,'' says Mr. Auch, a Catholic. ''I have grave concern for its impact on
the system. And equally grave concern for its impact on the church and its
priorities.'' He sips his coffee, but will not be comforted. ''What I've
learned,'' and he locks his eyes on those of his luncheon companion, ''is that
the bishops' style is to look for me when they want donations, but not to seek
my counsel.'' He taps the table impatiently. ''I don't want them to put me in a
position where I feel driven away from a faith I've worked harder at than my
business.''


A few blocks north of Milwaukee's University Club, Jack Murtaugh and Patrick
Flood, both former Catholic priests, work together at the Greater Milwaukee
Conference on Religion and Urban Affairs, sponsored by 13 interfaith religious
groups to promote an ongoing dialogue between business and religious leaders on
the ethical dimensions of such issues as closing plants without warning.

''The hierarchy of business is very rigid,'' says Mr. Murtaugh. ''And the higher
they get, the more careful they are. They wonder what the boss thinks of
everything they do. How do they bring a faith dimension to the bottom line?
It's difficult, because they take their work environment as a given, as
something beyond questioning from the viewpoint of values.''

Mr. Flood feels that ''what businessmen mostly want to do is educate religious
leaders to their view of things.''

The two seem more like weary pastors than angry revolutionaries. Businessmen,
Mr. Murtaugh says, would ''like bishops to bless the economy, the way they used
to bless battleships. But we're in such a period of transition and it is
affecting so many people, and the churches are the only institutions strong
enough to provide the forum for an in-depth examination of the moral issues
involved. I think that's what Archbishop Weakland personifies on the national
level.''

Oklahoma Avenue runs as smooth as a ruler's edge through Milwaukee's south side.
As he drives down it, Earl Lepp, secretary-treasurer of the Milwaukee County
Labor Council, A.F.L.-C.I.O., recites a mournful litany of the closed factories
along the route. ''McQuay-Perfex is for sale, and the Caterpillar Tractor
Company there will close next year. That'll be another 500 jobs lost. Patrick
Cudahy may close. We project that by 1985, southeast Wisconsin will be down over
72,000 manufacturing jobs from the 1979 levels.''

His companion, Kenneth A. Germanson, director of communications and legislation
for the Allied Industrial Workers of America, A.F.L.- C.I.O., speaks of his own
union's loss of 91 plants and roughly one-third of its membership in the last
five years.

Their car pulls up at Ye Old Dinner Bell, a small restaurant once noisy every
noontime with customers from the nearby plants. The mood during the labor
leaders' meal is like that following a friend's funeral: He's dead, what can you
say now?

Labor feels suddenly alone. ''You can't count on any party,'' Mr. Lepp says,
adding that the unions are also not sure just what the Catholic Church, their
one-time staunch supporter, will do to help.

''Archbishop Weakland has let us organize in the institutions under his control,
but it hasn't always been that way,'' Mr. Lepp says in a reference to the
conflicts that ensued when labor tried to organize workers in Catholic schools
and hospitals. ''Still, we welcome the bishops' getting into this,'' he
continues. ''I just hope that it won't be too little and too late.''

Mr. Germanson points out that the Catholic Church supported Cesar Chavez and
farm workers, that bishops played prominent roles in securing union gains during
strikes against J.P. Stevens and the Farah Manufacturing Company, as well as in
seeking worker ownership for closing steel plants in Youngstown, Ohio.

But Mr. Lepp says that the bishops now ''have to recognize how the middle class
is suffering, how the poor are dropping out completely. They must do something.
The real crunch is coming for young people who will be just hitting their stride
at the turn of the century. We need the bishops' help now.''


You can buy The Business Journal from a newspaper vending box in front of the
St. John's Cathedral rectory, where Archbishop Weakland lives in a modest suite
of rooms made smaller by tiers of books and a Mason & Hamlin grand piano. He
tells a visitor of knowing hard times during his Depression-era childhood in
Patton, Pa. The small family-operated hotel burned down when he was a very young
child and his father died shortly thereafter, leaving his schoolteacher mother
to raise six children on her own.

When he entered the Benedictine order, his baptismal name of George was changed
to Rembert. After his ordination in 1951, he continued his studies at Columbia
University and at the Juilliard School. The lure of music was strong, he
confesses, but, ''I felt I couldn't spend my life entertaining, and I went on
without looking back.'' For a time, he maintained direct links to the world of
music by writing liner notes for classical record albums.

At 40, he became Abbot Primate of the Benedictines. At 50, he was named
Archbishop of Milwaukee by Pope Paul VI, an admirer of the Benedictines.

Amid the criticism, a visitor suggests, the Archbishop seems remarkably serene.
''Yes, I am,'' he responds with an easy laugh. ''My job as Abbot Primate was to
deal with cultural pluralism on a worldwide scale. I had to keep people talking
to each other. That's a big part of the way the American bishops deal with
issues. They want to get as many capable people involved in major issues as
possible. That process of dialogue is an integral part of who we are.''

That process has led Archbishop Weakland and his committee through dozens of
consultations with a wide range of experts: economists, including former
Presidential economic advisers Charles L. Schultze and Herbert Stein;
businessmen, including several executives from General Motors; academics;
theologians; labor leaders, such as Thomas R. Donahue, secretary-treasurer of
the A.F.L.-C.I.O., and leaders of other religions. They have also received
written comments from a variety of interested parties. The Catholic faithful
will participate through diocesan symposiums that will precede a second draft of
the letter in the spring of 1985. After suggested amendments have been received
and evaluated, a final version will be prepared and presented for a vote by the
bishops' conference in November 1985. The letter will then be sent to every
bishop for distribution to all his parishes, and to diocesan offices and major
Catholic organizations and publications in the United States.

Archbishop Weakland will journey to Rome this September to give Pope John Paul
II a private oral briefing on the first draft. This is an example of the tight
security the bishops have maintained on the drafts of this document. Their
sensitivity was heightened when the confidential minutes of a January 1983
meeting were distributed widely by a high curial official to all the American
bishops. These concerned discussions of the approaches of the American, French
and West German hierarchies to the application of general moral principles to
specific issues, such as nuclear deterrence. Their distribution was interpreted
as an effort to influence the American discussions and the early May vote on the
final draft of the letter on war and peace.

The exhaustive, some say exhausting, process of preparing the pastoral letters
has raised the eyebrows of curial officials in Rome who fear that conferences of
bishops in different countries issuing documents that are in conflict, as the
Americans were with the French and West Germans on the question of nuclear
deterrence, may generate uncertainty about who speaks authentic doctrine.

Pope John Paul II is thought to share the view of many European bishops that
their American counterparts are too energetic to be taken seriously as
intellectual leaders in the world church. The Europeans are nettled by the
American temperamental commitment to open discussion and debate - the habits of
their lives in a pluralistic society - on questions of ecclesiastical policy.

Archbishop Weakland points out that critics abroad ''want a strongly
hierarchical model of the church. The U.S. bishops believe in a model of the
church in which the Holy Spirit resides in all its members, and that the
hierarchy must listen to what the Spirit is saying to the whole church. That
strengthens the teaching authority of the bishops, as it ultimately does that of
the magisterium. We emphasize discernment,'' he stresses, ''not just innovation
or self-reliance, as an integral part of the teaching process.''

As he talks, the Archbishop rises and walks over to his piano. ''There is no
question,'' he says, ''that the church must also examine itself and its
practices as an economic actor with the same kind of responsibilities as any
kind of big business.''

He straightens the sheaf of music on the piano before continuing. ''We are
really raising the same questions that Pope John Paul II has, particularly in
his talks in the last year in such countries as Mexico, Korea, Brazil and Haiti.
We have to think in international, global terms. The church is already a
multinational moral force and so it is already in place to examine and speak
about the moral implications of economic issues.''

He raises his hand, as if to fend off an objection. ''If the church in the past
has neglected to say much about productivity and should do so now, that still
doesn't take away its need to talk about a more equitable distribution of
wealth.''

He lingers a moment longer next to the piano, which he often plays before
dinner. ''The accusation that monasticism breeds socialism,'' he says softly,
''is interesting when you remember that the roots of Western civilization came
out of that monastic experiment. Our concern for the land, for people, for our
resources, all of that.'' He smiles. ''That sounds like a good challenge for any
society.''

Though they would appreciate a little more encouragement from the Pope, most
American bishops remain confident of his support for the basic concept of
pastoral letters, which they feel echo his own themes. But those prelates who
made their mandatory five-year visits to Rome last summer were surprised to find
the Pontiff sidestepping discussions about the peace pastoral they had just
issued, saying that he had not yet had time to read it fully. Some thought his
hesitancy may have resulted from a sensitivity to European political conditions,
or to fears that to take a stand would bring about conflicts between various
national conferences of bishops. Others wondered if some of the attacks that
have been leveled at American church leaders in recent years by conservative
believers have caused the Pope to question the depth and rigor of American
Catholic commitment.

The Pope's appointment of John J. O'Connor to the highly important archbishopric
of New York is viewed by some interpreters of the American ecclesiastical scene
as an effort to balance the hierarchy's activism with a man regarded as an
energetic conservative.

Archbishop O'Connor, however, strongly identifies himself with the bishops'
conference and has a track record of collegial participation, particularly in
the development of the 1983 peace pastoral. Although he represented traditional
national-security interests as the former head of naval chaplains, he has
publicly supported the final nuclear pastoral on a number of occasions. And
those who looked to him to lead dissent against the present leadership of the
American church have instead seen Archbishop O'Connor develop a close working
relationship with Cardinal Bernardin of Chicago and give strong support to the
bishops' right to prepare a letter on the American economy. He is also a
champion of trade unions, in which his father was an active leader.

In order to improve communications with Vatican administrative offices, the
American bishops are contemplating opening a lobby- like office in Rome, on the
model of those already operated by national conferences of bishops from Central
America and Poland. They also hope that during the Pope's next visit to the
United States, possibly as early as next year, opportunities will be built into
his schedule for ''dialogues'' with representative Catholics in order to deepen
papal understanding of the American mentality.


At this significant time in its history, the bishops' conference of the United
States stands at the center of a number of vectors of force: Well- organized
efforts to enlist sympathies for the capitalist system, paired with the
possibility of growing alienation among affluent Catholics; harsh criticism from
highly conservative Catholic papers, such as the Minnesota-based Wanderer, which
has suggested that some American bishops are in schism; wary eyes cast by some
European bishops and Vatican officials, and a charismatic Pope with a measured
response to the American bishops, even as they insist they are developing his
own ideas.

''Religious leaders,'' Archbishop Weakland says, ''have a tough time knowing at
what moment they should be prophetic and challenging, and at what time they
should be healing and comforting. Keeping these in balance is exactly what
bishops are called to do.'' $

IN EUROPE, A FEAR OF PARTISANSHIP

A LEADING ROMAN Catholic bishop in Western European recently invited three
Americans to his residence. The talk was light, wide-ranging, rather
noncommittal. Suddenly, the bishop changed to a more serious subject. What, he
asked his guests, could they tell him about the document on the economy that his
American counterparts were preparing?

Their answer was ''little,'' and the bishop seemed disappointed. Quickly, he
made clear that, on the basis of his information, the document was going to be
controversial. He did not use terms like ''left'' or ''right,'' but he suggested
that it would have a clear political character. His discretion, his loyalty to
his church, precluded any direct criticism of his American colleagues and their
enterprise, but his message was unmistakable: He expected something partisan,
and he did not approve.

Although there are wide variations in individual national positions,
particularly in West Germany and the Netherlands, Western Europe's bishops are
rather more conservative than their American counterparts. There is no European
church document that coincides philosophically with the American bishops' call
for a halt to production, testing and development of nuclear weapons; by
contrast, it would seem barely conceivable that the American episcopate could
say, as the French bishops did last November in a letter entitled ''Win the
Peace,'' that nuclear deterrence is legitimate because of the ''aggressive and
dominating character of Marxist-Leninist ideology.''

Jacques Jullien, Bishop of Beauvais, explained the French position this way:
''We're dancing on the brink. In this situation of extreme distress, the choice
is between non- war and slavery - the gulag or Finlandization - and we are
picking something better than nothing.''

Talking privately, some European Catholics have expressed irritation about the
American bishops' attitudes, not so much because the Euoropeans consider the
American views illegitimate, but because they seem distorting factors in Europe,
taken out of the context and give-and-take of American debate. The Europeans are
not sure that the Americans' positions reflect the attitudes of the majority of
Catholic opinion in the United States, but they are often passed off as such in
discussions in Europe.

IN DEALING WITH THE ECOnomic crisis in a declaration called ''For New Modes of
Life,'' issued in September 1982, the French episcopate said: ''In acknowledging
the legitimacy of political pluralism among Christians, the French bishops
affirm in the name of the faith that they cannot solely support this or that
option, and that they do not possess the solution to crises or a model for the
happy society.''

Rather than proposing broad solutions, the French bishops asked specific
questions about a society obsessed with its material circumstances, saying that
''systematically critical attitudes, full of prejudices'' really hid a refusal
to deal with economic problems in practical terms. The French said that seeking
subsidies from the state was not always justified, and pointed to attitudes
''that are not always honest or reasonable'' concerning social security and
unemployment insurance. At the same time, they insisted that salaries are often
inadequate and that efforts had to be made to protect the incomes of the
disadvantaged.

In his definition of the church's role in economic matters, Jean- Marie Cardinal
Lustiger, Archbishop of Paris, took an assertive but nonideological line: ''The
church plays a political role when it has the courage to spell out the political
consequences of the spiritual demands of the Gospel. Confronting the economic
crisis, the church can strongly assist solidarity in the nation, in avoiding
some groups' selfish reflexes, and putting new modes of life into effect.''
-JOHN VINOCUR ; John Vinocur is chief of The Times's Paris bureau.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Fathers William Lewers, J. Bryan Hehir and David Hollenbach
(page 19); photo of bishop conference (page 19); photo of Bishop Peter A.
Rosazza (page 18); photo of Michael Novak, William E. Simon and Alexander M.
Haig Jr. (page 16); photo of Archbishop Rembert G. Weakland

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOOD;
PUTTING COCONUTS TO TASTY USE

BYLINE: By Craig Claiborne with Pierre Franey

SECTION: Section 6; Page 42, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1413 words

DATELINE: MY MOTHER WAS A fine and


in her community, at least - well-known maker of desserts, end-of- the-meal
sweets ranging from pecan and custard pies to Bavarian creams and eggnogs. I
admired all these things, but it was the coconut cakes - with their thick layers
of meringue and chenillelike tufts of freshly grated coconut - that tickled my
palate to the most salivating degree.

Travel and time have only deepened my early respect for the coconut. A few
months ago, I visited Brazil and in the state of Bahia I again sampled one of my
favorite Brazilian foods, xin xin de galinha, a saute of chicken with shrimp in
which a key ingredient is coconut milk. I was offered several recipes from
friends who know their way around the Brazilian cooking stove. When I returned
home, I was determined to experiment with the dish.

The wonder was where to find the coconuts locally on the eastern tip of Long
Island. I visited several grocery stores and supermarkets. To my great surprise,
I discovered that fresh whole coconuts were readily available in each of them.
The question then became, who eats all those coconuts and to what uses are they
put? Are they all used in cakes, pies, candies and coconut ice cream? Or are
there, perhaps, a multitude of neighbors who experiment with the foods of
Brazil, Indonesia and Thailand, countries where cooking with coconut milk is
basic.

In the enthusiasm of preparing that xin xin, I found myself with a slight
overabundance of coconut milk and discovered a first-rate dish of Thai origin
that is made with the milk and a blend of roasted sweet and hot red peppers. It
yields an excellent, somewhat smooth but peppery sauce to be served with a quick
saute of skinless, cubed, boneless chicken breasts.

I must add one note of caution. Although coconut milk is used in copious
quantities by many home cooks of many nationalities, it is rather high in
cholesterol and should be reserved for special feasting and not become a part of
the daily diet.


Xin xin de galinha (Braised Brazilian chicken with coconut milk) 2Rock Cornish
game hens,

about 1 1/2 pounds each 5tablespoons lemon juice 2cloves garlic, crushed

Salt to taste, if desired

Freshly ground pepper to

taste 1pound medium-size fresh shrimp, about 32, peeled

and deveined, 2tablespoons peanut, corn

or vegetable oil 1cup finely chopped onions 1tablespoon finely minced

garlic 3/4cup finely diced green

peppers 1 1/2cups diced, seeded fresh

tomatoes 3small, dried, hot red peppers 1bay leaf Ycup finely chopped fresh

coriander Ycup roasted peanuts Ycup whole roasted cashews 1/4to 1 teaspoon
dried, hot

red-pepper flakes 3/4cup coconut milk (see instructions for making coconut milk)
2tablespoons dende, or palm, oil

(see note) or 2 tablespoons olive

oil blended with 1/2 teaspoon paprika 1/2cup dried shrimp (see note).



1. *Cut the hens into serving pieces, discarding the backbones or putting them
to another use. Cut each leg crosswise in half. Cut each thigh crosswise in
half. Cut each breast crosswise in half. Cut off and discard the wing tips. Cut
each wing at the joint into two pieces.

2. *Put the pieces in a bowl and add two tablespoons of the lemon juice, one
clove of garlic, salt and pepper. Let stand 30 minutes.

3. *Put the fresh shrimp in a second bowl and add two tablespoons of the lemon
juice, the remaining clove of garlic, salt and pepper. Let stand 30 minutes.

4. *Heat the two tablespoons of oil in a heavy skillet or casserole and add the
chicken pieces, skin side down. Cook over moderately high heat until they are
browned on one side. Turn the pieces and continue cooking, turning often, until
the pieces are well browned on all sides.

5. *Add the onions, minced garlic and chopped green peppers. Cook, stirring,
until the mixture is wilted, about five minutes.

6. *Add the tomatoes, hot peppers, bay leaf, coriander and remaining one
tablespoon of lemon juice. Stir. Bring to the boil and cook 10 minutes.

7. *Put the peanuts and cashews into the container of an electric blender and
blend as finely as possible.

8. *Add the nuts, pepper flakes and coconut milk to the sauce and stir. Add the
dende oil or olive oil blended with paprika and reduce the heat. Cook about one
minute and add the dried and fresh shrimp. Cook, stirring, about two to three
minutes. Serve with rice.

Yield: Four to six servings.

Note: Dried shrimp and dende, or palm, oil are available in stores where
international foods are sold, including the Portuguese American Delicatessen,
112A Greenwich Avenue, and the International Groceries and Meat Market, 529
Ninth Avenue (at 40th Street), both in Manhattan.  Chicken with red-chili sauce
Thai-style) The sauce: 3sweet red peppers, about 1 pound 3or more hot red
peppers, about 1/8

pound (see note) 2cups coconut milk (see instructions for making coconut milk)
1teaspoon ground cumin 1teaspoon ground coriander

Freshly ground pepper to taste 2teaspoons fish sauce, available in

Oriental markets (see note) or

anchovy paste 1tablespoon white vinegar The chicken: 1 1/2pounds skinless,
boneless chicken

breasts

Oil for shallow frying The garnish:  1/4cup finely chopped fresh coriander
leaves 1/4cup finely chopped scallions.



1. *Preheat the broiler to high.

2. *Keep the hot and sweet peppers in separate batches. Place them on a rack and
put under the heat source.








 Let cook, turning often, until the peppers are burnt or charred all over, top
to bottom. Put the peppers in a paper bag and seal tightly. Let stand until cool
enough to handle. Peel the peppers and remove and discard the stems and seeds.

3. *Put the sweet peppers into the container of a food processor or electric
blender and blend thoroughly. There should be about one cup.

4. *Put the hot peppers into the container of the food processor or electric
blender and blend thoroughly. There should be about three to four tablespoons.

5. *Put the coconut milk in a saucepan and cook down to one and one-third cups.
Add the sweet pepper puree and blend. Add the hot pepper puree, one tablespoon
at a time, until it is seasoned to taste.

6. *Add the ground cumin, ground coriander, pepper, fish sauce or anchovy paste
and vinegar. Blend well and let simmer briefly.

7. *Cut the chicken breasts into flat, one-inch cubes. Pound each cube lightly
with a flat mallet to make each slightly flatter.

8. *Heat a very small amount of oil in a nonstick skillet and add the chicken
cubes. Cook, stirring, until the pieces have lost their raw look throughout. Do
not overcook.

9. *Add the chicken pieces to the sauce and heat thoroughly. Serve sprinkled
with chopped coriander leaves and chopped scallions.

Yield: Six to 10 servings.

Note: The hotness of small hot red peppers varies from pepper to pepper and crop
to crop. After you roast and puree the peppers, you should add the puree little
by little to achieve the hotness desired. You may freeze any leftover puree.

Fish sauce is a salty, widely used seasoning in Vietnam and Thailand. In
Vietnam, it is called nuoc mam and in Thailand, nam pla. It is widely available
in this country in shops that deal in fine imported Oriental merchandise How to
prepare coconut milk for cooking


The clear liquid that drains from cracked coconuts is not the coconut milk used
in cooking. To prepare coconut milk for cooking, preheat the oven to 300
degrees. Place one whole coconut (about one and one-half pounds) on a flat,
heavy surface. Using a heavy hammer or cleaver, crack the coconut so that it can
be divided into halves. Place these halves on a baking sheet and let bake about
20 minutes or until the white flesh starts to separate from the shells. Remove
the flesh with its dark outer coating. Using a swivel-bladed or straight paring
knife, cut away and discard this dark outer coating. Cut the white flesh into
cubes. Put the cubes into the container of a food processor or electric blender.
Add two cups of hot water. Blend thoroughly.

Line a mixing bowl with cheesecloth or a clean kitchen towel. Pour in the
coconut mixture. Lift up the sides of the cloth or towel and twist the corners.
Twist to extract as much liquid as possible from the ground flesh. You should
obtain about two and one-half cups of liquid.

MICHAEL GEIGER

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of coconut

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE;
PRINCIPLE VS. VALUE

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1209 words


''Words are the tokens current and accepted for conceits,'' wrote Francis Bacon
almost four centuries ago, ''as moneys are for values.''

Since Bacon's time, two of those words have added to their meanings. Conceit, in
the singular, now is most often taken to mean ''unwarranted pride'' rather than
''idea.'' And the word values, in the plural, is no longer limited to material
worth. The word values has become the all-embracing vogue term for ''God and
country,'' the work ethic, respect for family, coming to the dinner table with
your hair slicked down and your mouth watering for apple pie with a slab of very
American cheese.

Only a few years ago, principles were the big thing in politics; lately, that
word has been shunted aside for values, usually modified as family values. The
phrase traditional values is also used, by people who probably mean historical
values. What happened in American life that replaced principles with values?
What's the difference between the two words?

At the beginning was the principle: The Latin principium meant ''source, origin,
beginning.'' That came to mean a primary truth that formed the basis for other
beliefs and then to mean a rule for ethical conduct. The word, as well as the
kind of conduct it signified, was put forward by theologians.

Not so with values. Rooted in the Latin word for ''strength,'' the plural meant
what Bacon used it to mean: material worth. It gradually came to acquire a
meaning of intrinsic worth. And then, about 50 years ago, psychologists and
sociologists glommed on to the word and made it their own, until politicians
came along recently to adopt their meaning.

In this sociopolitical meaning, values are neither standards of intrinsic worth
nor eternal verities. They are relative, not universal: Sociologists used the
term to describe the behavior that is accepted by consensus. These values are
emphasized within the society and become central to each member's social
acceptance: For Titanic passengers, ''women and children first'' was a value,
while among some aborigines, ''kill only what you need to eat'' is a value.

Values can change but principles do not. David Guralnik, editor of Webster's New
World Dictionary, explains: ''Principles, being theological in origin, are
fixed, invariable, absolute, eternal. Values, being in a sense scientific, are
nontheological and therefore subject to change and alteration as the demands and
needs of a society change.''

A woman's place is in the home: That was once a value, but times and that value
have come a long way, baby. (Titanic passengers, both in recognition of cultural
developments and the Democratic candidate for Vice President, would now think of
editing their value to ''children first.'')

''If you work hard and play by the rules,'' said Geraldine Ferraro in her
acceptance speech at the Democratic Convention, ''you can earn your share of
America's blessings . . . . Those are the values I taught my students.''

The value system of one society puts a high worth on work; another society may
think of work as an unfortunate necessity and put a higher worth on the
contemplative life or chasing around.

Principles are what you stand for in life; values are what you stand around in
among your friends. Principles are stern and unyielding; values are warm and
supportive. I try to keep my fuddy-duddy political views out of these language
pieces, but the fact that principles are out and values are in says a lot about
politics in both parties today.

Counting Olympiads

''Isn't the Olympiad the years between the Olympic Games?'' asks Michael Antebi
of Brooklyn. ''If so, there are millions of coins with the error engraved on
them.''

The original meaning of Olympiad is ''the time between Olympic games'' and, in
this sense, an Olympiad would be equivalent to a United States Presidential
term. But most people, and all television announcers, take the Olympiad to mean
''the quadrennial celebration,'' a meaning that has a lineage of five centuries.
This newer meaning gets the gold medal.

The organizers of the 1984 games pushed an odd amalgam of Roman numerals and
English words in styling their event ''the XXIIIrd Olympiad.''

Sports columnist Dave Anderson of The New York Times reacted: ''Notice that the
organizers have added a blob of California culture, putting 'rd' after Roman
numerals. That's like putting guacamole on pizza. In L.A., you can get guacamole
on pizza.''

The New York Times style is ''the XXIII Olympiad,'' which is an improvement over
the nerd's rd but is not a complete representation of the spoken term. Upon
deliberation, I would write ''Olympiad XXIII,'' in the style of the Super Bowls,
or ''the Twenty-Third Olympiad,'' or ''the 23d Olympiad.'' Who ever heard of the
XXIIIrd Psalm? Or the XXIII Psalm? The eye should see what the internal ear
hears.


Zap, You're Alive

Zap has done it again.

This major slang coinage, the emergence of which has been tracked in this space,
is pressing ahead in its fight to become standard English. (You don't think an
imitative sound can make it? What about crunch, the sound of an icebreaker
moving through ice? That made it from an imitative sound to a standard verb and
now has spread to notoriety as a noun, as in ''Zap is coming to the crunch.'')

To recap (itulate has been scratched): Zap was coined by Philip Francis Nowlan,
the creator of Buck Rogers, in the late 1920's to describe the sound made by his
character's paralysis gun. During the Vietnam War, this example of onomatopoeia
was adopted by soldiers as a verb for ''to destroy or kill with a burst of
gunfire, flame or electric current,'' as the American Heritage Dictionary
defined it. It then made its way back to children's usage as in a kid's pointing
a finger, cocking a thumb, and announcing happily, ''Zap, you're dead!''

In the 1980's, owners of video recorders began using the word as a verb with a
meaning particularly appropriate to its paralysis-gun origin: to avoid, erase,
or stop the recording or playing back of a commercial.

Recently, under the headline ''Fighting Television 'Zapping,' '' Philip
Dougherty, advertising columnist of The New York Times, brought the term
up-to-date: ''Zapping, originally meant to describe the use of a TV
remote-control device to skip around the dial during commercial messages, now
has become a generic word to cover all use of technological advancement to
escape the advertising.''

Consumers, armed with a Buck Rogers weapon to defend themselves against
advertising saturation by Wilma the spokesperson and TV's grand viziers, can hit
their ''fast forward'' buttons when playing back a sponsored program and thereby
zap the commercials.

''The ultimate defense against being zapped,'' says adman Kenneth Roman,
speaking to a war council of his peers, many of them worried about the end of
advertising's era of uninterrupted intrusiveness, ''is to involve the viewer.''

Many of us are already involved and are just waiting for him to come on the
screen. We have the weapon and, thanks to Buck Rogers, the verb to immortalize
it.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS Fiction1

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1349 words


19

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932.  2

28

LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency.  3

15

2

FIRST AMONG EQUALS, by Jeffrey Archer.  (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
Three young men vie to be chosen Prime Minister by the Queen of England.  4

4

12

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.  5

3

23

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  6

7

22

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  7

6

11

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.  8

5

18

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  9

8

12

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.  10

10

5

THE GREMLINS STORYBOOK, by Mary Carey.  (Golden Books, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the current film ''Gremlins.'' 11

9

11

THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch.  (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The legends
of an old manor haunt four generations of an English family.  12

11

11

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Three witches wreak
havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town.  13



2

MACHINE DREAMS, by Jayne Anne Phillips.  (Seymour Lawrence/Dutton, $16.95.)
Small, ordinary moments in a family's life burst into unexpected meanings.  1412


19

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  1513

9

POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A
woman discovers the truth about her husband after he disappears.

Nonfiction 1

17

THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and David Horowitz. (Summit,
$20.95.) The dark as well as the glamorous side of four generations of a
prominent family.  2

29

WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The troubled life of the
late entertainer John Belushi.  3

3

6

IN GOD'S NAME, by David A. Yallop. (Bantam, $16.95.) A British journalist argues
that Pope John Paul I's death in 1978 was a case of murder.  4

4

10

THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent.  5

6

8

GOOD MORNING, MERRY SUNSHINE, by Bob Greene. (Atheneum, $14.95.) The syndicated
columnist's journal of his child's first year.  6

7

23

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard, $10.) The novelist recalls
her childhood in Mississippi.  7

5

13

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  8

9

47

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  9

12

22

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  10

10

14

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  11

8

4

D.V., by Diana Vreeland. Edited by George Plimpton and Christopher Hemphill.
(Knopf, $15.95.) Memoirs of the one-time ''Empress of Fashion.'' 12

13

9

POWERPLAY, by Mary Cunningham with Fran Schumer. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster,
$16.95.) The rise and fall of a woman executive at the Bendix Corporation.  13

11

3

REGGIE, by Reggie Jackson with Mike Lupica.  (Villard Books, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the controversial baseball player.  1414

15

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.  (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  15

14

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' television series.

Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

120

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

285

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  3

39

BOOK WITHOUT A NAME, by Kit Williams.  (Knopf, $10.95.) New picture story by the
author of ''Masquerade,'' offering a prize for the finder of the book's true
title.  4

4

19

WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE

DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard work updated in 1983.  5

5

4

GO FOR IT! How to Win at Love, Work, and Play, by Irene S. Kasorla. (Delacorte,
$13.95.) Advice from a psychologist.  The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all bookstores. In
Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that point, sales in
this category are not generally large enough to make a longer list statistically
reliable.  *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted
to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ARCHDUKE OF SARAJEVO: The Romance and Tragedy of Franz Feriinand of Austria, by
Gordon Brook-Shepard. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The first biography in English of
the Austrian whose assassination usherd in World War I.

A HANDBOOK FOR VISITORS FROM OUTER SPACE, by Kathryn Kramer. (Knopf, $15.95.) A
wonderful Pychonesque first novel that describes the end of the world, brought
about by a war no one seems to have have started.

IN ANOTHER COUNTRY, by Susan Kenney. (Viking, $13.95.) A strangely joyful movel
about the losses and pain suffered by a small-town Vermont wife and mother,
written in a cool and level tone that turns life's commonplaces into
distinguished fiction.

JOSEPHINE HERBST, by Elinor Langer. (Atlantic/Little, Brown,

$19.95.) A sensitive biography of a novelist (once ranked with

Hemingway) who passed from 20's bohemianism to 30's

radicalism to obscurity in the 40's, from which she now emerges.

LAST DAYS, by Joyce Carol Oates. (Dutton, $15.95.) Eleven stories

displaying Miss Oates's uncanny ability to penetrate different

states of consciousness; to her usual preoccupation with madness

and violence are added new, mature concerns.

SOMETHING OUT THERE, by Nadine Gordimer. (Viking, $15.95.) A distinguished
collection by the South African writer. A novella about a marauding baboon and
four terrorists, metaphors for her country's political troubles, and nine
stories..

TOUGH GUYS DON'T DANCE , by Norman Mailer. (Random House, $16.95.) A murder
mystery set in Provincetown, Mass. Seven corpses, booze, sand dunes, along with
such Mailer obsessions as God, the Devil, magic and assorted strange voices.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DAYS OF MAGIC AND DISASTER

BYLINE: By Herbert Gold

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words


Herbert Gold, who lives in San Francisco, is the author of the novel ''True
Love'' and other books.  THE HAIGHT-ASHBURY

A History.  By Charles Perry.  Illustrated. 306 pp. New York: Random
House/Rolling Stone Press. $16.95.

IF the planners of last month's Democratic convention had read an advance copy
of Charles Perry's

''The Haight-Ashbury,'' they might have hesitated

further before bringing their roadshow to San Francisco. But the Haight-Ashbury
episode is now history; this telling of it vividly evokes those ancient times
when flower power burst out of the postbeatnik crust on the youthy edge of
American life. The so-called Children's Crusade of the late 1960's was based on
a mixture of rock and roll, drugs, liberated sex, funny clothes, underground
publication, antiwar agitation, communal experiments, generous parental and
governmental entitlements, a demographic bulge of adolescence. This unparalleled
blend of idealism, opportunism, goofiness and a unique historical moment ignited
in a social climate that provided just the right mix of receptiveness and
opposition for a revolution. The forever-springtime climate of the Bay Area
helped too.

Now the revolution is over, both won and lost, as happens in the convulsions of
history. This book, by a journalist who has covered the scene over the years,
refrains from philosophy, offers a minimum of deep speculation about the
world-historical use or menace of flower power. Charles Perry has squeezed the
hot air out of the story and has bent himself to the task of describing the
events, personalities, conflicts and vagrant notions that characterized the
beginning of a turbulent national experience. ''The Haight-Ashbury'' might not
be ''Ten Days That Shook the World,'' but it's an exciting account by a survivor
who is both loyal to the charm of the magic moment and professionally equipped
to keep his cool.

Mr. Perry has chiefly organized his history around events in LSD use and rock
and roll performed by bands with white performers and funny names - the Grateful
Dead, the Jefferson Airplane. Every revolution has its predecessor stormlets and
the effects of acid were broadly related to those of marijuana, the drug of the
beatniks, but LSD is a far more invasive hallucinogen. The hordes riding into
the West to sample Owsley Blues, as pills manufactured by Augustus Owsley
Stanley 3d were known, sought something undisciplined, demonstrative, unquiet.
An existing folk music scene, which involved individual singers, acoustic
guitarists and small groups, gave way to electrical amplification. The run-down
Victorian houses of the Haight-Ashbury district were ready to receive converts
to the new drugs and the new music. There was space for the spacey.

Once the population was in place, it found new programs - providing free food
outdoors, protesting the Vietnam War and being kind to each other over sitar
music with herb tea. A middle-aged man I had known in Berkeley as a free-speech
and antiwar protester turned up in the Haight as an acid distributor. ''I'm not
putting down the Vietnam War,'' he said. ''After all, it brought us together.''
I also remember a young woman in a commune on Page Street explaining that her
group marriage, three women and seven men, had turned out to be the answer to
her parents' and the Judeo-Christian tradition's failures. ''How long has it
worked out so well?'' I asked. ''Since last Tuesday,'' she said.

Everything from religion to peace, city planning to a theatrical benefit,
feeding the poor to harassing the squares, justified grand outdoor rock
concerts.

Mr. Perry has done his research, showing how the straight world, police, media
and churches reacted to the phenomenon. The Gray Line organized hippie bus
experiences for tourists. The San Francisco police took an alternately
sympathetic and violent interest in the revolution in their midst; the city both
coped and failed to cope with the 1967 ''Summer of Love.'' Mr. Perry cites the
school newspapers of the psychedelic academy, particularly the very inventive
Oracle of San Francisco and the Berkeley Barb, and the free poetry,
proclamations and public service announcements handed out on street corners by
the Communications Company.

He has interviewed survivors, and includes a fascinating epilogue telling Where
They Are Now, those untamed creatures of the Panhandle and happenings and Golden
Gate Park who are now middle-aged Americans. He includes a detailed chronology
of the crucial year of 1967. The magic day of the great Human Be-In in Golden
Gate Park ended with 100,000 stoned revolutionaries watching a parachutist
floating through the late afternoon sky like an Icarus studiously making a deal
with gravity. This was the mother gathering that spawned Woodstock and Altamont
and inevitably brought money and exploitation to the ''youth market.''

While a subtext of nostalgia for the excitement of the times gives some
tenderness to his reporting, Mr. Perry does not skimp on disaster - drug deaths,
violence, profiteering, self-delusion, the full spectrum of rock and roll
psychedelic folly. But because he controls his nostalgia, he is fair even to the
people he despises. His presentation recreates the times and - for this reader -
stimulates a small firestorm of nostalgia too.


NOWADAYS, in the 80's, there may be a tinge of green in America but not really
enough to scare anyone or give any special hope. Many of the Hell's Angels who
patrolled the stage during the Human Be-In while handsome Timothy Leary chanted
his gospel - tune in, turn on, drop out - have since done prison time, as has
Mr. Leary, once of Harvard University, himself. Bob Dylan and Allen Ginsberg are
respectively over 40 and over 50 and have learned to trust some people over 30.
And on campuses, if you see someone in a tie-dyed T-shirt or garb of psychedelic
goofiness, he is sure to be a tenured professor.

The revolution was partly victorious and mostly postponed on account of history.
But this rapid, detailed, and accurate account ''exquisitely portrays,'' as
Charles Perry says about a work he cites, ''the psychedelic life in all its
anguish and aimless gorgeousness.'' Diggers, Janice Joplin, the I-Thou Coffee
House, Emmett Grogan, the Fillmore Auditorium, the Straight Theater, and
Chocolate George: R.I.P.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of flower child

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Truth About Agent Orange Vietnam veterans, says Rena Kopystenoski, a
veteran's wife, ''do not ask for money, but for the truth, for someone to admit
what has been done, and to try to stop what shall prove to be the beginning of a
nation of mutations.''

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 511 words


So she told United States District Judge Jack Weinstein at the hearings he
conducted in Brooklyn last week on the settlement of the Agent Orange case. Some
Vietnam veterans favor accepting the settlement. Others deride the $180 million
as a pittance and want to continue their suits against the herbicide's
manufacturers.

What is the truth about Agent Orange?

The herbicide was sprayed for 10 years over forests and roadsides in Vietnam to
reduce the enemy's cover and prevent ambushes. Whether justifiable or not, the
spraying probably saved the lives of many soldiers. But the herbicide was
contaminated with minute amounts of an impurity, dioxin, which the survivors
cite as the cause of their present illnesses.

Dioxin is a fearsome poison. But poisoning depends also on dose. The dioxin in
all the herbicide spread during 10 years of war, over 6 million acres, amounted
to just 368 pounds. Most of that stayed in the thick forest canopy, with about 5
percent reaching the ground.

Could soldiers in a sprayed forest, or even soldiers sprayed directly by
accident, have picked up a significant dose of dioxin? It's far from likely.
Could hazardous amounts of undegraded dioxin have accumulated in the soldiers'
environment? Conceivable, but in no way probable.

Complaints about Agent Orange didn't begin until six years after spraying had
ceased. Cancer apart, few known diseases have such a latency. And the diseases
and birth defects the veterans complain of are widespread throughout the
population.  The pilots who sprayed the herbicide were exposed to it daily. In
their tour of duty they received a thousand times more than would ground troops
by being sprayed directly. Yet a survey of the pilots' health completed last
February showed no unusual incidence of diseases, including the three dioxin is
thought most likely to cause.  Other studies still under way may reveal some
subtle pattern of ill health. But so far there's no reason to suppose either
that veterans were exposed to significant amounts of dioxin in Vietnam, or that
they have any symptoms for which dioxin might be the explanation.  How on earth
could so tenuous a case have ended in a $180 million settlement?  Don't blame
the veterans too much. They feel rejected, with reason, and their illnesses are
genuine, even if not yet provably different from other people's. Their fears and
grievances have been stoked by an avid legion of lawyers; nearly a thousand are
representing veterans in the Agent Orange case. They shaped their suit on a
shadow that grows fainter in the light of each new health study. They knew the
quality of the evidence, and the court should set their fees at the same.  The
settlement devised by Judge Weinstein is preferable - both for the veterans and
the chemical companies - to years of inconclusive and divisive litigation. The
Vietnam veterans can be reassured of the truth about Agent Orange. As for money,
they'd be well advised to accept the $180 million before too much more truth
accumulates.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DALLAS IS GIRDING FOR DELEGATES AND DEMONSTRATIONS

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 826 words

DATELINE: DALLAS


Thousands of demonstrators preparing to set up a tent city in Dallas before the
Republican National Convention promise to be good guests, and Dallas has
responded by providing basic amenities. It has also set aside several hundred
guest rooms - at the county jails.

Dallas District Attorney Henry Wade has asked prosecutors to evict prisoners at
county jails to make room for protesters expected to be arrested during the
convention.

Mr. Wade, who indicted Jack Ruby for shooting President Kennedy's assassin, Lee
Harvey Oswald, has also set up a high- speed computer system that can spit out
indictments at the rate of three pages a minute for things like assaulting a
police officer or marching without a parade permit. The clerk need only insert
the name of the defendant and the date.

Mr. Wade said in a telephone interview that the measures were simply
precautionary. ''You try to have some extra jail cells in case you need them,''
he said. ''Nobody knows if they're going to arrest one or a thousand. We've
never had a convention before.''

Permits for 28,000 Sought


Requests for more than a score of parade and assembly permits covering some
28,000 demonstrators have been filed with the city. Among the applicants are the
Ku Klux Klan, Vietnam veterans, Concerned Christians for Reagan and the World
Association of Iranian Monarchists.

Mr. Wade said, however, that the actual number of demonstrators would probably
be lower because many groups based their permit requests on inflated estimates.
Dallas officials have estimated there may be 5,000 to 6,000 demonstrators.

But the city is taking no chances. Besides clearing jail cells, it has set up
fenced compounds to hold large numbers of violators if it comes to that. A
helmeted, flak-jacketed riot squad has been on convention maneuvers for two
months. The Police Department's nine bomb-sniffing German shepherds, joined by
six from the Secret Service, will nose through the hotel rooms and other spots
visited by dignitaries. And there is a new fence around the convention center.

There are other arrangements that the city is not talking about for security
reasons.

Specter of Assassination


Haunting all of the security arrangements is the dark specter of Nov. 22, 1963,
when John F. Kennedy was assassinated here.

''I think Dallas thinks it's got to prove itself,'' said A. C. Greene, a Dallas
journalist and historian who has written several books about Dallas including
the recently published ''Dallas USA.''

''Part of it goes back to the assassination,''Mr. Greene said, ''but also,
Dallas wants to be seen as the supercity, the city of the future. I think
they're overreacting, but I don't think it's the assassination. This generation
has purged itself. The pall has dissipated.''

Mr. Greene said he thought the city executives ''want the national party to be
pleased, to say, 'Now that's the way to run a convention.' ''

'Another Chicago' Feared


In the view of Mr. Greene and others the fear is not of ''another Dallas,'' but
rather of ''another Chicago,'' where in 1968 demonstrators and police fought in
the streets while the Democrats were holding their national convention.

The major coalition of protesters, the Alliance for Justice, which will set up a
tent city at Dallas for several days of activities including an address by the
Rev. Jesse Jackson says the last thing it wants is trouble.

''The tenor is nonconfrontational,'' said Patricia Lamiell, publications
director of the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now, Acorn,
the central group in the Alliance for Justice. ''This is not 1968 in Chicago.''

To avoid that kind of confrontation, the city and Acorn have joined in a kind of
uneasy detente.

Initially, the city had arranged a special site for protesters. But the site was
at Lake Hubbard, 20 miles out of town.

Agreement on Camp Site


In May the organization sued for the right to camp in the Trinity River basin
not far from the Convention Center. In June the city agreed out of court to the
Trinity River site.

Acorn and the Alliance for Justice plan to erect a tent city for 1,000 to 1,500
people to camp next weekend. They will strike camp before the convention.

The city has gone to some pains to accommodate the uninvited guests. The tent
city site will have running water, named steets, electricity and pay telephones.
There will be lights at night and showers.  But other problems remain.

Two groups, Freeze Reagan-Bush and Concerned Christians for Reagan, both filed
for permits for rallies in the same area near the Convention Center.

The anti-Reagan group planned a ''Rock Against Reagan'' concert to feature two
punk rock groups, ''Reagan Youth'' and ''The Dead Kennedys.'' The city is trying
to limit the concert to three hours to permit the rally by the pro-Reagan group.
The concert organizers have threatened to bring suit.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dallas Convention Center

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LEARNING TO UMPIRE THE 'BEST GAME IN THE WORLD'

BYLINE: By WILLIAM R. GREER

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 904 words


Every morning for five weeks this summer, 34 men and women started their day by
debating 1 of the 10 official rules of baseball. The other day it was Rule No.
7, which deals with the runner.

''Don't assume anything,'' said Dallas Parks, a former American League umpire.
''You have to make sure they touch the bases. A smart manager will watch for
that. He does not care about you. He is not your friend out there.''

Ask why any of the people listening to Mr. Parks, all students at the New York
School of Umpiring, would seek such treatment and the answer is always the same:
''It's the best game in the world.''

The students - most of them from New York, one from Paris, two of them police
officers and three of them women - were at Fordham University in the Bronx
learning to call strikes and balls, to tell when a player is safe or out and to
spot fair and foul balls.

Top 3 Students to Move On

The only way to become a major- league umpire is to attend an accredited
umpiring school, and before this year there were only two in the country, both
in Florida. But this year, Zach Rebackoff, a professional umpire with 8 years of
minor-league and international experience, started the New York school.

It is the only umpire school in New York City to be accredited by the major
leagues, and it is the only one in the nation that holds a class during the
summer.

Mr. Rebackoff's first class graduated this month, and he chose the top three
students - Angel Aguilar, 28 years old, from Salt Lake City; William Fisher, 23,
from Hudson, N.Y., and Mickey Irving, 24, from Chesapeake, Va. - to send to an
advanced umpire school in Bradenton, Fla., in March.

If the students are good enough, they will start in the A league, and move up
through the AA league to the AAA league, one step below the majors, after
several years. To move from AAA to the major leagues, umpires have to be spotted
by a scout, just as ballplayers do. There are only 58 umpires in the major
leagues, and 172 in the minors, so competition is stiff.

'Frustrated Ballplayers'

Graduation from Mr. Rebackoff's school, which costs $645 for the five- week
course, qualifies umpires to work only in amateur leagues and college ball.

Despite the competition for jobs, the students are avid. At one time or another
most of them played baseball. ''I feel that all professional umpires are
frustrated ballplayers,'' Mr. Parks said.

One student, Elvin Mercado of the Bronx, even played professionally. The
Cleveland Indians signed him in 1964. But after a year as a catcher on the
Indians' farm team in Portland, Ore., he was drafted and sent to Vietnam. A
bullet wound ended his professional baseball career, and 15 years ago he became
a New York City police officer.

''I can't play amateur ball because I signed professional,'' he said. ''This is
the next best thing.''

Umpire as Policeman

''Actually, the umpire is the policeman out in the field,'' he said. ''The thing
is, nobody likes authority. Some people don't like cops. You got no friends out
there. I love this game. There's nothing like it.''

After he retires from the Police Department, Mr. Mercado plans to become an
umpire in the International League in Puerto Rico, where he was born.

Valerie Seals, a 29-year-old who moved to Manhattan from New Orleans to be a
model, had never played organized baseball, but she quit her job as a bartender
to try umpiring. There are no women umpiring in the major leagues, but the women
in the umpiring class are rooting for one woman - Pam Postema - who has risen to
the AAA level.

''At first I was skeptical,'' Miss Seals said. ''I've gotten into it. If I could
get as good as most of the guys here, I'll seriously think about the majors.''

Mr. Parks, who was an American League umpire for four seasons, starts off the
day with his students by dissecting the 1984 edition of the Official Baseball
Rules, line by line.

Calling TV Games

''A lot of times you will see this situation,'' Mr. Parks told the class as he
discussed Rule 7, which tells when a runner is entitled to a base, when he can
advance from one base to the next and how he can be put out.

''A batter hits a ball into the infield, the ball is misplayed, the batter has
already obtained first base, then the ball is thrown into dead territory - what
do you do?'' Mr. Parks asked.

''Third base,'' the students shout, meaning they would automatically award the
runner third base.

There are frequent digressions in class, most of them by students recounting
plays they saw on television. One student said he saw a New York Mets pitcher
commit a balk.

''I called it before the ump did,'' he said. The class broke into cheers.

To prepare his umpires for a life on the baseball field, Mr. Rebackoff berates
them, kicks dirt at their shins and shouts at them from two inches away.

''Anybody can call strikes and balls, fair or foul, safe or out,'' Mr. Rebackoff
said. ''It's how you handle situations.''

Mr. Rebackoff was a cabdriver in 1974 when he decided to become an umpire. ''I
always wanted to play pro baseball, but I injured my arm in high-school
football,'' he said. He grew tired of umpiring after 8 years on the road - there
is rarely a home game for an umpire.

''You can't be friends with the players or the managers,'' Mr. Rebackoff said.
''The most fun is being at the games.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of students at Umpiring school

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 14, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Accuses China

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 36 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 13


Vietnam said today that Chinese gunners fired 5,000 rounds into the northern
Vietnamese province of Ha Tuyen over the last 10 days, killing or wounding 10
people in the most serious incident last Tuesday.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 16, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

OUR TOWNS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL NORMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1366 words

DATELINE: BETHEL, N.Y.,


There must be ghosts here, singing in the hills and swimming naked in Fillipini
Pond. Down on the alfalfa field that Max Yasgur used to own, they gather every
day, 400,000 strong. They park their cars in the middle of the road, eat peanut
butter and jelly for dinner, smoke cannabis for dessert.

Yes, there must be ghosts here, those that frighten and those that cheer. Why
else would so many people still be both angry and amazed?

Fifteen years ago this week, as the miasma of Vietnam worsened, legions of the
young made their way to this Sullivan County hamlet for a music festival billed
by its promoters as ''three days of peace and love.''

When the Woodstock generation departed, however, it left behind a town in
turmoil. Now, the old grudges and fears have re-emerged. People are once again
muttering obscenities about the ''long hairs'' and the ''Communists'' as if they
were still here haunting the place or, worse yet, as if they might return.



Bert Feldman, a short, unthreatening 62-year-old man who totes a thick walking
stick to spell an injured back, started the whole thing.

A former editor of a weekly newspaper, his passion is local history. For three
days in August 1969, he worked as a security marshal and guide at the festival,
The historian as participant.

Like others here, he at first opposed the gathering, but once a part of it, he
came to believe that Woodstock was ''a singular event in American social
history,'' one that ''crystalized a generation.''

Thus converted, he decided to mark the 15th anniversary of the fesitval by
erecting a monument on the site. The festival was originally to be held in the
town of Woodstock, 50 miles to the north, but at the 11th hour, official
opposition forced a change of site.



In Mr. Feldman's mind, this ''holy ground'' carries the same import as the
battlefield at Gettysburg. The analogy, which he offers to anyone who will
listen, does not sit well with some of his neighbors.

''Gettysburg?'' said George Neuhaus, the Town Supervisor. ''No, it's a
disservice to Gettysburg and what that stood for. The festival was more like the
Chicago fire. Do they have markers commemorating that one?''

His derision aside, his comparison might be more apt than Mr. Feldman's. Almost
without warning, Bethel was consumed. The flower children came like a firestorm.
They swept out of the tree lines across the fields. When traffic backed up, they
abandoned their cars in the roads - six, seven and eight abreast, from culvert
to culvert, mile after mile. They invaded the stores and bought the shelves
clean. For three days in August, tiny Bethel, permanent population 3,500, became
one of the largest cities in the state.

''We were lucky it wasn't a complete disaster,'' said Mr. Neuhaus. ''The
majority of people don't want a repeat and wished it hadn't happened.''



The site of the festival was a wide, sloping field that formed a natural
amphitheater on a dairy farm owned by Max Yasgur, an amiable man who died in
1973.

In the years that followed, the land changed hands several times. The stage site
and field - some 40 acres - are now owned by Louis Nicky, the 59-year-old
proprietor of Ace Auto Glass on Utica Avenue in Brooklyn. He has no plans for
the land, but he has given Mr. Feldman permission to put up the monument.

The flavor of the town has changed some in the last decade and a half. In the
summer, the dairy and horse farmers share their domain with Hasidim from New
York City who vacation in several bungalow colonies here.

It has been a relatively uneventful summer. A rodeo opened in town and people
are talking about that. The council also gave its okay to a group that holds war
games with pistols that fire pellets filled with dye. And someone caught a big
bullhead this year, 21 pounds, 9 ounces. ''Darndest fish you ever saw,'' said
the co-owner of the general store.



Now and then, strangers stop in town and ask directions to the site of the
festival. They are told to go past the post office and fire station and the
small park planted with red and white annuals, past White Lake and along West
Shore Road, a narrow stretch that dips and rises, then on for a mile or so until
on the left they see a field that sweeps up perhaps a quarter of a mile to its
crest.

Off to the side are the concrete foundations of the stage, almost covered now by
a stand of wild sumac. The field, as chance would have it, has been recently
mowed, as if someone were expecting a large assembly.

Donald Clark, building inspector then and now, can almost see them sitting
there. ''It was just a sea of humanity,'' he said. ''It was miraculous, but it
tore the town apart. People are afraid a monument will attract them back.''



In a corner of the field, where West Shore Road crosses Hurd Road, is a small
stand of corn. Bert Feldman and Arthur Schubert were there the other day
watching Wayne Saward dig a trench in the red shale and preparing a frame for a
concrete base.

Mr. Saward, a welder on the Tappanzee Bridge, has joined forces with Mr. Feldman
and Mr. Schubert, a Grossinger waiter and alumnus of the Woodstock security
force, to erect the small monument - a cast iron sculpture fashioned by Mr.
Saward and a 3-by-4-foot plaque that reads, ''Site of the Woodstock Music and
Arts Fair, August 15, 16 and 17, 1969.''

The day after the foundation was dug, the monument committee came into conflict
with town officials over permits and a local sign ordinance. There was some
question about whether the monument would be up in time for the festival's 15th
anniversary. As in all such disputes, a lawyer was summoned.  At 27, Mr. Saward
was too young to have attended the festival, but he has been swept up by its
mystique and halcyon vision.

''I've read all the books,'' he said. ''I've been here every year on the
anniversary. My brother has promised that if anything happens to me, this
monument will be taken care of.''

''The Mecca concept,'' Mr. Feldman, chimed in, ''is not that far- fetched.''



There are some here who long ago would have welcomed a shrine. ''We had a
billion dollars worth of advertising,'' said Art Vassmer, ''and we threw it all
away.''

Mr. Vassmer and his brother, Fred, own Vassmer's General Store - groceries,
mechandise, bait and tackle.

During the festival, there were queues at their doors. They would let them in 40
or 50 at a time. The brothers would have stayed open 24 hours a day, but they
just ''plain tired out'' and had to close for a while.

''I'll tell you something,'' said Art Vassmer, adjusting his white apron, ''we
cashed I don't know how many checks and you know what, not one of them
bounced.''

''I'm glad I saw it,'' Fred said. ''It gave me a new experience in life. I
always said I never met a man I couldn't shake hands with.''



After the festival, some of the businessmen in town organized a testimonial
dinner for Max Yasgur. It was a sellout.

Max, as they remember, was proud of most of his neighbors and ashamed of a few.
He just could not understand how some people would actually sell a glass of
water to a bunch of thirsty kids.

Ken Van Loan was at the dinner. He owns Ken's Garage up the hill from the
firehouse and was the president of the local businessman's association.

The other day, as Bert Feldman and his cohorts worked on the monument, gas.

''Even with all those cars in town, I never heard a horn blow the whole time,''
he said. ''But let the church crowd get out on Sunday now, and they're leaning
on their horns. If there had been half a million adults here instead of half a
million kids, there would have been a riot.''



A few years ago, a car pulled up to the pumps and the driver asked Ken Van Loan
if he had been around when the festival took place.

''I been here for 30 years,'' he answered.

''I was at the festival, too,'' the man said, ''and I owe you for a quart of
oil.''

And then he paid his longstanding debt.

''That,'' said the service-station owner, ''was the last unpaid bill from
Woodstock.''

Yes, there must be ghosts here. Why else would Ken Van Loan, Art and Fred
Vassmer, Bert Feldman and their kind think so fondly of 400,000 strangers.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of monument; photo of Bert Feldman; photo of Woodstock crowd

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 16, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE BUREAUCRACY;
HEAR NO EVIL, SPEAK NO EVIL, PUBLISH NO EVIL

BYLINE: By DAVID BURNHAM

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1541 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 15


Over the last three and a half decades, most Federal agencies have adopted rules
to require millions of current employees, an in some cases former employees, to
agree to submit any books, magazine articles and speeches for review by
Government censors.

The range of this censorship extends from the very top to the very bottom of the
bureaucracy.

Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Attorney General William French Smith,
for example, have signed agreements promising that if they ever write a book or
article, including fiction, that touches upon certain types of intelligence
material, they will submit it to censors before publication.

All 20,637 current employees of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and tens of
thousands of retired F.B.I. employees, have signed statements that permit the
bureau to censor anything they write, at any point in their lives, if it
contains information learned as a result of their connection with the F.B.I.

In 1983, alone, the Defense Department's 4.6 million employees submitted for
censorship the manuscripts of well over 15,000 books, articles and speeches.

It is not known how many Government employees have been forced to alter their
material because of censorship. Neither is it known how many employees might
have been dissuaded from writing because of the threat of censorship. A
spokesman at one agency, the F.B.I., said: ''We've never had a book completely
rejected. Some have contained material that was classified or otherwise violated
policy, but when this was pointed out there was concurrence in every instance.''


Criticism Is Building


Federal officials say censorship is necessary to protect the nation's security
and to prevent the improper disclosure of information collected in criminal
investigations. For many years, this argument was accepted with little dissent.
But now criticism is building, with the critics contending that many of the
regulations violate the First Amendment's free speech guarantee, actually hurt
the Government by stifling informed dissent and, in any event, do not prevent
the disclosure of many secrets.

A recent effort by the Reagan Administration to broaden the lifetime controls on
the writing and speeches of certain employees generated such a wave of
opposition that the Administration withdrew the proposal last February.

Then, in June, the House Post Office and Civil Service Committee approved
legislation introduced by Represenative Jack Brooks, Democrat of Texas, that
would outlaw virtually all existing censorship requirements except for the
C.I.A. and the National Security Agency. This legislation has been referred to
other House committees for further consideration.

The Fine Print Varies


Among the agencies that censor the writing or statements of their employees,
their former employees or their contractors are the Central Intelligence Agency,
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the National Security Agency, the Defense
Department, State Department, Securities and Exchange Commission, United States
Information Agency, Federal Reserve, Nuclear Regulatory Commission and Tennessee
Valley Authority. The fine print of the regulations varies agency by agency, but
the basic idea of prior-publication review of statements concerning the United
States Government is always present.

One of the strongest supporters of the current restrictions is Asssistant
Attorney General Richard K. Willard, who was the author of the Administration's
plan to strenghthen certain parts of the censorship rules.

''Our adversaries employ highly efficient intelligence services which use overt
and covert means to gather information concerning American military
capabilities, diplomatic intentions and our own intelligence efforts,'' Mr.
Willard said recently. ''The security of this nation and the peace of this world
depends in large part on our ability to keep certain kinds of information
secret.''

Among the Critics


Among the most outspoken critics of the censorship requirements are Ralph P.
Davidson, chairman of the board of Time Inc.; Dennis Hays, president of the
American Foreign Service Association; Thomas I. Emerson, a leading authority on
Constitutional law who is a professor emeritus of the Yale Law School, and
George W. Ball, a former Deputy Secretary of State.

''Any abridgment of the freedom of speech, and particularly the practice of
pre-publication censorship, runs counter to the genius of our democratic
system,'' Mr. Ball told a House subcommittee recently. ''Indeed, our founding
fathers strongly affirmed the principle that a democracy can govern wisely only
in an atmosphere of informed public discussion.''

Another critic is Stephen McLeod, a former captain in the United States Army. A
year ago, while still in the Army, Captain McLeod decided that a censorship
agreement he had signed after seven years as an intelligence officer violated
his rights as a citizen of the United States.

On July 28, 1983, he went to the administrative office of his unit in West
Germany, requested all copies of his personal agreement and tore them in half.
At the same time, he gave the Army a statement saying his action was not to be
construed as suggesting that he had violated or ever would violate United States
law regarding the control of classified information.

After the destruction of his agreements, Mr. McLeod said in an recent interview,
he succumbed to heavy pressure from his commander to resign from the Army. He
now teaches college-level English literature and has begun legal proceedings to
try to regain his commission in the Army.

'Our Anxiety' About Moscow


''The agreement is exactly the kind of thing the founding fathers were trying to
prevent when they drafted the free speech guarantee of the First Amendment,''
Mr. McLeod said. ''The First Amendment is one of the things that makes the
United States unique. If we, in our anxiety about the Soviet Union, end up
adopting that country's methods, it ultimately could mean it doesn't matter
which side of the wall you live on.''

The agreement that the Attorney General and Secretary of State have placed their
signatures on and that Mr. McLeod destroyed was Form 4193, issued by the Reagan
Administration in July of 1981. Under this agreement, any person given access to
a highly secret category of material labeled ''sensitive compartmented
information,'' or S.C.I., is required to allow the Government to review any
future writings, including fiction, that might have been derived from S.C.I.

On March 11, 1983, however, President Reagan signed National Security Decision
Directive 84, a plan that considerably broadened the pre-publication review
requirement for all Government employees handling sensitive compartmented
information and extended the use of polygraph testing in an effort to stop
disclosures. The opposition to this directive was so powerful among a wide range
of individuals and institutions that 11 months later its sections concerning
censorship and polygraph testing were withdrawn.

But a study completed last month by the General Accounting Office at the request
of Representative Brooks, who is chairman of the House Government Operations
Committee, showed that the withdrawal was something of an illusion because at
least 120,000 Government employees had already signed lifetime censorship
agreements through Form 4193, not including employees of the C.I.A. or National
Security Agency.

In addition to the various lifetime requirements, the study found that close to
5 million Government employees working for 12 agencies were subject to
pre-publication review requirements for material published or statements made
while they were employed by the Government.

'Unwarranted Infringement'


It was partly on the basis of such findings that the House Post Office and Civil
Service Committee approved the Brooks proposal.

The legislation holds that requiring employees to sign pre-publication review
agreements represented an ''unwarranted infringement of open debate on matters
of national importance'' and was ''readily subject to intentional manipulation
and abuse for partisan political purposes.''

If enacted, the legislation would substantially modify the impact of a 1979
Supreme Court decision that supported the censorship requirements of the Central
Intelligence Agency as they were applied to Frank W. Snepp, a former Central
Intelligence Agency employee whose earnings from a book about intelligence
activities in Vietnam were seized by the Government. In addition to holding that
the C.I.A.'s censorship was valid and not an impermissible prior restraint, the
Court indicated that such restrictions could properly be imposed on a wide range
of Federal employees.

Partly because Congress is expected to be in sesssion for only a few more weeks
in the current legislative year, the bill's future is far from clear. Opposition
is expected from many agencies whose censorship rules would be largely be
eliminated. In addition, with the exception of Senator Charles McC. Mathias Jr.,
Republican of Maryland, few members of the Senate majority have expressed
concern about current censorship requirements.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

STUDY OF VIETNAM VETERANS FINDS NO INCREASED RISK OF BIRTH DEFECTS

BYLINE: By RICHARD D. LYONS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1142 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Aug. 16


The largest medical study of Vietnam veterans yet undertaken concludes that they
appear to have no increased risk of fathering children with general birth
defects, Government scientists reported today.

However, the report, from the Centers for Disease Control here, noted that
Federal epidemiologists had found evidence that a small number of babies
fathered by veterans who were most likely to have been exposed to the herbicide
Agent Orange had developed unexplained, rare and often crippling defects such as
division of the spinal column.

The researchers said they were unable to conclude on the basis of their studies
that these defects were caused by exposure to Agent Orange. They also said at a
news conference today that their work ''could not discount the possibility of
mental retardation'' and the possible development of other defects later in
life.



Concern Among Veterans


The issue of birth defects has been of great concern to veterans' groups because
of the known toxicity of Agent Orange, a defoliant containing dioxins that was
widely used in the Vietnam War to deprive the enemy of jungle cover.

Dr. J. David Erickson and Dr. Joseph Mulinare, the senior authors of the report,
titled ''Vietnam Veterans' Risks For Fathering Babies With Birth Defects,''
concluded:

''Vietnam veterans who had greater estimated opportunities for Agent Orange
exposure did not seem to be at greater risk for fathering babies with all types
of defects combined. However, for a few specific types of defects the estimated
risks were higher for subgroups of Vietnam veterans that may have had a greater
likelihood of exposure to Agent Orange. These seemingly higher risks could be
chance events, the result of some experience in the Vietnam service of the
father, or the result of some other unexplained risk factor.''

The report, to be published Friday in The Journal of the American Medical
Association, was criticized by some Vietnam veterans' organizations as
incomplete. They stressed the need for further studies.

Congress, reacting to repeated demands by veterans' groups for a thorough
inquiry into the possible effects of Agent Orange, ordered the report as the
first part of a $100 million investigation.

The three remaining segments of the investigation will focus on people most
heavily exposed to Agent Orange, the long-term health effects of service in
Vietnam, regardless of exposure to herbicides and the possibility that Vietnam
veterans face increased cancer risks. These studies will not be completed for
another five years or so.

The study made public today sought scientific answers to widespread anecdotal
questions and rumors that children of servicemen exposed to Agent Orange were
developing birth defects at a much higher rate than might be expected in the
general population. In the general population, the study said, serious birth
defects occur in 2 to 3 percent of all births.

The study examined 4,815 babies with birth defects born to parents living in the
Atlanta area in the years 1968 through 1980, and compared them with a control
group of 2,967 normal children born in this area at the same time.

In both groups, 9 percent of the fathers were Vietnam veterans. In both groups,
some of the veterans had been exposed to Agent Orange while others had not come
in contact with the agent. The study did not try to define combat-related
experience.

The two groups of children were selected from the 323,421 children who were born
in the Atlanta area in those 13 years, including 13,000 who had some form of
birth defects. This area was chosen partly because of the careful record-keeping
by the Metropolitan Atlanta Congenital Defects Program.

The proximity of the Federal Centers for Disease Control was another
consideration.

Once the two groups of babies were identified, researchers said interviews were
conducted in 1982 and 1983 with their parents, although ''no specific mention
was made of Agent Orange or service in Vietnam.''

Method of Study


The birth defects of the afflicted babies were then divided into 96 categories,
while the military service, Vietnam service and exposure to Agent Orange then
was calculated for the fathers based both on interviews and examinations of
their military records. In essence, they started with a defective baby and
worked backward to determine if the father had any exposure to Agent Orange in
Vietnam.

The researchers emphasized that great care was taken to record data as
accurately and completely as possible because, Agent Orange aside, questions
have also been raised suggesting that Vietnam veterans who developed malaria
there might have greater risks of fathering defective babies.

In addition, the epidemiologists sought to find out what drugs were taken to
prevent malaria because of other suggestions that these chemicals might in some
way be related to birth defects. No association was found.

After analyzing the statistics, the researchers said: ''This study cannot prove
that some factor associated with service in Vietnam was or was not associated
with the appearance of rare types of defects, or defects in the babies of
selected persons, or of defects in the babies of small groups of veterans.

''However,'' it continued, ''the conclusion that Vietnam veterans in general
have not fathered babies with all types of birth defects combined, at higher
rates than other men is based on relatively strong evidence.''

Some Unexpected Abnormalities


The researchers said they did find a higher than expected rate of cases of spina
bifida, that is, the division of the backbone into two sections, as well as
cleft lip, abnormal growths at various places in the body, slits in either the
eyes or eyelids, and peculiarities with fingernails and toenails.

At the same time, a lower than expected incidence of a wide variety of other
defects was noted, leading to the conclusion that the increase in spina bifida
and the other abnormalities ''may be chance phenomena.''

An editorial in the journal by one of its editors, Dr. Bruce B. Dan,
complimented the Centers for Disease Control for the thoroughness of its work.

Reviewing this and previous studies, Dr. Dan concluded that ''it would seem that
a fairly strong statement can be made that it is unlikely that serious
congenital anomalies in children of men serving in Vietnam were results of that
experience.''

However, representatives of some veterans groups said the study did not go far
enough in determining the possibility of risk.

Frank McCarthy, president of Vietnam Veterans Agent Orange Victims Inc., in
Stamford, Conn., said the study ''doesn't tell us what we really want to know.''

''We need a second study that will tell Vietnam veterans if they are likely to
have children with birth defects,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
 FRIDAY, AUGUST 17, 1984 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 866 words


President Reagan assured a group of Jewish leaders at the White House that he
was ''not going to bomb Russia in the next five minutes,'' according to a
participant at the meeting. The comment appeared to be an attempt by Mr. Reagan
to make light of an inadvertently taped quip that provoked criticism by Western
European newspapers and denunciations by the Kremlin. (Page A3, Column 1.)

The Governor of an Indian state dismissed the region's top elected official and
replaced him with a rival politician who pledged cooperation with the Government
of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. Opposition leaders in the southern state,
Andhra Pradesh, termed the action ''a coup'' by Mrs. Gandhi. (A3:5-6.) National


John Z. DeLorean was acquitted by a Federal jury in Los Angeles of all eight
counts of an indictment charging him with trafficking in millions of dollars
worth of cocaine. (A1:6.)

The jurors at the DeLorean trial said their decision to acquit the former auto
maker after 29 hours of deliberation was based on a belief that the Justic
Department had entrapped him and had not proved its charges against him.
(A1:3-5.)

Child support payments will be enforced under a comprehensive bill signed by
President Reagan. The measure, which was approved by unanimous roll-call votes
in both chambers of Congress, would, in many cases, compel employers to withhold
funds from pay when a parent is one month late in making court- ordered support
payments. (A1:1.)

Conservatives were in full control in a debate before the Republican platform
committee. The panel crushed an attempt to endorse the proposed Federal equal
rights amendment and rejected a proposed statement that the party respected the
views of backers of the proposal. (A1:2.)

A $425,000 film on President Reagan that the Republicans have prepared for over
a year to introduce him when he accepts renomination at the party's convention
next Thursday has generated a controversy. The three television networks have
told the campaign there is a good chance that the 18-minute political film will
not be broadcast except in small segments during news reports. (A10:1.)

People who think things are better than they were in 1980 are very likely to
vote for President Reagan, while people who think things are worse are only
relatively likely to vote for Walter F. Mondale, according to the latest New
York Times/CBS News Poll. Mr. Reagan's campaign is seeking to take advantage of
a public perception that things are better by pressing the point at next week's
convention and in television commercials. (A1:1-3.)

Finances of Agriculture Secretary John R. Block are being investigated by F.B.I.
agents in Minnesota, according to sources familiar with the inquiry. Jim
Nichols, the state's Agriculture Commissioner, said the agents had questioned
two of his employes about whether Mr. Block could profit indirectly from a
$400,000 loan that the Government made to one of his business partners.
(A8:1-5.)

The largest medical study of veterans of the Vietnam War to date concludes they
appear to have no increased risk of fathering children with general birth
defects, according to Government scientists. But they said that epidemiologists
had found evidence that a small number of babies fathered by veterans who were
most likely to have been exposed to Agent Orange had developed rare and
crippling defects. (A1:4-5.)

The first space salvage mission is set for November. Under an agreement signed
with insurance companies, American astronauts aboard a space shuttle will seek
to retrieve and bring back to earth a commercial satellite stranded in a useless
orbit. (A8:1-3.)

Women won full membership in the United States Jaycees under a resolution
approved overwhelmingly by members of the all-male civic organization. The vote
at a closed meeting in Tulsa, Okla., was 5,372 for admitting women to 386
opposed, with 77 abstentions. (A8:1-2.) Metropolitan

About 25 swimmers were dragged under water off Rockaway Beach in Queens when a
tug hauling a barge created an undertow so strong that the swimmers said it
swept them off their feet. Four swimmers, including one of the score of
lifeguards who charged into the water to rescue them, were hospitalized and in
stable condition. The police said 16 people were treated at the beach for
swallowing sea water. (A1:3-4.)

The latest duplicate toll-slot woe is besetting the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel
Authority. The authority's toll machines accept not only its $1.50 tokens but
also the Mexican peso, a coin worth only half a cent. Authority officials said
that the use of pesos started soon after the authority introduced a new token
with a fare increase in April 1982 and that the illegal practice was costing the
authority $132,000 a year. (B1:5-6.)

Just before a scaffold wall collapsed at the Olympic parade on Broadway
Wednesday, two police officers climbed atop the structure to keep spectators off
it, according to the police. A spokesman said the two officers left after being
told by a building engineer that the building's security force would do the job.
(B4:1.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 18, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CBS AGAIN SEEKS DISMISSAL OF WESTMORELAND LIBEL SUIT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 579 words


CBS says Gen. William C. Westmoreland has failed to show that the network was
either wrong or reckless in the documentary that the former commander of
American troops in Vietnam says defamed him.

CBS made the argument in a brief, filed Thursday in United States District Court
in Manhattan, that renews a request for a summary judgment dismissing the
general's $120 million libel suit against the network. Judge Pierre N. Leval
must rule on that request before Sept. 17, when the trial is scheduled to start.

General Westmoreland said he was libeled by a 1982 ''CBS Reports'' documentary,
''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' that depicted what it called ''a
conspiracy at the highest levels of American military intelligence'' to
understate what officers knew to be the size of the Vietcong and North
Vietnamese forces before the Tet offensive of January 1968. The broadcast said
the strength reported in the official ''Order of Battle'' was arbitrarily and
misleadingly minimized to maintain public belief that America was winning a war
of attrititon.



Earlier Depositions Cited

Because General Westmoreland was a public official, he must prove not only that
the program was wrong but also that its producers knew it was wrong or
carelessly failed to investigate the truth of the conspiracy charges.  The new
brief recited earlier depositions and documents from officers, some of whom
appeared in the program, affirming a manipulation of the figures. It also said a
wide range of libel cases established its right to broadcast such charges with
far less investigative effort than its yearlong attempt to sort out the facts of
what had been a long-running fight between a group of military-intelligence
officers and some Central Intelligence Agency analysts.

Separately, General Westmoreland's lawyer, Dan Burt, has given Judge Leval new
documents to buttress the contention that President Lyndon B. Johnson and his
aides were well aware of the dispute among the intelligence agencies. The
documents were found in the Johnson library and released in response to a CBS
subpoena.

Johnson Book Quoted

One document, a memorandum that Walt W. Rostow, then the national security
adviser, sent to Mr. Johnson in January 1967, began, ''As you know, a debate
continues on the absolute size of the enemy order of battle in Vietnam.'' Other
documents - dealing with General Westmoreland's efforts to shorten the 1968 Tet
''stand down,'' a ceasefire and reduction of military activities, because he
feared a Vietcong attack - contest the documentary's contention that American
forces were unprepared for the assault.

The CBS brief, however, noted that Mr. Johnson's book, ''The Vantage Point,''
said the Tet attack was ''more massive than we had anticipated.'' It also
pointed out that the Pentagon Papers, the Defense Department's study of the
origins and conduct of the war, said: ''Coming on the heels of optimistic
reports from field commands, this offensive caught official Washington off guard
and stunned both the Administration and the American public.''

The documents from the Johnson library also affirm the concern in the White
House about potential press reaction to the higher estimates of guerrilla
strength that both the civilian and military analysts were proposing to make
public. ''Danger is press will latch on to previous underestimate and revive
credibility gap talk,'' Mr. Rostow wrote Johnson on Nov. 21, 1967.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 18, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 634 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on
page 46.

1. The Queen of romantic novelists, is in her counting house, counting out the
money from sales of her most recent book, from which this detail is taken.
Identify her and explain.

2. ''It is said that a person's level of humor reflects the level of his
thinking. If so, aren't one and the other too low for the President of a great
country?'' said a commentator in the Soviet Union. To what was he referring?

3. With the help of a comma, a tax pledge was strengthened. Explain.

4. Being the Governor means sometimes having to say you're sorry, Mario Cuomo
discovered. To whom did he apologize and what was the reason?

5. A skin-grafting procedure helped save the lives of two severely burned young
brothers. Why was that noteworthy?

6. The presence of a New York lawyer, Martin Galvin, at an event in a foreign
country led to bloodshed. What were the circumstances?

7. When the Games of the XXIII Olympiad ended, the United States ranked first in
both number of gold medals won and in total number of medals won. What nations
placed second in these categories?

8. ''It means the young Trotskyites can meet, it means the gay rights activists
can meet,'' said a Congressman about legislation recently signed by President
Reagan. Explain.

9. ''Odd custom,'' said a tourist from London about New York City's ticker-tape
parade for America's Olympic medalists. Who was the person who, in 1910, was the
first to be honored with such a parade?

10. At La Guardia Airport, 80 arrivals and departures an hour are regularly
scheduled on weekdays, starting at 8 A.M., and other of the nation's busiest
airports also have such schedules. Why is that noteworthy?

11. The United States has suspended its most important cocaine eradication
program in a foreign country because of a wave of raids by guerrillas who say
they are fighting to impose a Chinese-style political system there. The country
is (Brazil/ Colombia/Mexico/Peru).

12. Coins like this have been taking their toll in the Metropolitan area.
Identify the coin and explain.

13. A noted auction house was charged with ''persistent fraud and illegality''
by the New York State Attorney General in connection with a recent sale of rare
Hebrew books and manuscripts. What house is it and what is at issue?

14. Minesweepers were dispatched to two bodies of water where underwater
explosions have damaged vessels since July 9. In what waters have the incidents
occurred?

15. More than one of every (two/ three/four/five) babies born in New York City
last year was born out of wedlock, according to Health Department statistics.

16. Members of a Federal jury said they had acquitted John Z. DeLorean of all
eight counts of an indictment charging him with trafficking in cocaine for two
reasons. What were they?

17. A longtime star who is pursuing a legend is returning to lead the team with
which he was most closely identified. Name the player and the team.

18. A work by the composer Ernest Bloch was featured on the program to have been
played by the New York Philharmonic in a tour of Malaysia next month. Why was
that noteworthy?

19. The ruling party in a nation that is a Western-modeled democracy adopted a
new constitution calling for the creation of a Marxist-oriented, one-party
state. Identify the nation.

20. The largest medical study of Vietnam veterans yet undertaken concludes that
they appear to have a greater risk of fathering children with general birth
defects. True or false?

21. A law recently signed by Governor Cuomo is the first in the nation
specifically intended to curb a form of pollution. What pollution is it?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. BUILDING NEW MINESWEEPERS AFTER YEARS OF RELYING ON COPTERS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 812 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 18


The United States Navy, after two decades of relying primarily on helicopters to
sweep mines at sea, has ordered two new classes of minesweeping ships.

The first new American minesweeper to be built since the 1950's, Avenger, is
being built of oak and fir, rather than steel, to make her less vulnerable to
magnetic mines. She is scheduled to be delivered in September 1985.

The new ships were designed to respond to what naval officers have said is an
expanding capacity of the Soviet Union to lay mines. The minesweepers would be
charged with clearing American ports and coast in the event of hostilities.

The Navy operated a fleet of minesweepers during World War II, but it was
depleted during the demobilization that followed. New minesweepers were built
during the Korean War. Later the Navy turned primarily to helicopters for
minesweeping, although both ships and helicopters swept mines during the war in
Vietnam.

A Shortage After World War II

After the demobilization of World War II, the Navy had so few ships to sweep
mines when the Korean War began in 1950 that it was forced to turn to Japan,
which had an effective minesweeping force during World War II.

During the three-year war, the Navy had 58 wooden minesweepers built. But
several were sunk by mines during the assault on the harbor at Wonsan, on the
east coast of Korea. Seeing the vulnerability of the ships, the Navy started
looking to helicopters as minesweepers.

Thus the Navy sold 35 of its minesweepers to allied navies. Of the rest, only
three remain active in the American fleet. The others have been transferred to
the reserves, where they are used for training but would be mobilized if
hostilities broke out.

Over the years, the Navy experimented with several helicopters before settling
on the RH-53. Thirty were built but seven were lost in the attempted rescue of
American hostages from Iran in 1980. The rest are assigned to three squadrons in
Norfolk.

The advantage of the helicopters, a spokesman for the Navy said, is that they
can be loaded onto C-5 transport planes and flown quickly to any part of the
world, as were the three RH-53's flown to Jidda on Monday at the request of the
Saudi Government.

The helicopters sweep quickly, do not themselves trigger mines, and can be
employed from surface ships or land. When not sweeping mines, they can be used
as transports.

Limited Range of Copters

But the helicopters cannot sweep mines in deep water nor can they remain on
station for long, having a range of only 100 miles.

Getting new minesweepers has been slow going, however, as the ships lack glamor
and have few constituents among senior naval officers. Vice Adm. Robert L.
Walters, the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Surface Warfare, told Congress
last year, ''No segment of naval warfare has been underfunded for so many years
as has the mine warfare community.''

The first of the two new classes of minesweepers, led by the 1,000-ton Avenger,
being constructed by Peterson Builders in Sturgeon Bay, Wis., is intended ''to
permit the breakout of United States forces from continental United States ports
and then to accompany deploying forces overseas and conduct mine clearance
operations there,'' Admiral Walters said.

The second class, known as minesweeper hunters, are 470-ton ships intended to
keep coastal waters clear. ''After the breakout of naval forces, these ships
will provide clearance for commercial harbors,'' Admiral Walters said.

The Avenger was authorized in 1982 and construction is on schedule for delivery
in September 1985, a Navy spokesman said. Asked why it took so long to build a
small ship, he said the first ship of a new class usually took longer to
construct than subsequent ships.

Hard to Find Woodworkers

In addition, a naval officer said, ''It's hard to find people who can work well
with wood these days.''

The Avenger and other ships of her class are to be equipped with mechanical
sweeping gear plus mine-hunting sonar and what the Navy calls a ''precise
integrated navigation system'' to permit the ships to maneuver through
minefields. The smaller ships will have variants of the same gear.

The Navy's program calls for 14 of the larger minesweepers: 5 have been
authorized, another 4 proposed in the fiscal 1985 military budget still in
Congress and the remainder to be authorized by fiscal year 1987.

The Navy has requested $349.5 million for the four minesweepers on which
construction would start during the fiscal year that begins on Oct. 1.

The program also calls for 17 of the smaller minesweepers to be authorized at 4
ships a year between fiscal years 1986 and 1989 at a total cost of $923.6
million. By contrast, the Navy has asked for .2 billion to begin building the
first of a new class of destroyers known as DDG-51 in the coming fiscal year.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
THE SWEET AND THE SOUR OF A CRITIC'S BIG APPLE YEAR

BYLINE: By Benedict Nightingale

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2921 words


Nearly a year ago I arrived in New York from London, to discover something
curious about the city I'd known well in my footloose 20's, but had visited all
too seldom since my jowls began to sag and the fuzz on them to grey. That was
that absolutely everyone wanted to talk about the theater, and almost everyone
had some connection with it. Before I'd recovered from my jetlag, I'd been
driven across town by a cabbie who had toured Europe in ''Bubbling Brown
Sugar,'' been shown an apartment by a man who ran a theater museum, been offered
another by a retired actor, been sold a phone by a resting actor, bought a book
from a woman who insisted on doing her imitation of John Gielgud, and, needless
to say, been brought food and drink by an assortment of aspiring hoofers and
assistant stage managers masquerading as waiters. That wasn't coincidence. That
was what the pollsters call a statistically significant proportion of the local
population.

New York was a theater-mad city - but where was the theater itself? That proved
rather harder to find. Since ''La Cage aux Folles'' had already opened to
general acclaim, there was no musical to review until mid-October, when a
revival of ''Zorba'' brought Anthony Quinn to town, his singing voice and his
footwork a bit creaky but his lordly, grizzled charisma undiminished. And not
until November did a new American play hit either Broadway itself or one of the
more prestigious Off Broadway addresses. Then it was that a melodrama called
''Brothers'' - presenting Carrol O'Connor in high dudgeon at the refusal of one
of his sons to donate a kidney to another - opened at the Music Box and
proceeded to run for precisely one performance. Was scarcity and disaster to be
the tale of my year as a theater critic in New York? Well, yes. Well, no. What
follows are a few memories of a sometimes exhilarating, sometimes maddening
eleven months, a visiting maggot's not altogether random look at that
sweet-and-sour confection which likes to call itself the Big Apple.

When Americans decide to have fun in earnest, they certainly do so. No, it
wasn't Citizen Kane or the Great Gatsby who sent me weaving back to my apartment
early one September morning, filled with champagne, caviar and love for my
fellow-toilers in the theatrical vineyard. It was Michael Bennett, who had
celebrated the 3,389th, record-breaking performance of his ''Chorus Line'' in a
highly traditional and highly untraditional way. He had brought New York's
theater community to a tent in Shubert Alley, where they had assiduously made
merry; and he'd brought onto the Shubert stage as many as possible of the
dancers and singers who had appeared in his show, at one barely credible point
332 of them all at once.

On they came, members of the present company, the original company, the
bus-and-truck company, the various regional and international companies,
slipping neatly into one another's roles as the evening progressed and sometimes
performing simultaneously. Donna McKechnie, playing the solo dancer trying to
battle her way back into the chorus line, was suddenly joined by eight other
Cassies. Paul, the Puerto Rican homosexual, turned out to be 10 Pauls, all
stammering and shrugging out their forlorn secrets. One scene was played in a
medley of languages, Japanese to German to heaven knows what. And then it
happened. Down the aisles they walked in their spangled coats and shimmering
hats; onto the stage they clambered in their tens, their scores, their hundreds;
and the evening suddenly became a celebration not just of ''A Chorus Line,'' not
just of Broadway, not just of the musical theater, but of the human capacity to
enjoy and to share - which is, after all, what the stage exists to express. The
performers wept. The audience wept. The ushers wept. I wept. We all knew we'd
never see anything like it again.

In June, as I sat in the little waiting-room overlooking Lafayette Street, I
could hear tiny trilling and tooting sounds happily wafting in from next door.
Was the Public Theater, I wondered, on the point of discovering another ''Chorus
Line''? Then the noise stopped, and in trooped two woebegone figures, followed
by a small, neat, dapper man, Joseph Papp himself. ''They want to do a musical
about Al Capone,'' he explained as the others left. ''I don't think they've got
the style quite right.''

I met Mr. Papp on several occasions during my stay. This time, he was in short
khaki pants, reaching to his knees and giving him the look of a colonial
administrator out on official business in some torrid troublespot: which is, in
a way, what he is. He has brought sanity and order to that large, unruly empire,
the New York theater, giving it the Public complex, Shakespeare in Central Park,
and plenty of lesser things. Now he is beginning to arm and accouter himself for
his biggest battle yet, the creation of what, with his usual instinct for the
pungent phrase, he's dubbed the National Theater of Broadway.

This is something he and its other advocates hope to produce, very literally,
out of thin air. Owners of Broadway theaters are given special dispensation to
sell their unused development rights to builders or potential builders in a much
wider area than is customary; and, as part of the deal, to be used for financing
new work in the smaller and less profitable of those theaters. That way,
Broadway gets what it sadly lacks at present, contemporary American plays. That
way, persistently dark theaters are kept open. But Mr. Papp argues that the fund
could start operating even without the sale of little slices of New York sky.
All it needs is an initial $10 million from private or public sources or both.
Does all this sound unlikely, even unattainable? Well, those are precisely the
sounds Mr. Papp most likes. ''Don't tell me anything is impossible,'' he's apt
to say, ''let's try it first.''



Coming as I do from a country where people are more likely to say ''that's
difficult, let's have nothing to do with it,'' I myself feel about Mr. Papp
rather as a half-suffocated man feels about oxygen.

Also, I happen to agree with much of what, when we met, he said about the drama:
''The theater's about talking, about debating. It's dialectic, thrilling and
pleasurable and perhaps a bit frightening. If people get too comfortable in one
position, I try to put on plays that will knock them out of it. I'll put them on
even if I myself strongly disagree with their point of view. . . .I don't like
people who are narrow. I don't like the extreme left, the extreme right, or the
extreme middle. I reject all that, because in some areas I feel to the right, in
some to the left, in some even to the middle. And I don't want my theater filled
with plays putting across one point of view.'' There are playhouses, many of
them in my own country, where words like that should be branded across the
portico, preferably in fire.



Mark you, let's not belittle the British theater. Mr. Papp himself eloquently
moaned to me about the relentless domesticity of American drama these days:
''I've had to go to England, to Poland, Czechoslovakia and Russia for plays of a
social nature, and what a relief they are! You feel you're back in the world at
last. Here, it's so internal.''

There are differences both large and small between our two theaters. American
actors tend to be pretty good at English accents, while English actors think
that all they have to do to be American is roll their r's rather a lot. In
London the curtain sometimes rises on time, in New York never. In New York, the
foyers are smaller and more crowded, the theater bars scarcer, the programs
free, fat but less informative about the play in question.

Members of the audience are more talkative during the show, more generous in
their bravos, and less inclined to say ''sorry'' when you tread on their feet,
and, of course, costs and seat prices are three, four, five times higher. And
very importantly, there's little public subsidy, explaining perhaps the greatest
gap in the New York theater: no National Theater, no RSC, nothing between
commercial Broadway and an Off Broadway that mostly stumbles by on private
patronage.

But what I noticed almost more was the difference in content between the two
nations' drama. A not-uncommon English play these days involves a young hooligan
who has spent the day beating up rival fans at a soccer match, setting fire to
wheelchairs, pushing old ladies down elevator shafts, and doing other things
that prove he's alienated and therefore a worthy subject of sympathy. After much
grim analysis, the dramatist's finger ends accusingly pointed at educators,
social workers, politicians, policemen, and (of course) us in the audience, who
have been sitting and watching a bourgeois play instead of making revolution.

The archetypal American play seems to involve a child of maybe 30, 40 or 50 who,
after three hours of in- depth recrimination on the front porch, manages to
persuade his tyrannical father, voracious mother or both that he's left the
cradle for good. At the climax, invariably seen by the author as a moral and
spiritual triumph, the overage infant turns to his oppressors and says, with
every appearance of meaning it: ''Mom and dad, from here on out it will no
longer be appropriate for you to change my diapers.''

Oh well, I exaggerate; but not that much. If a cut-rate Marx is responsible for
much English drama these days, an ersatz Freud is even more influential in the
American one. ''Brothers,'' Christopher Durang's ''Baby With the Bathwater,''
Tina Howe's ''Painting Churches,'' Wendy Wasserstein's ''Isn't It Romantic?,''
Terrence McNally's ''The Rink'' - again and again I found myself at plays, some
very good, whose overriding issue was when, how and whether it was possible for
physical adults emotionally to grow up.

Even the year's major revivals, Arthur Miller's ''Death of a Salesman,''
Tennessee Williams's ''Glass Menagerie'' and Clifford Odet's ''Awake and Sing,''
involved conflict between parent and child; so the obsession is not new and
therefore not just to be explained by a post- Vietnam, post-Watergate retreat
from politics nor by the national absorption with relationships recently
anatomized by Christopher Lasch in his ''Culture of Narcissism.'' In fact, I
came to think it presumptuous to speculate any further about the American
psyche, and ended up simply wishing that your personal drama would learn
something from our social drama, our drama from yours.

Yet the American drama can be very intense, very strong on the rare occasions it
does grapple with social matters. The year produced David Mamet's ''Glengarry
Glen Ross,'' a brilliantly scathing study of dog-eat-dog in the real estate
jungles of Chicago, and David Rabe's ''Hurlyburly,'' another picture of moral
and emotional cannibalism, this time set in Hollywood. Why, then, did the New
York theater seem so silent about the subject closest to itself, namely New
York? The thought occurred to me with special force one night as I climbed into
a taxi outside my local Blimpie's, near which someone had recently been
murdered, and drove across streets whose alternate ruts and bulges suggested
they'd been first attacked by zealots with sledgehammers, then mended on the
same principle as pinning the tail on the donkey, by blindfolded tots.  It also
seemed an opportunity squandered. Where in the New York drama was the tension,
the barely contained hysteria, the alarming unpredictability of New York itself?
Come to that, where was the generosity, the good-humor, the fun, the marvellous
energy to be found there, too? Not until May suddenly magicked up ''Balm in
Gilead,'' Lanford Wilson's homage to the lower depths of the Upper West Side,
did I see a play that caught the feel of the city's streets and tenements and
coffee-shops. And that work was 20 years old.



The Shuberts and the Nederlanders more or less are Broadway, since between them
they own 28 of its 39 theaters. They've wrangled, been reconciled, warred again,
and now seem to be observing an uneasy truce. But to meet their top executives
is to know that they're never likely to be taosting each other's birthdays over
dinner in 44th Street. That's not for any grand professional reason, but because
they're such a personal contrast. You can easily imagine Bernie Jacobs,
president of the Shubert Organization, sipping good, dry champage at Sardi's.
James Nederlander Sr. seems the sort of fellow who'd be happy with a convivial
Bud in the bar next door.

Their very offices, I felt, proclaimed their differences. Mr. Jacobs sat
discreetly enthroned behind a majestic desk in what one might suppose to be a
receiving room in the Elysee Palace, were it not for the wonderfully patterned
ceiling, which looks as if it belongs to a cardinal or princeling in Renaissance
Florence. Mr. Nederlander (''call me Jimmy'') slumped amiably backwards in his
chair in what, were someone to tidy it, might pass muster as junkshop in Hell's
Kitchen. Mr. Jacobs and I affably conferred about matters theatrical in a
comfortable corner of that exquisite room, while he took important phone calls
or, more disconcertingly, made them: ''Give him $500,'' ''Give him new
air-conditioning,'' ''Give him anything he wants.'' Mr. Nederlander mumbled in
earnest, homespun tones while rumpled figures shambled in and out, genially
shaking my hand: ''Hi, I'm James Junior,'' ''Hi, I'm Arthur.''

Both men still have their differences of opinion. For instance, Mr. Nederlander
recently bought two theaters in London, not (he told me) because he saw the
place as a tryout town for New York, but because - aw shucks, he loved England,
liked to keep abreast of the English scene, and might transfer the odd show this
way or that. Mr. Jacobs's more mandarin view (''If we want a play in London, we
don't need to own a theater to have it,'') seemed rather to irk him.

Again, Mr. Jacobs gave the impression of believing that the main trouble with
the New York theater was the New York reviewers: ''Critical standards are
unrealistic, much harsher than those applied to Off Broadway. I'd like to see an
atmosphere where serious plays can be done, and the name of the game isn't to
see how quickly they can be closed.'' Was it my imagination, or did Mr.
Nederlander take a certain relish in demurring? ''I think the critics are right
about most plays, even if some of them are my own. You can't ask them to
subordinate their integrity.''

Actually, both men agreed about one thing. They rejected Joseph Papp's glum
prophecy about Broadway: that soaring costs and rising prices will eventually
reduce the theatrical season to one musical playing for one performance to one
oil tycoon paying a billion dollars for the privilege. Mr. Jacobs seemed
particularly sanguine about the future, and perhaps had cause to be, with
''Cats'' continuing to demonstrate the Shuberts' instinct for commercial
success, and ''Glengarry'' and ''Sunday in the Park With George'' proving they
aren't interested in commercial success alone. Only one thing seemed to please
him more than those shows, and that was the computer he keeps in an anteroom.
Suddenly there was an adolescent gleam in the eye of the high-powered producer,
and his fingers began to summon up the bookings for another of his megahits,
''The Real Thing'': ''Look, every seat sold in every section, except four. Four.
And I can tell you exactly where those four are and why they're empty. . .''
Now, there's a toy James Nederlander might covet.



The rule about theater awards, as about horse-racing, is that your personal
favorites rarely come in first. I knew this from London, and now I know it from
New York. Some of the events and people that most pleased me during the year
went unrewarded, occasionally even unremarked at that exotic tribal ritual that
calls itself the Tony Awards: ''Glengarry,'' and Arthur Kopit's underrated
analysis of the nuclear game, ''End of the World''; Kate Nelligan, audaciously
passionate in O'Neill's ''Moon for the Misbegotten,'' and Dustin Hoffman in
''Death of a Salesman,'' a Willy Loman too cocky, feisty and interestingly
untraditional for the taste of the nominating committee; ''Baby'' and ''The
Human Comedy,'' two reminders that good musicals needn't always be incestuously
about the entertainment industry itself. And since Broadway did in fact have one
of its less prolific years - only 36 new productions, 20 of them designated
failures by ''Variety'' - it would be nice to have paid tribute to the
accomplishments of Off Broadway. What of Beth Henley's hilarious picture of
Southern quirks and quiddities, ''The Miss Firecracker Contest''? Or John
Malkovich's successful orchestration of no less than 29 performers in ''Balm in
Gilead''? Or the actress Dianne Wiest, who brought both nuance and depth to two
quite different parts, a harried wife in Lanford Wilson's ''Serenading Louie''
and the child-woman of Pinter's ''A Kind of Alaska,'' suddenly awoken after 29
years' sleep? She seemed rebuttal in herself of the old canard, still sometimes
heard in Europe, that American performers tend to turn characters into
themselves, instead of themselves into characters.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of cast of 'Chorus Line'

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
Agent OrangeEffect Unproved

BYLINE: By Margot Slade

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 309 words


A decade after the end of the war in Vietnam, some of the men who served there
fear that their lives are still in danger and that not even their unborn
children are safe. Their exposure to Agent Orange, a chemical defoliant that
contains dioxin, they say, has increased the risk of cancer and other diseases
and of birth defects.

The results of the largest medical study of Vietnam veterans yet undertaken may
allay some of the anxiety. Scientists at the National Centers for Disease
Control announced last week that Vietnam veterans were found to be at no greater
risk than other men of fathering babies with birth defects. Although there was
evidence that a very small number of babies of men who were most likely to have
been exposed to the herbicide had suffered from rare defects such as division of
the spinal column, researchers were unable to conclude that these defects were
caused by Agent Orange. Government researchers examined 4,815 babies with birth
defects in the Atlanta area from 1968 through 1980, and compared them with a
control group of 2,967 normal children. In both groups, 9 percent of the fathers
had served in Vietnam.

Under pressure from veterans' groups, Congress ordered a Federal study of the
herbicide, which was sprayed over jungle areas to deprive the enemy of cover.
The remaining segments of the study, not due for five years or so, will cover
the health effects on the veterans themselves.

Veterans groups have said the first report did not go far enough because it did
not address the link between exposure to Agent Orange and mental retardation or
defects that can develop later in life. ''We are never going to settle all
questions,'' responded Dr. Vernon N. Houk, director of the environmental section
of the Centers for Disease Control, ''but we are seeking reasonable answers for
reasonable people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dr. David Erickson, Dr. James Mason and Dr. Vernon Houk

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 762 words


William Diehl's

 HOOLIGANS (Villard, $15.95) is not merely macho. It is machississimo - every
one of the hooligan heroes is bigger than life, tougher than life, all-wise,
all-resourceful. In this big book, the social misfit is glorified into an
eternal loner with the mind of Spinoza, the physical strength of Samson and the
inner doubts of Hamlet. He is pictured as being better than all others. He
marches in the cause of truth, and because he has discarded the hypocritical
trappings of society, his heart is essentially pure.

The hooligans are a special squad of local police detailed to clean up an old
but unspecified city in South Georgia. They are a sort of dirty dozen, except
that there are only eight of them. Into their midst comes one Jake Kilmer, an
agent of the Federal Racket Squad who for years has been trying to get the goods
on a mob family. He turns out to be a soul brother of the hooligans - just as
tough, just as ruthless yet just as assailed by inner doubts. Strong men come
face to face, and their admiration is mutual.

Kilmer arrives only to find the capo and his associate murdered. That is only
the beginning. Within three days, the entire family is wiped out. But who is
after the mobsters? Another mob? Then there are other elements - fixed horse
races, an old romance, killers on the loose, a black mobster who works with the
local sheriff.

When it comes to action, Mr. Diehl is just fine. When it comes to romance, he is
merely trite. '' 'Oh, Jake,' she said huskily.'' That kind of stuff. The book
could well have been cut. There are long flashbacks, in italics, about Vietnam.
These are introduced to show how Jake Kilmer came to be as tough as he is, and
they are entirely unnecessary. ''Hooligans'' is absolutely, utterly
unbelievable, escape fiction cynically assembled with an eye to Hollywood. Clint
Eastwood, anybody?



Just about as ambitious, and at the end not very successful, is

SWITCH by William Bayer (Linden/Simon & Schuster, $14.95). It does have a
startling idea. The locale is New York, where two women are murdered and their
severed heads switched. Cleary a psycho is at work. In charge of the case is
Lieutenant Janek, an introspective, lonely police officer who believes in the
psychological approach. He solves cases by putting himself into the criminal's
mind. In ''Switch'' he has two cases - the decapitations and something involving
a crooked police officer. And he has a love affair.

There are several defects in the book. It is only through the offices of the
author that Janek's new girlfriend has been a longtime target of the killer. In
real life, such coincidences do not happen. Stylistically, ''Switch'' has badly
overwritten sections and some with automatically written, banal rhetoric: ''The
face of a man who had made a dangerous journey into a lawless country that for
years he had been too frightened to explore.'' Mr. Bayer an do better than that.



Stuart M. Kaminsky continues his Toby Peter series with

THE FALA FACTOR (St. Martin's, $11.95). Peter is the private eye who operates
out of Hollywood in the period just before and during World War II, and his
clients have included some of the most revered names in the film colony. In
''The Fala Factor,'' however, he is approached by no one less than Eleanor
Roosevelt. She is convinced that F.D.R.'s dog, Fala, has been kidnapped and that
a canine impostor is living with the President in the White House.

If you believe that, you will believe anything. But this nonsense is part of the
fun of the series. ''The Fala Factor'' is, like all the Toby Peter books, partly
an affectionate parody of the hard- boiled private-eye school and partly a
nostalgic look at a vanished, innocent America. Only a churl would fail to
respond to the obvious good time Mr. Kaminsky has had in writing this amusing,
harmless trivia.



From England comes

WHY KILL ARTHUR POTTER?  by Ray Harrison (Scribners, $12.95). It is a historical
mystery set in the London of 1890. A humble clerk is killed, and Sgt. Bragg and
Detective Constable James Eversleigh Kerwood Morton are put on the case. The
sergeant is very middle class, with a few radical leanings; his partner is a
wealthy member of the gentry with money and a university degree. But they get
along very well. This is Mr. Harrison's first novel, and he handles himself very
well. If there is no great originality, there is an easy, unforced style and
thoroughly convincing characterization. Sgt. Bragg sometimes thinks of things
that would astonish you.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3806 words


FICTION

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF LIAM FAULDS. By Hugh McCleave. (Joan Kahn/St. Martin's,
$13.95.) With some clever turns and comic charm, the Scotsman Hugh McLeave's
10th novel tells the story of a novelist who decides to pump new life into his
tired career by writing a novel under a nom de plume and is destroyed in the
process. Graeme Baldwin, a once-bright star on the London literary scene, is now
aging, weary and cynical. One night, while watching ''The Treasure of the Sierra
Madre'' on television, he begins to contemplate the legends surrounding the
mysterious identity of its author, B. Traven. Baldwin creates Liam Faulds and,
under that name, writes ''A Common Grave,'' a star- crossed lovers' tale of a
Catholic and a Protestant in Northern Ireland. The novel, of course, becomes a
runaway best seller and the mysterious Faulds generates more curiosity and
attention than might J. D. Salinger and Thomas Pynchon combined. Mr. McCleave's
caricatures of high-powered Fleet Street publishers and authors are, if not
poison-penned, enjoyably acidulous, and the elaborate plotting to create and
sustain the myth of Liam Faulds has, at times, the exhilaration of a sturdily
constructed mystery. But the book is on shakier ground in the more complex
characterization of Martin Gilchrist, a young freelance writer whom Baldwin
employs to impersonate Faulds's agent, and in the depiction of Anne, Martin's
wife. Anne becomes the novel's pivotal character, but her motives for
out-plotting Baldwin and turning her husband into Britain's hottest literary
property - a plot that involves theft, arson and murder - are both vague and
improbable. Martin and Anne seem to move only according to the dictates of Mr.
McCleave's neatly stitched plot - a problem as they grow from minor to major
characters and their deceptions shape the course of Baldwin's downfall. In the
end, ''The Life and Death of Liam Faulds,'' amusing as half literary satire and
intriguing as half cloak-and-dagger melodrama, remains two halves that never
quite become a whole. - Roy Hoffman

* FULL CIRCLE. By Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $16.95.) Danielle Steel's latest
novel, ''Full Circle,'' starts off in the world of Jean and Andrew Roberts, a
young newlywed couple living blissfully in an apartment over the Third Avenue El
in New York. (''She had turned out to be even more wonderful than he'd thought
and he smiled to himself as he turned the key in the lock.'') The year is 1941
and the week is passionate, as the young couple recklessly abandon birth control
and biorhythms before Andrew is sent off to war. But by the third chapter, the
party is over. Andrew has been killed; Tana has been born to the widowed Jean;
Jean has become the mistress of a wealthy married man; and Tana, on reaching the
impressionable age of 18, is raped by the man's son. Before the novel ends, we
have witnessed Tana's progress from the Third Avenue El apartment to a house in
the hills of San Francisco, via a small Southern girls' college, a brief
flirtation with the civil rights movement, law school in Berkeley, an affair
with a married man and finally marriage to a judge (''a whole man, of many
interests and pursuits'') and two children late in life. So much so fast leaves
little time for any serious reflection on the part of the main players. Would
she take his name? Yes, of course, ''none of this women's lib . . . for her.''
How to juggle a career and a family? ''It can be as easy as you want, my love,''
says the wise judge. ''But there's no reason why you can't have a career and a
family.'' Cliches abound, characters come and then go just as quickly, but the
lively plot and fast romp over the past three decades make the book a good read.
- Nancy Ramsey

* THE DOSSIER. By Pierre Salinger and Leonard Gross. (Doubleday, $15.95.) An air
of knowledgeabilty about government, broadcasting and international intrigue
pervades this deft thriller by Pierre Salinger, President Kennedy's press
secretary and then a television correspondent, and Leonard Gross, author of
''The Last Jews in Berlin.'' The hero, Andre Kohl, ''chief European
correspondent'' (''His delivery was emphatic and forceful, his manner usually
stern''), interrupts a year's sabbatical when an Israeli secret service agent
tells him that the man likely to be elected president of France had been a Nazi
collaborator during World War II. Kohl, who bears a rather pointed resemblance
to one of the authors of ''The Dossier'' (we learn why Kohl's name is both
French and German, and that his book about Kennedy ''was one of the top five
nonfiction bestsellers of 1964''), attempts to discover whether the accusation
is true. The authors trot out the deputy director of the C.I.A., a K.G.B. agent,
the American President and a covert anti-Communist intelligence ring that
enlists former Nazis as Kohl abandons his passive role as correspondent, risks
his life to find the truth of the matter and saves France. ''The Dossier''is an
intelligently written, suspenseful, tightly structured insider's view of
international double-dealing that rarely stumbles into the implausible.
Superficial as it seems when dealing with Kohl's love affair with a woman 20
years his junior or his midlife crisis over not having become a concert pianist,
the novel has sophistication and authority when it concentrates on what its
authors know a great deal about.- David Evanier

* A SPY IN WINTER. By Michael Hastings. (Macmillan, $14.95.) At least one major
mystery surrounding the activities of Kim Philby, the British spy who defected
to the Soviet Union in 1963, still remains - the identity of the Russian agent
who recruited and guided him. That agent is the major character in Michael
Hastings' ''A Spy in Winter.'' Mr. Hastings is the pseudonym of a member of the
Israeli Knesset and a former military intelligence officer, and he demonstrates
a thorough knowledge of the workings of the murky world of espionage. The story
is told from the viewpoint of the aged Soviet master spy, Alexander Orloff, who
defected to the United States and has lived there for 17 years. He has accepted
an invitation to appear on British television because he will be interviewed by
the daughter of his former wife and because he realizes this will be his last
chance to return to London before he dies. Orloff's arrival sets off a rash of
killings of elderly men who were unmasked, though not arrested, as spies 30
years earlier, and the British intelligence services, as well as Scotland Yard,
set out to solve the murders. Signs point to the existence of a second spy ring
operating in England at the same time as Orloff's, and Orloff himself becomes
involved in the investigation. The labyrinthine plot and emphasis on the
conflicts among the British ''parallel services,'' as well as the peculiarly
British undercurrents of class consciousness, make this a successful thriller
even though the characters - with the exception of Orloff - are mere pawns. -
Jim Haskins

* LIGHTSOURCE.  By Barry Wood. (New American Library, $17.50.)This suspense
novel by Bari Wood, co-author of ''Twins,'' is set in the near future, when
dwindling natural energy reserves have brought the United States to the verge of
disaster. At this crucial juncture, Emily Brand, a physicist working at a
secluded laboratory in New York State, discovers the key to efficient nuclear
fusion. As one character surmises, ''She might win the hardest, highest-stakes
game since poor old Oppy Oppenheimer cajoled a fission bomb out of that bunch of
maniacs in New Mexico.'' To the moguls at NARCON, a giant oil concern, however,
Brand's equations mean the end of the gravy train and, together with various
shady allies in the Government, they do everything in their power to prevent her
from reaching the President. Brand's opponents are a desperate bunch who torture
and murder her fourth-grade teacher to get information, but fortunately the
bookish scientist takes to high-speed car chases and shootouts like a duck to
water. In her souped-up Volvo, with a pistol by her side, Emily Brand is like a
Clydeless Bonnie Parker with a knack for plasma physics. A breathless exercise,
''Lightsource'' is long on plot and pauses only briefly to develop its
characters. Here, for example, reproduced whole, is the paragraph in which the
heroine explains her failure to attend her father's burial: ''Emily had missed
her father's funeral on purpose. Her father had been a Jew, her mother a Quaker.
Emily hated death, and religion confused her.'' There are a few tense moments on
the way to Brand's rendezvous with the President, but the novel's chief virtue
is perhaps its brevity; ''Lightsource'' can be comfortably compassed in a couple
of leisurely afternoons. - Richard Nalley

* OPIUM. By Tony Cohan (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) Set in 1963, with American
involvement in Vietnam as its historical backdrop, ''Opium'' operates on several
different levels. In the love story involving Jim Cross, a United States medical
student and Su Lin, the daughter of a wealthy Hong Kong drug baron, Tony Cohan
creates believable characters with sensibilities suited to the 60's era. (Cross
is a big fan of Miles Davis and John Coltrane, and ''Opium'' is filled with
well-chosen pop culture references.) Addressing the Vietnam War, one of the
characters observes that ''in the last century two opium wars were fought in
Asia. This war in Vietnam will be history's third.'' This is echoed later with
the statement that ''opium is synonymous with white imperialism.'' The drug's
uses and effects receive almost textbook-like examination. Mr. Cohan seems
mesmerized by the narcotic's power, so it isn't surprising that his most vivid
character is Terhune, an American scholar living in China who is an opium
addict. Terhune's journal entries, written under the spell of the drug, reveal
his stoned and often melodramatic perceptions. ''Ah, opium, I have raced the
corridors of heaven with you, trudged each black circle of hell.''
Unfortunately, the central plot - Cross rescuing Su Lin from the clutches of
Asian drug dealers determined to draw her into the illicit family business -
gets obscured in the second half of the novel, buried in Terhune's ruminations.
Still, it is to Mr. Cohan's credit that he entertainingly combines a variety of
subjects. - Mason Buck

NONFICTION

JAPANESE WOMEN: Constraint and Fulfillment.  By Takie Sugiyama. (University of
Hawaii, $18.95.) ''Japan, a decade behind the United States, is now expressing
its awareness of women as a major social issue,'' Takie Sugiyama Lebra writes in
''Japanese Women.'' ''Nevertheless,'' she continues, ''resistance to women's
liberation is as widespread and persistent as ever.'' At issue is whether
contemporary Japanese women - still bound to strictly traditional mores - can
continue to find fulfillment in their largely submissive, domestic roles. To
explore this subject, Mrs. Lebra, a professor of anthropology at the University
of Hawaii and the author of ''Japanese Patterns of Behavior,'' conducted
exhaustive interviews with women of varying ages (28 to 80) and socioeconomic
status in a small community in central Japan. There is much in her study that
will interest Western readers - the popularity of arranged marriages in modern
Japan, the sanctity of the family and the remarkable tyranny inflicted on a new
bride by her mother-in-law. Most interesting of all is Mrs. Lebra's conclusion
that Japanese wives, who are in charge of all household decisions, including
financial ones, enjoy an authority and autonomy, and therefore fulfillment, not
experienced by American career women. By skillfully blending statistical
information and personal accounts, Mrs. Lebra, a master researcher, provides a
thorough and surprising look into another world. - Jeanne McCulloch

* RAZZLE-DAZZLE: The Curious Marriage of Television and Professional Football.
By Phil Patton. (Dial, $14.95).  To justify his title, Phil Patton, a
sportswriter, leans heavily on such familiar professional football names as
Johnny Unitas and Pete Rozelle in describing the romance between the National
Football League and the television industry. But for anyone already aware of
N.F.L. history over the last quarter of a century, the best parts of this book
are its behind-the-scenes glances at television's philosophy and mechanics in
presenting pro football. Perhaps even more interesting are the recollections by
some of those involved in the networks' negotiations with both the N.F.L. and
its rival, the American Football League, during the 1960's. Missing, however,
are the details behind the N.F.L.'s current $1 billion five-year contract with
the three major networks, which expires in 1986. Also missing are the details of
how that contract, which enriched the clubowners and the N.F.L. office, helped
provoke the 57-day strike of N.F.L. players during the 1982 season. ''Indirectly
- subtly but profoundly - television changed not only the way we viewed the game
but the game itself,'' Mr. Patton writes. ''It turned it into a razzle-dazzle
game: the theatricality of its presentation on the screen was echoed in its
evolution on the field.'' Yes, the N.F.L. rules makers have enabled the offenses
to concentrate more on passing in the last few years, with an increase in
scoring that concerns those who remember when ''dee-fense'' ruled. But the
Giants and other struggling noncontenders don't employ a razzle-dazzle
philosophy. And for all the points on the scoreboard last year, the N.F.L.'s
television ratings were down slightly.  - Dave Anderson

* CARING: A Feminine Approach to Ethics & Moral Education. By Nel Noddings.
(University of California, $15.95.) For Nel Noddings, an associate professor of
education at Stanford University, moral development and education are rooted in
the natural parent-child caring relationship and/or one's memory of it. Instead
of exploring how moral reasoning develops or attempting to teach moral choice
through rational argument, Mrs. Noddings examines what it means to care and be
cared for, how caring for another person relates to the larger moral picture and
how caring ultimately functions in an educational context. Such an approach is
labeled ''feminine'' only because of its emphasis on receptivity and
responsiveness. Empathy, of course, plays a crucial role in our caring for
others, and in analyzing it, Mrs. Noddings differs from other psychological
theorists. She views empathy as a feeling rather than an emotion. Emotions are
triggered by visceral responses; feelings arise when caring is followed by
comprehension. She shows how receptivity to another person's distress precedes
an understanding of the nature of the problem. We react to an awareness that
''something is the matter'' before we are motivated to figure out what that
something is. This theory contrasts with the more common assumption that empathy
depends primarily on our skill at assuming various roles. While Mrs. Noddings
emphasizes that the caring person needs some response from those who receive his
or her care if the relationship is to grow, she devotes considerable space to
circumstances where caring is more one-sided - such as those involving people of
diminished capacity, pets or with one's response to the environment. Neither a
how-to book nor a syrupy celebration of universal love, ''Caring'' is for both
general readers and specialists.  - Lisa Kuhmerker

* THE OMNI INTERVIEWS.  Edited by Pamela Weintraub. (Omni/Ticknor & Fields,
$17.95.) Many scientists would feel injured if they were remembered more for
generating myths than for uncovering truths. Yet as E. O. Wilson, one of the
fathers of sociobiology, has observed, ''The most dedicated and inspired of all
scientists have been the people who are entertaining, explicitly or implicitly,
a mythology of their own.'' This seeming paradox emerges over and over in ''The
Omni Interviews,'' a collection of freewheeling discussions from Omni magazine
with 20 world-famous scientists, many of them Nobel laureates. Jonas Salk, who
discovered a polio vaccine in 1955, now views humankind as becoming a single,
integrated organism. Brian Josephson, who explored the properties of
superconductors in the early 1970's, says our world came into being when some
universal intelligence chose it from a variety of possible worlds. Francis
Crick, who in 1953 revealed the structure of DNA, suggests that life was sent to
Earth by some extraterrestrial civilization. And Roger Sperry, who demonstrated
in the 50's the fundamental split between the brain's right and left
hemispheres, now believes the mind is the master, not merely a servant, of the
brain's physiological components. So striking are the myths entertained by these
extraordinary scientists that one wonders whether their scientific breakthroughs
depended on their eccentric world views. More often than not, though, it appears
that the elaborate, sometimes fanciful tales were spun around the discoveries.
Or perhaps the scientists devise myths because they have found that even the
best scientific explanations cannot unravel the mysteries of how life and
consciousness emerge from matter. - Sarah Boxer

* RICHELIEU AND OLIVARES.  By J. H. Elliott (Canbridge University, Cloth,
$29.95. Paper, $9.95.) Throughout the early decades of the 17th century,
France's Cardinal Richelieu and his much maligned Spanish nemesis, the
Count-Duke of Olivares, jousted across the Europe, each trying to make his own
monarch the arbiter of the continent. While Richelieu's military victories and
absolutist administration have convinced scholars his rule forged the first
modern state, Olivares has been condemned as inept and anachronistic. J. H.
Elliott, a historian at Princeton's Institute for Advanced Study, is not of this
school. His Olivares is Richelieu's equal. Obsessed with the prestige of their
kings - Louis XIII of France and Philip IV of Spain - and the restoration of
royal authority, Richelieu and Olivares were pragmatic rulers. They rivaled each
other in advocating social and economic reforms that would discipline chaotic
societies. Convinced that their kings were God's choice to lead Europe, they
drove their countries to war. According to Mr. Elliott, Olivares shied away from
extreme solutions to crises; he lacked the ruthlessness and sense of timing that
made Richelieu seem so lucky. Such luck was vital, for victory offered both
crowns the prestige they sought abroad and the absolute authority that promised
order at home. But victory was never certain in 17th-century warfare and
conspiracy. Mr. Elliott argues that continuous conflict and Richelieu's own
personality made his task of forging a unified state among Protestant heretics
and rebellious nobles easier than that of Olivares, who tried to hold together a
loose empire of provinces watchful of their customary privileges. Mr. Elliot's
analysis shakes off the language of inevitability that has clouded discussion of
the history of France and Spain. - Jonathan M. Elukin

* REGGIE: The Autobiography. By Reggie Jackson with Mike Lupica. (Villard Books,
$15.95.) Reggie Jackson never did make it very easy to like him, and his
autobiography does not change things. ''Reggie,'' written with the sportswriter
Mike Lupica, is arrogant, boastful and egotistical; it never allows modesty to
get in the way of a good story. Indeed, it is dedicated to, among others, ''my
biggest supporter of all . . . God.'' Many people believe in God, but for Mr.
Jackson it evidently works the other way around - God believes in him. Despite
all the hype and braggadocio, something genuine keeps popping up, striving for a
breath of fresh air. As the book progresses, the posturing starts to subside,
and even the writing seems to undergo a subtle change, from a breezy
journalistic style, heavily puctuated with one- line paragraphs, to a more
formal method of presentation. Do the substance and tone of the book really
alter, or is it the reader who changes, gradually falling under the well-known
Reggie Jackson spell? No matter, because in either case, it turns out to be one
of the better sports autobiographies of 1980's. It is frank, straightforward
and, in places, painfully honest. It is also good-humored and frequently funny.
Mr. Jackson has an excellent memory, a good ear for dialogue and a nice sense of
the absurd. Like the man himself, the book is often opinionated but never dull.
Mr. Jackson's former teammate Rick Monday was once asked whether he liked the
leading home-run hitter among active players. ''Reggie is at least three
different people,'' he said. ''One of them I have always liked and admired and
respected very much. The other two I can't stand.'' The reader comes away
knowing Reggie Jackson better and appreciating (to some extent, anyway) the
demons that force him to behave the way he does. - Lawrence S. Ritter

Cadmus: An American Original

By Steven Heller Recent interest in representational painting has fostered an
appreciation of artists whose realist modes, long out of the stylistic and
commercial mainstreams, are now receiving renewed attention. Eighty-year-old
Paul Cadmus is one such artist. Collected by a few ardent patrons, he is a
master draftsman. His unique blend of Bosch-like fantasy and Ashcan School
realism has now been reintroduced in the profusely illustrated and comprehensive
PAUL CADMUS (Imago Imprint, $35), an interesting portrait of the iconoclastic
artist by his admiring yet critical brother-in-law, Lincoln Kirstein. ''My
aim,'' Mr. Kirstein writes, ''is not to enhance a reputation but to assay an
imagery that, while seldom obscure or arcane, is often unappreciated by those
who only scan for shock, and who may be puzzled or confused by Cadmus's choice
of metaphor.'' For Mr. Cadmus, best known for his earlier, more accessible
works, including the much reproduced New York street and restaurant scenes and
Coney Island panoramas, also practices a dark, more personal, visionary magic
realism in which black humor and distant allusions are endemic.  In the
mid-1930's, Mr. Cadmus produced numerous paintings and murals for the Works
Progress Administration. As Mr. Kirstein says, ''Such art, neither portable nor
exportable, never made dealers happy.'' In 1940, Mr. Cadmus was commissioned by
Life magazine to illustrate a significant American event for an issue on
patriotism; he chose a tragedy in which 26 strike- breaking miners were savagely
beaten by strikers. The resulting canvas was never published in Life; when
finally exhibited, critics termed it unspeakably bad and gory. Mr. Kirstein
notes that lack of critical success never daunted Mr. Cadmus, who continues to
paint, often with a satirical edge, without regard for the marketplace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of paintings of Cardinal Richelieu and Count-Duke of Olivares

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS Aug. 19, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1368 words


Fiction1

110

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932.  2

29

LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency.  3

33

FIRST AMONG EQUALS, by Jeffrey Archer.  (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
Three young men vie to be chosen Prime Minister by the Queen of England.  4

524

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  5

413

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.  6

623

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  7

819

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  8

712

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.  9

1

SILVER WINGS, SANTIAGO BLUE, by Janet Dailey. (Poseidon/Simon & Schuster,
$15.95.) The adventures and romances of the women pilots of World War II. 10

12

12

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Three witches wreak
havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town.  11

9

13

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.  12

11

12

THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch.  (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The legends
of an old manor haunt four generations of an English family.  13

14

20

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  14

1

THE FOURTH PROTOCOL, by Frederick Forsyth.  (Viking, $17.95.) A London jewel
robbery leads to plots and counterplots behind the Iron Curtain. 1513

3

MACHINE DREAMS, by Jayne Anne Phillips.  (Seymour Lawrence/Dutton, $16.95.)
Small, ordinary moments in a family's life burst into unexpected meanings.
Nonfiction1

18

THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and David Horowitz. (Summit,
$20.95.) The dark as well as the glamorous sides of four generations of a
prominent family.  2

37

IN GOD'S NAME, by David A. Yallop. (Bantam, $16.95.) A British journalist argues
that Pope John Paul I's death in 1978 was a case of murder.  3

2

10

WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The troubled life of the
late entertainer John Belushi.  4

4

11

THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent.  5

7

14

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  6

6

24

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard, $10.) The novelist recalls
her childhood in Mississippi.  7

5

9

GOOD MORNING, MERRY SUNSHINE, by Bob Greene. (Atheneum, $14.95.) The syndicated
columnist's journal of his child's first year.  8

8

48

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  9

11

5

D.V., by Diana Vreeland. Edited by George Plimpton and Christopher Hemphill.
(Knopf, $15.95.) Memoirs of the one-time ''Empress of Fashion.'' 10

10

15

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  11

9

23

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  12

12

10

POWERPLAY, by Mary Cunningham with Fran Schumer. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster,
$16.95.) The rise and fall of a woman executive at the Bendix Corporation.  13



92

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.  (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  14

1

A VERY PRIVATE EYE, by Barbara Pym.  (Dutton, $19.95.) An autobiography of the
late English novelist, derived from her letters and diaries.  1515

15

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' television series.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

121

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

286

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  3

420

WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard work updated in 1983.  4



1

ZIG ZIGLAR'S SECRETS OF CLOSING THE

SALE, by Zig Ziglar. (Revell, $13.95.) How to ''sell'' your ideas, products and
services. 5

3

10

BOOK WITHOUT A NAME, by Kit Williams.  (Knopf, $10.95.) New picture story by the
author of ''Masquerade,'' offering a prize for the finder of the book's true
title.

























 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.  *An asterisk before a
book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling
industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.



BEST SELLERS

AND BEAR IN MIND

(Editors' choice of other recent books of particular interest)

CEREMONIAL TIME: Fifteen Thousand Years on One Square Mile , by John Hanson
Mitchell. (Anchor/Doubleday, $15.95). With geology, archeology, the memory of
locals and Indians, the author has reconstructed the history of one square mile
west of Boston.

HUBERT HUMPHREY: A Biography , by Carl Solberg. (W.W. Norton, $19.95.) An
Absorbing life of the Prarie Progressive who was mayor of Minneapolis,
Congressman, Senator, Vice President to Lyndon Johnson, but not President, his
ultimate goal.

JOSEPHINE HERBST, by Elinor Langer. (Atlantic/Little, Brown, $19.95.) A
sensitive biography of a novelist (once ranked with Hemingway) who passed from
20's bohemianism to 30's radicalism to obscurity in the 40's, from which she now
emerges.

LAST DAYS , by Joyce Carol Oates. (Dutton, $15.95.) Eleven stories displaying
Miss Oate's uncanny ability to penetrate different states of consciousness; to
her usual preoccupation with madness and violence are added new, mature
concerns.

ONE MORE DAY'S JOURNEY: The Story of a Family and a People , by Allen B.
Ballard. (McGraw-Hill, $17.95.) A study of Afro-American migration from the
South to Philadelphia in 1917-18 and 1922-23, when the author's own forebears
came north.

REQUIRED WRITING: Miscellaneous Pieces 1955-1982, by Philip Larkin.  (Farrar,
Strauss & Giroux; cloth, $17.95; paper, $9.95.) Lively reviews, lectures,
essays, interviews, acceptance speeches, introductions and memoirs by one of the
best living English living poets.

THE WAR OF THE END OF THE WORLD , by Mario Vargas Liosa. (Farrar, Strauss &
Giroux, $18.95.) A large, exciting novel, by the Peruvian writer, about Brazil
at the end of the 19th century and the suppression of a revolutionary
millenarian sect.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: reviewreview

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1068 words


New & Noteworthy

WHO WAS WHO IN THE GREEK WORLD: 776 BC- 30 BC, and

WHO WAS WHO IN THE ROMAN WORLD, edited by Diana Bowder. (Pocket Books, $8.95
each.) ''Who Was Who in the Greek World'' was published in 1982, ''Who Was Who
in the Roman World,'' in 1980. Our reviewer, D. J. R. Bruckner, wrote that these
are ''invaluable guides.'' ''In lucid, brief and accurate entries, they bring to
life the people who shaped civilization in the West from the eighth century B.C.
until the collapse of Rome in A.D. 476.''

THE UNPOSSESSED, by Tess Slesinger. (Feminist Press, $8.95.) Published in 1934,
Tess Slesinger's only novel has been reissued as part of the Feminist Press's
''Novels of the Thirties'' series. ''The Unpossessed'' focuses on 1930's radical
chic and habitues of New York literary parties. The book received praise for its
ferocious drive, wild and unfaltering rhythm, wit lightly blended with malice,
effective denouement and impeccable construction. Miss Slesinger died in 1945,
at 39.

DISPATCHES, by Michael Herr. (Avon, $3.95.) Avon has reissued Michael Herr's
journalistic account of his stint in Vietnam as a correspondent to coincide with
the 10th anniversary of the war's end. In 1977, our reviewer, C. D. B. Bryan,
wrote that ''quite simply, 'Dispatches' is the best book to have been written
about the Vietnam War. . . . Nothing else so far has even come close to
conveying how different this war was from any we fought - or how utterly
different were the methods and the men who fought for us.''

THE WORDS TO SAY IT: An Autobiographical Novel,

 by Marie Cardinal. (VanVactor & Goodheart, Cambridge, Mass., $7.95.) In France,
Marie Cardinal's account of a woman's breakdown and her recovery through
psychoanalysis was called a fictionalized memoir. Translated by Pat Goodheart,
it was published here last year as an autobiographical novel. The author has
said that ''The Words to Say It'' is substantively more fictional than the
public may have assumed. Diane McWhorter, our reviewer, wrote that Miss Cardinal
''bowls over her audience with dazzling verbal artistry and emotion-stirring
tours de force'' but ''when we come to, we may feel a bit taken in.''

ON STRATEGY: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam

War, by Harry G. Summers Jr. (Dell, $3.95.) Col. Harry G. Summers Jr., of the
Strategic Studies Institute of the Army, wrote in this 1982 work that political
scientists had studied why the Vietnam War should be waged and systems analysts
had studied how. But the military failed to decide how the analysts' means could
be used to achieve the political scientists' ends. In a news story, Drew
Middleton, The New York Times's military correspondent, wrote that many military
officers regard ''On Strategy'' as ''the most incisive defense yet written on
the role of the Army and, to a lesser degree, the other services in the war.''

STICK, by Elmore Leonard. (Avon, $3.50.) In Elmore Leonard's 17th thriller,
Stick, the protagonist, has finished a seven-year penitentiary term for armed
robbery and now lives by his wits around Florida's Gold Coast, where almost
everybody is very hip and money-conscious. Our reviewer, George Stade, said in
1983 that ''when Mr. Leonard is observing, satirizing, plotting, working up
suspense, thickening the air with menace, discharging it in lightning flashes of
violence, exposing the black holes behind the parts people play - when he tends
to business, he gives us as much serious fun per word as anyone around.''

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (Signet/New American Library, $4.50.) In 1970
the pregnant Colette MacDonald and her two children were fatally clubbed and
stabbed in their home on the army base at Fort Bragg, N.C. Jeffrey MacDonald,
her husband and the girls' father, was a doctor and a captain in the Green
Berets. In 1979 he was convicted of the murders. This book combines
tape-recorded autobiographical notes by Dr. MacDonald, legal transcripts,
interviews and Joe McGinniss's observations in its 654 pages. In The Book Review
last year, Joan Barthel noted that Mr. McGinniss steps ''with scrupulous
precision through the maze of facts, opinions, deceptions, contradictions and
inconsistencies'' and ''without being intrusive, (he) becomes a genuinely
sympathetic character in the book. . . . It is this involvement, finally, that
makes 'Fatal Vision' - even beyond the fascination of the story it tells and
even at this length - well worth reading.''

YOU MUST KNOW EVERYTHING: Stories 1915-1937,

 by Isaac Babel. (Carroll & Graf, $8.95.) Patricia Blake wrote in The Book
Review that in ''You Must Know Everything,'' ''at least six of the stories rank
among (Isaac Babel's) finest, and each of the others carries the singular and
unmistakable resonance of Babel's genius.'' The central theme of the writer's
work, she said, is ''the Russian Jew's encounter with Bolshevism in its various
aspects, its brutality and its heroics, its ruthlessness and its idealism.''
This collection, translated by Max Hayward, was first published here in 1969.

SCENES FROM CORPORATE LIFE: The Politics of

Middle Management, by Earl Shorris. (Penguin, $7.95.) This book was originally
published in 1981 under the title ''The Oppressed Middle: Politics of Middle
Management. Scenes from Corporate Life.'' Our reviewer, Richard Schickel, wrote
that Earl Shorris believes Hannah Arendt's and others' ''work on totalitarianism
can be taken from the public political realm and applied to the secret life of
the modern American corporation.'' And, Mr. Schickel noted, ''If, at times, (Mr.
Shorris's) singlemindedness, his lack of humor, his insistence on the
inescapably tragic nature of corporate life make one impatient and restless, the
fact remains that he has written a scary and valuable book.''

KINGS IN THE COUNTING HOUSE, by Herbert Mitgang. (Ballantine, $2.95.) The main
character in Herbert Mitgang's fourth novel, ''Kings in the Counting House,'' is
a journalist, as is the author - he reports for The New York Times. ''Kings in
the Counting House,'' published last year, is a thriller involving satellite
broadcasting, executives of major news organizations, terrorists and spies. An
insistent concern is the future of communications.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Miss Slesinger

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CLOSE ENCOUNTERS WITH DEMOCRACY

BYLINE: By BARBARA HALL; Barbara Hall is a freelance writer.

SECTION: Section 12; Page 23, Column 1; Survey of Education Desk

LENGTH: 1289 words


''IT makes you feel really good when they notice you. It's me and my questions
they're answering. It's not as if government's in a glass ball and I can't be a
part of it.''

The speaker is Marylee Shaker, a senior at Yorktown High School in Arlington,
Va., one of thousands of American teen- agers who were less than enthusiastic
about civics until they directly encountered the Washington decision-making
process. Miss Shaker's experience was a result of her school's affiliation with
the Close Up Foundation, the largest of three Washington-based nonprofit
organizations established to counter high school students' assumptions that
democracy must be distant and dull.

More vital civics education is called for in several of the recent national
reports on education, including the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of
Teaching's 1983 evaluation of American high schools. ''Civics used to be a
mainstay in the high school; recently it has declined,'' wrote Dr. Ernest Boyer,
president of the Carnegie Foundation, in the report. ''Civic illiteracy is
spreading, and unless we educate ourselves as citizens, we run the risk of
drifting unwittingly into a new kind of Dark Age. In a world where human
survival is at stake, ignorance about government and how it functions is not an
acceptable alternative.'' Dr. Stanley Elam, contributing editor to Phi Delta
Kappan magazine, who conducted recent surveys on high school seniors' perception
of the Bill of Rights, said: ''We found that their understanding of the Bill of
Rights is very, very inadequate. The most startling and depressing finding in
our polls is that standard civics or government courses don't increase students'
sense of the Bill of Rights. The courses are so formal that they don't affect
attitudes much.'' Dr. Elam concurs with Dr. Boyer that ''the whole nature of
government and civics courses has to change.'' One solution recommended in the
Carnegie report is students' direct participation in the democratic process.

The three organizations that acquaint students with civics on a firsthand basis,
besides the Close Up Foundation, are Washington Workshops Inc. and A
Presidential Classroom for Young Americans. Their goal is to carry civics
education from the passive to the active state by bringing thousands of students
and teachers to Washington annually for lively, informative encounters with the
process and its leading participants. All three groups emerged during the late
1960's and early 70's, in the Vietnam and Watergate atmosphere, amid a
perception that such negative events could dissuade young people from public
concern and, eventually, public service.

The three differ in who and how they teach. The Close Up Foundation, based in
Arlington, Va., is the most far-reaching and expensive of the three. Begun a
decade ago by a former teacher and State Department protocol officer, Stephen
Janger, it has brought 130,000 students and 19,000 teachers to the capital.

Close Up's policy is one of open eligibility. Any high school student may take
part regardless of his or her academic standing or ability to raise $460 for a
week's stay in a city hotel. While all three organizations depend largely on
corporate underwriting, Close Up also receives Federal Government financial
support that takes the form of student and teacher scholarships.

Presidential Classroom accepts only students of high academic achievement -
those who, according to the administrator, Brian Foss, ''demonstrate the ability
to translate what they get here in Washington to their home communities.''
Presidential Classroom's programs costs $425 for a week's session, including
city hotel accommodations. Headquartered in Alexandria, Va., it was co-founded
15 years ago by the late Vice President Hubert Humphrey, the journalist Bill
Moyers and John Golden, a former Presidential aide to both John F. Kennedy and
Lyndon Johnson. Presidential Classroom has put 37,000 students from all 50
states and abroad through its program.

Washington Workshop, the oldest and smallest of the three, to date has gathered
in 20,000 sophomores, juniors and seniors, most from East Coast high schools.
The program has no academic requirements for enrollment. Students are asked to
pay $435 for a six-day session of Government activities and hcusing at Marymount
College in Virginia.

The organization was founded in 1967 by Leo Tomkin, who as a Capitol Hill staff
member used to notice school tours wend their ways through the halls of
Congress. As Thom Berkeley, the current Washington Workshop Congressional
liaison, explained, ''Mr. Tomkin said, 'They're all looking at this from the
outside. Why can't they see it from the inside?' ''

''Seeing it from the inside'' has meant countless exchanges between the nation's
leaders and those of the future. Students have talked with top-ranking
legislators from both sides of the political aisle. ''We're not nonpartisan,''
said Mr. Janger, ''we're multipartisan. There are a lot of agendas here.''

There have been sessions with journalists on the Washington scene, with
ambassadors, military officers, Cabinet members and the President himself.
President Reagan has been available to the students on several occasions when
the White House press corps has been clamoring for access. Students also sit in
on sessions of the House and Senate.

Contrasts crop up in the curriculum materials and lesson plans of the three
organizations. Washington Workshop's approach is the simplest: Students are
given the Congressional Quarterly and a handbook on government. Further
materials are left to the visiting teachers' discretion. On the other hand,
Presidential Classroom, unlike its counterparts, employs its own teaching staff,
who provide curriculum and conduct courses around the government events.

THE Close Up Foundation's offering is the most ambitious. During the school year
two half-hour student seminars, one hourlong teacher seminar and special
conferences are broadcast from Washington each week on C-SPAN, the
Washington-based cable network that also telecasts proceedings of the House of
Representatives. Social studies teachers can videotape these programs free of
charge, within certain guidelines, for later use in the classroom, or the
telecasts can be brought in live if they coincide with classroom scheduling in
high schools where cable television is available, this facet of the foundation
is underwritten by R.J. Reynolds and Conoco Inc.

The foundation also produces debates and discussions of current issues,
featuring Washington news makers. Among topics covered are United States-Soviet
relations, energy, American education and world peace. Several hundred tapes are
available free to 2,200 Close Up schools and may also be bought.

Pam Chivucos, a former high school teacher who now conducts workshops for
educators interested in the video program, says that some teachers are initially
hesitant about television in the classroom. But, she said, ''Television is a
force in children's lives. You turn it on, and the kids do watch. The difference
between our programs and most television is something like the difference
between comics and the classics in print.''

Sara Jane Knight, Mary Lee Shaker's social studies teacher in Arlington, Va.,
has been involved with Close Up since 1976. ''The greatest change I see from
this,'' she said, ''is student motivation. In the beginning of a video series,
students watch their peers. They don't really listen to their questions or the
answers. As the series progresses, they realize there's a lot more to this. They
learn to critically analyze questions and answers. And especially after they go
to Washington, they register to vote, they work in campaigns.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Clairborn Pell; photo of Stephen Janger with Sara Jane Knight

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 20, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VOWING TO 'FIND IT,' U.S. PRESSES MINE HUNT

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 879 words


ABOARD U.S.S. SHREVEPORT, off Ras Shukhair, Egypt, Aug. 19 - Officers aboard
this Navy transport vessel searching for mines in the Gulf of Suez said today
that they would not stop until they found one.

''If it's there, I think we'll find it,'' said Comdr. Chester F. Harrison, who
is in charge of the minesweeping RH- 53D Sea Stallion helicopters that have been
operating from the Shreveport. ''Our capability is that good.''

Sonar is providing what Commander Harrison described as some ''pretty good
pictures'' of the bottom.



'We Haven't Found a Thing'

But in the first two days of searching the south-central Gulf of Suez, the four
specially equipped helicopters have yet to turn up evidence of what has been
causing the underwater explosions that have damaged 19 ships since July 9.

''We haven't found a thing,'' said Commodore Alvin S. Newman, Commander of the
United States Naval Forces Central Command, who took 14 American journalists on
a tour of the 16,900-ton Shreveport today.

There is another problem, the commodore said. If and when the mission,
code-named Operation Intense Look, does find an unexploded mine, the weapon
would probably not reveal who planted it.

''Every maritime nation in the world has mines,'' said Commodore Newman. ''It
would be impossible to lay specific blame.''

Egytian officials say they consider Libya the chief suspect, but concede they
have no proof.

The search is likely to last two or three more weeks, the officers said.  Capt.
Robert J. Ianucci, who commands the Shreveport, said the ship, which has been
anchored south of Ras Shukhair, would move 11 miles closer to the coastal city
tonight. The idea, he said, is to take advantage of nearby mountains that he
hopes will block the hot desert winds that have been causing 15-foot swells.

''The deck has gotten a little tenuous,'' Captain Ianucci said.

Sonar on the Harkness, a United States oceanographic survey ship that has been
hunting for mines in this area at Egypt's request since Aug. 4, has spotted 12
suspicious objects.

But seven later inspections by divers turned up only rubbish and coral
formations on the sea bottom. Several of the suspect objects drifted away before
divers could reach them, officers said, suggesting the objects were not mines.

Three of the objects detected were too deep for divers aboard the Harkness to
inspect. Commodore Newman said these sites would be checked later by
better-equipped Navy divers aboard La Salle, the flagship of the United States
Middle East force, which along with three helicopters is searching for mines
near Jidda, Saudi Arabia.

Three underwater explosions have damaged ships in this part of the gulf,
Commodore Newman said. But the last occurred about three weeks ago.  Since then,
he added, the area has been ''constantly swept'' by the heavy commercial ship
traffic along the relatively narrow shipping lanes, where the water is between
50 and 75 meters deep.

This is the Shreveport's first real mine-searching mission, but not the first
for some of its officers.

Mission Called Humanitarian

Commander Harrison, 39 years old, took part in Operation End Sweep, the clearing
of mines from Haiphong harbor in Vietnam in 1973.

''But the missions here and in Saudi Arabia are humanitarian,'' he said.

Although there have not been any explosions in Red Sea waters near Jidda,
hundreds of thousands of Moslem pilgrims are headed there en route to Mecca for
the annual pilgrimage.

Captain Ianucci said Egyptian security procedures in the gulf were ''very tight
and very impressive.''

''On Channel 16, the maritime station, we can hear the Egyptian Navy challenging
every ship that comes into the gulf,'' Commodore Newman added.

In some cases, ships have been boarded and searched. Egyptian newspapers
reported today, for example, that a Libyan passenger ship, one of 63 vessels
that crossed the Suez Canal on Saturday, was permitted to enter the channel
after what the papers termed ''necessary measures'' had been taken. The reports
did not elaborate.

2 Soviet Minesweepers in Area

Reuters, quoting Suez Canal officials, reported today that two Soviet
minesweepers had crossed the canal. Their destination was unknown, the news
agency said. But at least one Soviet minesweeper has been searching for mines
off the coast of Southern Yemen, diplomats here said.

The Shreveport, armed with Stinger antiaircraft missiles and 3-inch guns, was on
24-hour alert, in case terrorists managed to evade Egyptian security measures,
Captain Ianucci said.

The ship, which has 651 men aboard, including the 200 who handle the
helicopters, can stay at sea a month without resupply. But Egypt has offered
fresh water, fuel and the waiving of Suez Canal tolls.

''The Egyptian pilot who guided us across said that we set a world's record for
a canal crossing,'' Captain Ianucci said. ''We were given a priority transit,
crossed at full speed, and made it in 7 hours and 45 minutes. The previous
record, they told me, was 10 hours and 20 minutes.''

''It was very exciting,'' he continued. ''I had never crossed the canal before.
The port authorities gave us four dozen roses. Ships blew their horns as we came
through. You know, it was 'God Bless America.' ''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ray Katnis (page A8); map of Middle East (page A8); photo of
crewman aboard U.S. ship Shreveport

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 20, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ROTTING IN LAOS

BYLINE: By John LeBoutillier ;
John LeBoutillier, Long Island Republican, while in Congress from 1981 to 1983
served on the House Foreign Affairs Committee and Task Force on Prisoners of War
in Southeast Asia.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 725 words

DATELINE: WESTBURY, L.I.


A terrible wrong was committed 11 years ago: 566 servicemen lost in Laos were
abandoned without a trace. While almost 600 war prisoners held in North Vietnam
came home in early 1973, not one of the 566 has ever come home - dead or alive.
This tragedy continues.

Gen. Eugene Tighe, who at the time was director of the Pentagon's Defense
Intelligence Agency, recently testified that he believed that our men were still
held in Laos. Privately, D.I.A. analysts concede that P.O.W.'s are still alive
there, differing only on how many there are. The most recent estimates range
from 20 to 253.

Hundreds of recent refugee reports, verified with ''lie-detector'' machines,
describe similar scenes: American pilots are held virtually as slaves in caves
and remote villages, guarded by Vietnamese and Laotian soldiers, at times forced
to repair American weapons and electronic equipment left over from the war.  How
did this happen? On Jan. 27, 1973, America and North Vietnam signed the Paris
Peace Accords, which provided for the return of all P.O.W.'s in Vietnam.
Neighboring Laos was not a participant and no provision was made for return of
P.O.W.'s there.  On Feb. 1, 1973, President Richard M. Nixon sent to Prime
Minister Pham Van Dong a letter pledging $3.25 billion in reconstruction funds
if Hanoi honored the treaty - and if Congress appropriated the money. In
exchange, Hanoi was to provide a complete list of all P.O.W.'s in Laos. It did
not. To this day, it has provided no information on any of the 566.  Then, on
Feb. 5, 1973, an American bomber was shot down in Laos with seven men on board.
National Se

curity Agency radio intercepts confirm that four were taken prisoner. Nothing
has been done about them.

Meanwhile, Capitol Hill made it clear that it would not appropriate the $3.25
billion. But Hanoi had shrewdly created an insurance policy against the
possibility that the money would fall through: the P.O.W.'s in Laos were a
bargaining chip.

By early March, it was obvious the funds would not be voted. Henry A. Kissinger,
architect of the Paris treaty and then national security adviser, dispatched
Robert C. McFarlane, now President Reagan's national security adviser, to Paris
to make a new offer: America would exchange $100 million in medicine for the
P.O.W.'s in Laos. Hanoi did not deny the P.O.W.'s were there; instead, it
countered: We don't want just $100 million; we want the $3.25 billion Nixon
promised us. With Congress unwilling to appropriate this sum, and Hanoi
unwilling to settle for less, the Administration was stuck.

Just when the public should have been informed of the dilemma, Watergate
convulsed the nation. Vietnam and Laos took a back seat.

For 11 years, Hanoi has positioned itself to ''find'' the P.O.W.'s. In a private
message to me in September 1981, its ambassador to Thailand said: ''Cases of
Americans reportedly captured but not registered with the center responsible for
P.O.W.'s require time for investigation and searching. Failure to register these
cases was due to many war circumstances which led to their missing on the way
from the places of capture to the detention centers.'' In a face-saving manner,
the North Vietnamese continue to give themselves an ''out.''

Why does the situation remain unresolved? Because Hanoi's policy is not to
''find'' the P.O.W.'s until Washington stops supporting Peking, opens full
diplomatic relations with Hanoi and makes good on past promises. And because of
the Reagan Administration's refusal to improve relations until Hanoi makes a
complete accounting of all the P.O.W.'s. The P.O.W.'s must wonder: ''Why has
America abandoned us?''

How to break this stalemate?

One Communist official told me in 1981: ''How can we ask our peasants to look
for your (troops) when you have destroyed all our schools and hospitals? If
America gives our people hospitals and schools, then we can ask these peasants
to look for your (troops).''

The only way to bring home the P.O.W.'s is to swallow some pride in admitting
that we lost the war and that Hanoi holds all the cards. We must provide,
without a quid pro quo, a multibillion dollar reconstruction program involving
medicine, hospitals, X-ray equipment, schools and other nonmilitary humanitarian
aid.

We don't put a price on human life; the North Vietnamese do. B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 20, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Accuses China Of Border Incursions

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 140 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 19


Vietnam accused China today of staging air, land and sea incursions into
Vietnamese territory last week and of increasing efforts to ''destabilize''
Vietnam's border provinces.

The Vietnam News Agency, monitored in Bangkok, said Chinese troops had fired
nearly 3,000 artillery shells into three districts of Ha Tuyen Province and
about 100 mortar rounds into a village of Quang Ninh Province.

Chinese aircraft repeatedly intruded about a mile into Vietnamese airspace in Ha
Tuyen, the agency said, while vessels entered Vietnamese waters for
reconnaissance 156 times. It said Chinese troops occupying a hill inside
Vietnamese territory in Ha Tuyen had conducted repeated raids, many against
civilian targets.

The agency said the Vietnamese ''put out of action'' 69 Chinese soldiers and
destroyed an antiaircraft gun and other weapons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 20, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CONVENTION IN DALLAS: THE REPUBLICANS;
DEFENDING WEAK SPOT

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 847 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Aug. 19


On opening night the Republican National Convention will seek to take the
offensive in President Reagan's most vulnerable area, foreign policy, with a
sharp attack on the Democrats by one of the Administration's most vigorous
proponents of the active use of American power and influence in the world.
Republican leaders have tapped Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the chief United States
delegate to the United Nations, who still calls herself ''a lifelong Democrat,''
to make the Republican case that the Reagan years have restored American
strength and confidence.

In what will be in effect a preamble to the keynote speech, Mrs. Kirkpatrick
plans to offer a strong-spoken, unapologetic defense of Reagan policy. ''The
restoration of our economic and military strength has silenced talk of
inevitable American decline and reminded the world of the advantages of
freedom,'' she intends to argue.

She has prepared a contrasting indictment of a Democratic Party that, as she put
it in an interview today, ''sounds and acts traumatized by its own
interpretation of the Vietnam experience and unable to get on with the problems
of the day.''



Foreign Policy Problems

For the Reagan strategists, her appearance marks an opportunity to underscore
the President's ability to appeal across party lines and also to throw the
Democrats on the defensive by accusing them of abandoning the foreign policy
activism of Presidents Truman and Franklin D. Roosevelt.

For Mrs. Kirkpatrick, who was a Maryland delegate to the 1976 Democratic
convention and a member of the credentials and platform committees, the occasion
offers a personal platform to bid for a higher foreign policy post in a second
Reagan Administration. Supporters have touted her for national security adviser.

With the economy on a steady upswing, it is the common estimate of Republican
and Democratic strategists that foreign affairs is the area in which President
Reagan risks the most serious challenge this fall.

Opinion polls steadily show that a majority of the public is fearful about the
risks of war and nervous about an accelerating nuclear arms race.



Public Evenly Divided

In contrast to his domestic policy, the President can point to few successes
beyond the quick invasion of Grenada last October. The latest New York Times/CBS
News Poll, taken earlier this month, shows the public no more than evenly
divided on Mr. Reagan's handling of foreign affairs despite some gains in recent
months and efforts by the Administration to improve his foreign policy position
for the campaign.

His most serious problem, some officials concede, is that in his first three
years President Reagan presided over a deepening chill in relations with the
Soviet Union and the breakdown of all major arms negotiations with Moscow.

The President has taken a more conciliatory stance this year. He eased his
public terms for a summit meeting with Soviet leaders and responded positively
in late June to a Soviet proposal for talks on antisatellite and space weapons.
Though prospects for such talks this fall have dimmed, White House officials
hope his efforts will help him with voters.

In Lebanon the President suffered his sharpest foreign policy reversal. He
committed American marines and prestige to the defense of a pro- Western
Government only to see 265 American lives lost to bombing, shelling and sniping.
Faced with rising criticism, he withdrew the Marines in February and then
watched the Government renounce its American-mediated agreement with Israel.



Moves to Cushion Criticsm

In Central America his once-covert war in Nicaragua has run into stubborn
opposition from House Democratic leaders. This summer the Administration gave
up, at least temporarily, seeking more funds for Nicaraguan rebels.

On that front as elsewhere the Reagan White House has moved this year to cushion
criticism. On June 1, Secretary of State George P. Shultz flew to Managua for
talks with the top Nicaraguan leader, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, giving diplomacy
more visibility than the covert war. In Honduras, American military maneuvers
were scaled down.

But the major gain for the White House has been the election of Jose Napoleon
Duarte, a Christian Democrat popular with many Democrats in Congress, as
President of El Salvador. His victory has helped the Administration win approval
for $70 million more in military aid and helped reduce El Salvador as a hot
political issue. In the latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll, no one cited
Central America as the most important problem facing the country.

In May Mr. Reagan made a trip to China that his aides said proved his ability to
deal with a major Communist power. Yet political strategists are wary of latent
public fears of peril abroad. Some worry that an unanticipated foreign crisis or
some political miscue, like Mr. Reagan's offhand jest about ''bombing'' Russia,
could raise public jitters and offer Walter F. Mondale an opportunity to use
what they call ''the war-peace issue'' to damage the President.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of volunteers preparing signs for convention hall

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 20, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 856 words


THE NEW AMERICAN POVERTY. By Michael Harrington. 271 pages. Holt, Rinehart and
Winston. $17.95.

About 20 years ago, Michael Harrington reminds us in his new book, he wrote
''The Other America,'' which has been credited with drawing President John F.
Kennedy's attention to the existence of poverty amid national affluence and of
helping to inspire the Johnson Administration's ''War on Poverty.''

The purpose of ''The New American Poverty'' is to show that that war has yet to
be won, that the poor are still with us.

To the conservative argument that this demonstrates the failure of the liberal
programs of the 1960's, Mr. Harrington responds that the programs were not all
that liberal. He argues that not enough money was spent on them, that they were
put into the hands of the usual political and economic jobbers and that the war
in Vietnam relegated the poverty war to unfinished business. Taking aim at
supply-side enthusiasts, Mr. Harrington writes that if ''social meanness were
the key to productivity, America would, on the record of the past twenty years,
be the most productive nation on the face of the earth.''

''The New American Poverty'' is a grim inventory of distressed groups. They
include skilled workers displaced by technological change and untrained young
blacks, unmarried mothers and fatherless children, immigrant laborers being
exploited in the fields of the Southwest and the sweatshops of the Northeast,
street people and old people. Most of them collect no unemployment insurance.

As all these groups have been much reported on, this time around Mr. Harrington
brings no revelations. And given the inclinations of the present Administration
- ''the new Gradgrinds,'' Mr. Harrington calls the Reaganauts - it is not likely
that his book will spark a new war on the new poverty. Nonetheless, his
descriptions of inner-city ghettos, stricken rural towns and worn-out industrial
areas are powered by a wholesome outrage.


Mr. Harrington, a durable advocate of the underdog, is determined to unsettle
those who, from the comfort of their calculations, would simply define poverty
out of existence. He is at his best when he works his way inside the statistics
to explain how hard it is for a middle-aged worker to move to a different town
or state, to learn a new skill, to get along without medical coverage.

When he comes to such matters as street criminals and unwed mothers, his
ideological allegiance makes for a defensive tone - ''they are mainly social
products, and therefore society is responsible for the evil it has imposed upon
them.'' Although Mr. Harrington points out that the bulk of the money for social
programs goes to people over age 65, most of whom are not poor, he cannot bring
himself to call for a cut in Social Security or, indeed, in any other
''entitlement'' program.

As a good Socialist, Mr. Harrington believes that we are in the midst of yet
another worldwide crisis of capitalism. That is what socialists have always
believed. He takes on conservative heavyweights, such as James Q. Wilson, Thomas
Sowell and Edward Banfield, who, he charges, like to blame the poor for their
troubles. Unfortunately, the encounter does not prove instructive. In a field
where numbers are available to prove anything one desires, Mr. Harrington's
technique is to choose those offered by groups that share his political
predilections, notably the A.F.L.- C.I.O. and the Congressional Black Caucus; he
makes his case by characterizing his opponents as ''simplistic'' and his allies
as ''brilliant'' and ''sophisticated.''


The socialist faith has no room in it for the part that unions and workers have
played in the falterings of the American economy; management is always to blame,
along with the System. And socialists are given to a hortatory mode that may
come across better on the platform than on the page. Mr. Harrington expresses
the hope that ''when we join, in solidarity and not in noblesse oblige, with the
poor, we will rediscover our own best selves - that we will regain the vision of
America.'' He has a soft spot for eyesight images: ''When will America open its
eyes?''

The way to end poverty, Mr. Harrington argues, is through a full-employment
program and ''a commitment to a new international economic order'' - objectives
that he describes in only the sketchiest fashion. He proposes subsidizing
corporations that act in socially productive ways and penalizing those that shut
down factories in distressed areas. He wants higher wages, affordable housing,
liberal immigration laws, a national health plan and more technological aid to
underdeveloped countries. Such measures, he maintains, will enable the American
economy to thrive, but he moves rather hastily over just how this will come
about. He puts great faith in ''planning.''

But then socialists have always found it easier to describe the failings of
capitalism than the successes of socialism. Their strength, exemplified by Mr.
Harrington's new book, is that they make it difficult for the more fortunate of
us to put out of our minds the pain of those who do not live in our
neighborhoods.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Michael Harrington

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

China Jails Vietnamese Spy

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 66 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Aug. 20


A Chinese court today jailed a Vietnamese spy for 10 years after he admitted
repeatedly crossing the border to collect information and incite rebellion, the
Chinese national radio reported. The radio said the spy operated from the
Vietnamese town of Liangshan and crossed the frontier a number of times between
April and July of 1982, when he was captured by Chinese security personnel.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 22, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Cambodian Border Defenses

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 47 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Aug. 21


Vietnam has deployed more antiaircraft guns and heat-seeking missiles along the
Thai-Cambodian border. The Supreme Commander of the Thai Army, Gen. Arthit
Kamlangek, said today that the weapons had been moved near the border opposite
Thailand's Surin and Sisaket Provinces.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 22, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CONVENTION IN DALLAS: THE REPUBLICANS;
KIRKPATRICK'S SPEECH DELIGHTS PARTY

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Aug. 21


The toast of Dallas today was a lifelong Democrat who had never attended a
Republican convention before and admitted she was a bit surprised to be here.

Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, President Reagan's chief delegate to the United Nations,
roused a desultory convention session Monday night with a strong endorsement of
American power and influence in world affairs. She drew cheers when she linked
Walter F. Mondale to the Administration of Jimmy Carter and said harshly, ''They
made things worse, not better.''

Today Representative Dick Cheney of Wyoming seemed to speak for many delegates
when he told reporters: ''I thought Jeane's speech was excellent. It was the
highlight of the convention so far. She clearly ended up the de facto
keynoter.''

Lyn Nofziger, a Reagan political adviser, drew shouts of agreement at a party
breakfast today when he said, ''This is not a dull convention when you have a
lifelong Democrat give the toughest foreign policy speech I've heard in 20
years.''

Monday night the hall was dotted with signs saying, ''Lean on 'em Jeane,'' and
today many Republicans were saying that if President Reagan was re-elected he
should lean on Mrs. Kirkpatrick in an expanded role, perhaps as national
security adviser. A few were even mentioning her as a possible Vice-Presidential
candidate on the Republican ticket in 1988.

Party Not Relevant


In an interview before her speech Mrs. Kirkpatrick noted that her last national
convention was in 1976, when she was a delegate from Maryland to the Democratic
meeting in New York and a member of the platform committee.

She had not changed her party registration, she said, adding, ''I no longer
regard party as relevant to the major problems of our times.''

Mrs. Kirkpatrick has received so much attention here partly because she plays
three separate roles for the Republicans.

As a woman she helps counterbalance the Democratic choice of Representative
Geraldine A. Ferraro for Vice President. As a Democrat she symbolizes the
Republicans' recognition that they are a minority party that must attract
Democratic votes to win national elections.

In her third role, Mrs. Kirkpatrick provides an intellectual rationale for the
basic premise of President Reagan's foreign policy: that there is a clear
difference between the United States and the Soviet Union, and that America is
justified in using its power to project its values around the world.

Representative Cheney summarized this view of the world when he said of the
Democrats today, ''They no longer know who the bad guys are.''

Mrs. Kirkpatrick's speech Monday night reflected her political and intellectual
origins. Her early heroes in Democratic politics included Hubert H. Humphrey and
Henry M. Jackson, two Senators who took a liberal line in domestic policy but
argued for an activist and anti-Communist foreign policy.

The United Nations delegate said of these and other Democrats last night: ''They
were not afraid to be resolute nor ashamed to speak of America as a great
nation. They didn't doubt that we must be strong enough to protect ourselves and
to help others.''

Lost Faith in Democrats


Mrs. Kirkpatrick, a professor of political science at Georgetown University
since 1967, says she started losing faith in her party when the Vietnam War
soured many of its leaders on the use of American power abroad. She joined a
loose-knit group of intellectuals known as ''neoliberals'' who argued that the
party had lost its courage and moral fiber.

In her speech she derided the Democratic Party that gathered in San Francisco as
an ostrich, ''convinced it could shut out the world by hiding its head in the
sand.'' Earlier she had said in an interview that Democrats failed to understand
that national power ''can be used intelligently, selectively and successfully.''

Mrs. Kirkpatrick, who has expressed impatience about her current job, made a bid
at one point to become President Reagan's national security adviser. Republicans
here say that her aspirations have clearly been enhanced by her appearance
Monday night.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 22, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TELECAST OF LIBEL CASE ASKED

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 256 words


Cable News Network is seeking court permission to provide live courtroom
television coverage in the event that Gen. William C. Westmoreland's libel suit
against CBS goes to trial.

The request was made in a petition filed yesterday in District Court. Judge
Pierre N. Leval, who is hearing the case, is on vacation and probably will not
rule on the petition until after Labor Day, according to a member of his office
staff.

Should the judge rule that a trial be held and grant the CNN petition, it would
mark the first time that live television coverage of a trial has ever been
allowed in a Federal court, according to Stuart Pierson of Verner, Liipfert,
Bernhard and McPherson, the lawyers representing CNN. CNN is the Turner
Broadcasting System's all-news television service. Mr. Pierson said all of the
defendants in the case had agreed to live television and photo coverage in the
courtroom.

The petition requests that one remote-controlled television camera and one still
photographer be allowed in the courtroom, with all members of the press allowed
to use the televised material in a pool arrangement.

Mr. Pierson said in the petition that the the case warranted live television
coverage because of its legal, social and political aspects.

General Westmoreland sued CBS and four CBS staff members after the broadcast of
a documentary called ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' which
asserted that in 1968 there was a conspiracy to suppress accurate information
about enemy strength prior to the Tet offensive.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 23, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GOLDWATER, SPEAKING HIS MIND, ECHOES THEMES OF '64 CAMPAIGN

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 812 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Aug. 22


The founder and father figure of the modern Republican Party limped onto the
rostrum tonight, ailing but triumphant.

His words were strong but the delivery was halting, and he was received more as
a party elder than as an oracle. But the crowd cheered when he revived an old
campaign theme and said of President Reagan, ''And in your hearts, you know he's
right.''

Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona was here to speak his mind, in his
inimitable, unvarnished style, and no one was going to stop him. He struck the
themes he has burnished through a life in politics, ignoring White House and
Reagan campaign officials, who hoped he would tone down his oratory.

''He said his heart was set on it,'' a Reagan campaign aide said after Mr.
Goldwater met with White House officials and Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada,
general chairman of the Reagan campaign. ''Laxalt and other senior officials
tried to talk him out of it,'' the aide said. ''They told him that this was not
exactly the best time for that sort of thing.''

Senator Goldwater repeated the clarion call of his ill-fated 1964 Presidential
campaign.

''And let me remind you that extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice,''
he told the delegates, but his remarks did not evoke the spirit of 20 years ago.
''What, may I ask, was more extreme than our Revolutionary War? Our Founding
Fathers pledged their lives, their fortunes and their sacred honor for that most
honorable and noble cause, freedom.''

He spoke of love and honor for America, of strength and courage, self-reliance
and sacrifices, freedom and leadership.

And he linked the Democrats to carnage. ''Every war in this century began and
was fought under Democrat Administrations,'' Mr. Goldwater said. ''You doubt me?
World War I, Woodrow Wilson, Democrat. World War II, Franklin Roosevelt,
Democrat. Korea, Harry Truman, Democrat. Vietnam, Jack Kennedy and Lyndon
Johnson, both Democrats.''

From the moment of his arrival, the Senator was engulfed in waves of affection
and nostalgia.

He is 75 years old now, as contentious and unpredictable as ever, and as modest.
He is a ruggedly handsome man, with a shock of graying hair. But he is suffering
from an ailing hip and says he is in the market for a hearing aid. Senate
colleagues sadly note a decline in both his vitality and mobility.

The Senator carries his conservatism modestly, and minimizes his contribution to
his party.

''The conservative concepts of politics go back to the days of the Greeks,'' he
said at a news conference this morning. ''There was nothing new.''

''The Republican Party has never been anything but a conservative party,'' he
continued. ''I don't buy the idea that I'm the grandfather or padre of anything
that's going on today.''

But Representative Ed Bethune of Arkansas expressed the consensus view of Mr.
Goldwater: ''He was the keeper of the flame.''

This is his eighth national convention, he says, and probably his last. ''In '88
I don't know if I'll still be here,'' the Senator said. ''I have a hunch this is
my last convention.''

He is revered by his colleagues as the grand old man of Senate Republicans. Now
serving his fifth term, he says it will be his last.

The Senator portrayed himself today as a traditionalist who looks to the future.
He insisted on calling Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro, the Democratic
nominee for Vice President, ''Mrs. Zaccaro,'' her name in marriage, explaining,
''I'm too old- fashioned to do anything else.''

But he predicted that he would live to see the day ''when we'll have a woman
Vice President or even President.''

''Women are more competent generally than men,'' Mr. Goldwater continued. ''They
have to run the house. They have to spend the money we make. They have to raise
the children.''

1964 Campaign Recalled


In 1964, Senator Goldwater bested Nelson A. Rockefeller for the Republican
Presidential nomination at a convention in which the New York Governor was booed
and vilified by enraged Goldwater delegates.

The Senator calls his Presidential campaign, in which he lost by a landslide to
President Johnson, the most exciting experience in his life. Nor does he
acknowledge making any mistakes, either in his campaign statements or in his
selection of a little-known upstate New York Congressman, William E. Miller, as
his running mate. He said at the time that ''one of the reasons I chose Miller
is that he drives Johnson nuts.''

''I'd do it again,'' Mr. Goldwater said this morning. ''I wouldn't change one
damned bit of it.''

He also demonstrated that he had lost none of his ability to alarm his
listeners. He would not mind seeing a United States fleet stationed in Puerto
Rico, he said, because ''one of these days we'll have to solve the problem of
Castro.''

When pressed by reporters, he said, ''I'm not suggesting an invasion of Cuba.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 23, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS;
When the Stars Align ;
Reborn Glory A decade ago, the kindergarten tot at our house was moved to remark
that the American flag ''looks like my lunchbox.'' That was a bad time for the
flag. Graphic designers were trivializing the Stars and Stripes on cartons,
shirts and towels. Opponents of the Vietnam War wore Old Glory on the seats of
their pants, or burned it in public. Supporters of the war aggressively pasted
the flag on hard hats and pinned it to lapels.

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 122 words


All that was bad for the manufacturers of the traditional banner flown from a
pole topped by a golden ball or eagle. They had to struggle along on sales to
post offices and schools.

Now the flag business has recovered. The nation's Bicentennial caused a big
spurt in sales. The return of the hostages from Iran produced another. This year
flag sales are flying high once again, due to national pride in the Olympics and
the political campaign, which finds Democrats making heavy use of the Stars and
Stripes to suggest that their commitment to American values is every bit as
strong as the Republicans'.

Instead of cultural conflict, the flag again stands for what Americans can
share. That news is worth a smart salute.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 23, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CONVENTION IN DALLAS: THE REPUBLICANS;
TRANSCRIPT OF REMARKS BY GOLDWATER

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1263 words


Following is a transcript of the speech by Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona
last night at the Republican National Convention in Dallas, as recorded by The
New York Times through the facilities of C-Span:

First I want to thank John Tower for that most generous introduction. Frankly I
didn't know it was going to happen. Knowing John as I do, I'm grateful he
stopped when he did. I've known John all his political life and I hold him in
the highest admiration.

Nancy Reagan, Mr. Chairman, delegates, ladies and gentlemen:

A month ago I sat in my den and watched the Democratic National Convention.
Speaker after speaker promised the moon to every narrow, selfish interest group
in the country. But they ignored the hopes and aspirations of the largest
special interest group of them all, free men and free women.

So tonight I want to speak about freedom. And let me remind you that extremism
in the defense of liberty is no vice.

What, may I ask, was more extreme than our Revolutionary War? Our founding
fathers pledged their lives, their fortunes and their sacred honor for that most
honorable and noble cause, freedom.

And I remind you, too, that these men and women who rebelled against tyranny did
not have the unanimous support of even their friends, their neighbors or
relatives. But they were willing to sacrifice, stuggle and die for the ideal of
liberty, while others sought more comfortable lives.

And since that time other Americans have fought, bled and died to protect those
God-given privileges - because, as Tom Paine said in that day, tyranny, like
hell, is not easily conquered.

But last month, those Democrat orators turned their backs on our own heritage.
Indeed, they would have us ashamed of our freedom and our ability to defend it.

And to me the worst part was that they said nicer things about the Soviet Union
than about our own military services. And I would remind you that these are the
men and women in uniform who are sworn to protect that very freedom that made
our country so great.

Let me tell you, the proudest moments of my life have been those times when I
wore the uniform of the United States of America. To have been privileged to
join with the men and women in the defense of freedom was, to me, the ultimate
expression of faith in our heritage.

I am also proud to be a veteran of the armed forces, and let me remind you
veteran was a word you never heard from these Democrats on their podium. Let me
say to the millions of veterans who are proud, proud, proud to have served our
country, we will not forget you.

To those men and those women now in uniform, and to the veterans and the ones to
come, I solemnly pledge that I will do all I can to see that you never are
forsaken, as you were in San Francisco.

Now believe me what I'm going to say is not easy to say; but nonetheless, truth
demands it. It has been the foreign policy and defense weakness of Democrat
administrations that have led us to war in the past. And I will be as specific
as the Democrats were unspecific in San Francisco.

Every war in this century began and was fought under Democrat administrations.
You doubt me? World War I, Woodrow Wilson, Democrat. World War II, Franklin
Roosevelt, Democrat. Korea, Harry Truman, Democrat. Vietnam, Jack Kennedy and
Lyndon Johnson, both Democrats.

And let me further remind you that while we are decommissioning our old Polaris
submarines, the Democrats would not allow us to build our new Trident
submarines. And while our Air Force pilots are flying 30- year-old B-52 bombers,
the Democrats want to take away the B-1 bomber.

The list goes on and on, while at home and abroad assaults continue on our basic
principles of liberty and freedom. The Democrats and their special interest
allies are trying to convince the American people that our own armed services
are the biggest obstacle to peace and prosperity. They tell us that spending a
small portion of our national resources for national defense is driving up
deficits and hurting our economy. But let us never lose sight of this one fact:
There is no more important step we can take to ensure a strong economy than to
ensure a strong defense.

Again, let me give you Thomas Paine who said, ''Those who expect to reap the
blessings of freedom must, like men, undergo the fatigue of supporting it.''

It's also a fact that the men and women in uniform are our first line of defense
in the continuous struggle to maintain freedom. And it's a fact that the
Democrat plan for defense would leave us ill-prepared for any sort of conflict.

Now a few short weeks ago the chairman of the House military appropriations
subcommittee released a phony report, made several years ago, that our armed
forces are weaker today than they were four years earlier. Yet every chief of
staff of whom I have asked that question - and I have asked all of them - and
every commander I asked around this world has said, ''Never have we been so
strong and never have we had such quality of men and women.''

Now if we want to insure forces strong enough to protect our freedom - and we do
- we must give them the tools to do the job. And I say thank God, we now have a
Commander in Chief, our President. who is doing his utmost to provide this
nation and our armed forces with those tools.

Now on the other hand, the chairman I just mentioned has not allowed his
subcommittee to appropriate sufficient funds for our defense in years and years.
He has refused to provide enough money for the military to protect our freedom.
And at this very moment he is refusing to do the same thing again.

Now you want to look a little higher to poke some blame at? Okay let's take
House leader Tip O'Neill. There's one. He will not allow the House Armed
Services Committee to agree with the Senate on a military bill. Now why? He
doesn't want a military bill until after the election.

Well, Tip, let me tell you something. You aren't going to win this election!

Now I suppose a lot of you are wondering why I chose to speak on this particular
subject. It's true that defense is close to my heart. But that is not the
reason.

What I am concerned about is our grandchildren and their children and
grandchildren after that. Wherever I may be, I do not want my grandchildren or
their children asking, ''Why didn't Paka - that's what they call me - do
something so we would not have to go off to war now?''

If in the life left to me - and let me warn you that there's more life left in
me than the Democrats like - if I can prevent that question from ever being
asked, then I will have fulfilled my duty to my country and to freedom.

And let me warn those Democrats who made such a mockery out of freedom in San
Francisco. Remember the millions of Americans who cheered, waved flags, and felt
joy in their hearts and tears in their eyes at the successof the American men
and women in the recent Olympics.

Don't you Democrat leaders try to tell me that Americans don't love and honor
America. And don't you Democrat leaders poke fun at the progress America has
made. And don't you Democrat leaders ever suggest we are not on the right path.
And one more warning, quit trying to divide America. There are too many millions
of Americans who just won't take that guff. I've cleaned that one up. Guff.

Members of the convention, we have a leader, a real leader, a great Commander in
Chief: President Ronald Reagan. And in your hearts, you know he's right.

My friends, because we are in Dallas, delightful place, let me say vaya con Dios
y buena suerte - 'til we meet again.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Anna Cocklin and Lois Fitch; photo of Barry Goldwater

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 23, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AGENT ORANGE, PARTLY SETTLED

BYLINE: By Mark Siegler and Kenneth Schaffner ;
Dr. Mark Siegler is chief of general internal medicine and director of the
Center for Clinical Ethics at the University of Chicago's Pritzker School of
Medicine. Kenneth Schaffner is professor of history and philosophy of science at
the University of Pittsburgh.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 664 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO


As nationwide judicial hearings on the proposed $180 million out-of-court
settlement of the Agent Orange case proceed, it is apparent that few Vietnam
veterans' groups are comfortable with the compromise. But for the rest of us who
share an interest in protecting manufacturers from unreasonable liability claims
against new products whose risks cannot always be fully anticipated, the
settlement should be welcomed as the best temporary resolution of a thorny
problem.

The sources of the veterans' discontent are several unresolved questions:
Exactly which injuries were caused by Agent Orange? What future risks face
veterans who were exposed to the chemical? And who is responsible - the seven
manufacturers or the Government - for injuries that may be attributable to the
herbicide?

A recent study by the Federal Centers for Disease Control on the issue of birth
defects in the offspring of veterans exposed to Agent Orange was inconclusive.
Researchers noted that four types of birth defects appeared more frequently than
expected among these children. But they suggested that the association might be
a matter of chance. For veterans' groups, the findings fueled rather than
settled the controversy.

Faced with this level of uncertainty, veterans should accept the $180 million
settlement, which is being offered by the seven manufacturers of Agent Orange.
When and if the fundamental issue of causation is resolved - that is, which
injuries actually were caused by Agent Orange - veterans would then be able to
press their case more forcefully in Congress. But the political claims of the
veterans' groups may be strengthened by having achieved preliminary success in
this courtroom struggle.

The principles at stake here go beyond Agent Orange to all future cases of
exposure to possibly toxic substances. The Agent Orange case has failed to
provided sound guidelines for deciding future disputes because it has not been
argued on the three

most important factors: causation, responsibility and fairness.  Compensation
programs should be linked to proof that exposure to a substance caused a
specific harm to a particular individual. This arrangement would help
individuals who have been exposed to a product by alerting them to their risk.
Manufacturers would also gain, because their liability would be limited to
injuries actually caused by their products.  In determining who was responsible
for an injury from a product, at least three questions should be addressed: Was
the product manufactured well or was it defective? Did the injured individual
consent voluntarily to use the product? Could the manufacturer have foreseen the
injury?  Some of the Agent Orange was contaminated by dioxin and thus defective,
and exposure occurred in a non- voluntary battlefield situation. Thus, either
the manufacturers or the Federal Government bear responsibility for injuries
that can be proved to have been caused by exposure to the product.  As a
society, we express our compassion and sense of justice by compensating those
who have been injured by involuntary exposure to a defective product. This is
reasonable and fair, particularly for soldiers who have been drafted to serve
their country. If Agent Orange actually caused the injuries attributed to it,
veterans should receive compensation.

The Agent Orange case revives painful memories of America's Trojan War. It stirs
emotions. We want to compensate the injured. But the way we handle liability and
compensation in the case of Agent Orange may set a precedent for many products,
including pharmaceuticals and immunizations. This, in turn, may influence the
intensity with which new products are developed and marketed.  The development
of new products will be encouraged by appropriate compensation for the injured.
Such compensation should be based on the three principles we propose: the
establishment of cause, the assignment of responsibility and the fair assessment
of damages. B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MONGOLIA REMOVES ITS AILING LEADER

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 567 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Aug. 23


The 67-year-old head of the Communist Party in Mongolia was replaced today for
reasons of health, the Soviet press agency Tass reported.

Yumzhagiin Tsedenbal, one of the Soviet bloc's longest serving leaders, always
noted as a firm supporter of Moscow, was succeeded by Prime Minister Dzhambiin
Batmunkh.

Mr. Batmunkh, who is 56, is former rector of the Mongolian State University. He
became Prime Minister in 1974.

The Soviet Communist Party immediately congratulated Mr. Batmunkh in a telegram
that, as quoted by Tass, called him a prominent party figure, statesman and
friend of the Soviet Union. The message pledged Moscow's full support.

Mr. Batmunkh, speaking at a special Communist Party meeting, pledged to continue
Mr. Tsedenbal's close relationship with the Soviet Union, calling it the
cornerstone of Mongolia's foreign policy.

In its dispatch from Ulan Bator, the Mongolian capital, Tass said Mr. Tsedenbal,
who had been in power since 1952, had been replaced because of health. It said
he had assented.

Warm Praise for Tsedenbal

Tass quoted warm praise of Mr. Tsedenbal from the communique of the Mongolian
party meeting, including approval of his work in extending and deepening
Mongolian-Soviet friendship.

Mr. Tsedenbal has a Russian wife and he often visited Moscow, most recently in
February.

Western diplomats reached by telephone in Ulan Bator said Mr. Tsedenbal made a
major speech during the visit last month by the chief of state of Vietnam,
Truong Chin. But they said Mr. Tsedenbal was absent two days ago during
commemoration of the 45th anniversary of a Soviet-Mongolian victory over
Japanese troops.

Diplomats in Moscow said they did not detect any political reasons behind the
change in leadership, nor did they foresee major foreign policy changes.

Some diplomats said they had solid information that Mr. Tsedenbal had been
ailing for some time and had been receiving treatment from Soviet doctors for an
unspecified illness.

Vow of Loyalty to Policies

Mr. Batmunkh's speech, as carried by Tass, referred often and warmly to his
predecessor and pledged to carry on his work. It praised the policies of the
Soviet Union and said the Soviet Communist Party was the inspiration for
Mongolia's party.

Mongolia, with a population of only 1.76 million, is situated between the Soviet
Union and China. A Western diplomat here defined it as a nation that - because
it is landlocked - must cast its lot with either the Soviet Union or China.

It has traditionally been more afraid of China, once its master, to the east,
south and west than of the Soviet Union to the north.

The Soviet Union is believed to have 25,000 troops deployed along Mongolia's
3,000-mile border with China. Mongola is a member of the Soviet trade alliance,
Comecon. Its agricultural economy is heavily dependent on aid from the Soviet
bloc.

Ulan Bator has the outward appearance of many cities in Soviet Asia, with rows
of prefabricated apartment buildings, Soviet-style mass transportation and even
policemen dressed in uniforms similar to those of the Soviet police.

Mr. Tsedenbal held the posts of both party leader and chief of state. While
announcing his removal from both posts, Tass did not report a successor as
president. Diplomats here said that, following Communist bloc practice, that
post, too, is likely to go to Mr. Batmunkh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Mongolia

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

KEY SECTION'S OF PANEL'S REPORT ON THE MILITARY AND THE PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4766 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 23


Following are key sections of the report today by a Pentagon-appointed panel on
relations between the military and the press:





Statement of Principle


The American people must be informed about United States military operations,
and this information can best be provided through both the news media and the
Government. Therefore, the panel believes it is essential that the U.S. news
media cover U.S. military operations to the maximum degree possible consistent
with mission security and the safety of U.S. forces.

This principle extends the major ''Principle of Information'' promulgated by the
Secretary of Defense on 1 December 1983, which said:

''It is the policy of the Department of Defense to make available timely and
accurate information so that the public, Congress and members representing the
press, radio and television may assess and understand the facts about national
security and defense strategy. Requests for information from organizations and
private citizens will be answered responsively and as rapidly as possible.''

It should be noted that the above statement is in consonance with similar
policies publicly stated by most former Secretaries of Defense.

The panel's statement of principle is also generally consistent with the first
two paragraphs contained in ''A Statement of Principle on Press Access to
Military Operations'' issued on 10 January 1984 by 10 major news organizations.
These were:

''First, the highest civilian and military officers of the Government should
reaffirm the historic principle that American journalists, print and broadcast,
with their professional equipment, should be present at U.S. military
operations. And the news media should reaffirm their reconition of the
importance of U.S. military mission security and troop safety. When essential,
both groups can agree on coverage conditions which satisfy safety and security
imperatives while, in keeping with the spirit of the First Amendment, permitting
independent reporting to the citizens of our free and open society to whom our
Government is ultimately accountable.

''Second, the highest civilian and military officers of the U.S. Government
should reaffirm that military plans should include planning for press access, in
keeping with past traditions. The expertise of Government public affairs
officers during the planning of recent Grenada military operations could have
met the interests of both the military and the press, to everyone's benefit.''

Application of the panel's principle should be adopted both in substance and in
spirit. This will make it possible better to meet the needs of both the military
and the media during future military operations. The following recommendations
by the panel are designed to help make this happen. They are primarily general
in nature in view of the almost endless number of variations in military
operations that could occur. However, the panel believes that they provide the
necessary flexibility and broad guidance to cover almost all situations.

The panel members fully support the statement of principle and the supporting
recommendations and so indicate by their signatures below:


WINANT SIDLE

Major General,

U.S.A., Retired

Chairman

BRENT BAKER

Captain, U.S.N.

KEYES BEECH

SCOTT M. CUTLIP

JOHN T. HALBERT

BILLY HUNT

GEORGE KIRSCHENBAUER

Colonel, U.S.A.

A. J. LANGGUTH

FRED C. LASH

Major, U.S.M.C.

JAMES MAJOR

Captain, U.S.N.

WENDELL S. MERICK

ROBERT O'BRIEN

Colonel, U.S.A.F.

Deputy Assistant

Secretary of Defense

(Public Affairs)

RICHARD S. SALANT

BARRY ZORTHIAN

**



Recommendation 1


That public affairs planning for military operations be conducted concurrently
with operational planning. This can be assured in the great majority of cases by
implementing the following:

a. Review all joint planning documents to assure that J.C.S. guidance in public
affairs matters is adequate.

b. When sending implementing orders to commanders in chief in the field, direct
that the C.I.N.C. planners include consideration of public information aspects.

c. Inform the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public Affairs) of an impending
military operation at the earliest possible time. This information should
appropriately come from the Secretary of Defense.

d. Complete the plan, currently being studied, to include a public affairs
planning cell in O.J.C.S. to help ensure adequate public affairs review of
C.I.N.C. plans.

e. Insofar as possible and appropriate, institutionalize these steps in written
guidance or policy.




Comments


1. Under the current system of planning for military operations, provisions
exist to include public affairs planning but it is neither mandatory nor certain
that current joint planning documents are adequate from a public affairs
standpoint. The basic purpose of this recommendation is to help assure that
public affairs aspects are considered as soon as possible in the planning cycle
for any appropriate military operation and that the public affairs planning
guidance is adequate.

2. The panel was unanimous in feeling that every step should be taken to insure
public affairs participation in planning and/or review at every appropriate
level.

3. Panel discussions indicated that it is difficult to determine in advance in
all cases when public affairs planning should be included. The panel felt that
the best procedure would be to include such planning if there were even a remote
chance it would be needed. For example, a strictly covert operation, such as the
Son Tay raid in North Vietnam, still requires addressing public affairs
considerations if only to be sure that after action coverage adequately fulfills
the obligation to inform the American people. Very small, routine operations
might be exceptions.

4. The A.S.D.(P.A.), as the principal public affairs adviser to both the
Secretary of Defense and the Chairman, J.C.S., must be brought into the planning
process as soon as possible. In view of the D.O.D. organization, the panel felt
that this should be the responsibility of the Secretary of Defense.

5. We received indications that some commanders take the position that telling
something to his public affairs officer is tantamount to telling it to the
media. All members of the panel, including its public affairs officers decried
this tendency and pointed out that a public affairs specialist is the least
likely to release material prematurely to the media. Although the panel did not
consider the matter officially, there is no doubt that public affairs officers
are just as dedicated to maintaining military security as are operations
officers and must know what is going on in a command if they are to do their
job!




Recommendation 2


When it becomes apparent during military operational planning that news media
pooling provides the only feasible means of furnishing the media with early
access to an operation, planning should support the largest possible press pool
that is practical and minimize the length of time the pool will be necessary.




Comments


1. Media representatives appearing before the panel were unanimous in being
opposed to pools in general. However, they all also agreed that they would
cooperate in pooling agreements if that were necessary for them to obtain early
access to an operation.

2. The media representatives generally felt that D.O.D. should select the
organizations to participate in pools, and the organizations should select the
individual reporters.

3. The media were unanimous in requesting that pools be terminated as soon as
possible and ''full coverage'' allowed. ''Full coverage'' appeared to be a
relative term, and some agreed that even this might be limited in cases where
security, logistics, and the size of the operation created limitations that
would not permit any and all bona fide reporters to cover an event. The panel
felt that any limitations would have to be decided on a case-by-case basis but
agreed that maximum possible coverage should be permitted.

4. The media agreed that prior notification of a pooling organization should be
as close to H-hour as possible to minimize the possibility of a story breaking
too soon, especially if speculative stories about the operation should appear in
media not in the pool or be initiated by one of their reporters not privy to the
pool. This would require a pool media decision as to whether to break the story
early, despite the embargo on such a break that is inherent in early
notification for pooling purposes. The media representatives were not in
agreement on this matter, but did agree generally that they should not release
aspects of the story that they had been made aware of during D.O.D. early
notification and which did not appear in the stories already out or in
preparation; nor should this privy information be used to confirm speculation
concerning an operation.

5. In this connection, the media generally did not agree with a view voiced by
some members of the panel that, absolutely to guarantee security, pool
notification would not be made until the first military personnel had hit the
beach or airhead even though advance military preparation could speed the
poolers to the site in the least time possible. The panel did not take a
position on this, but some felt that carefully planned pool transportation could
meet the media's objections in many, possibly most, cases. For example, in
remote areas the pool could be assembled in a location close to the operation
using overseas correspondents who would not have to travel from the United
States.

6. In this connection, the panel recognized that in many areas of the world an
established press presence would be encountered by U.S. forces irrespective of a
decision as to whether or not a pool would be used. This consideration would
have to be included in initial public affairs planning.

7. There was no unanimity among the media representatives as to whether
correspondents, pooled or otherwise, should be in the ''first wave'' or any
other precise point in the operation. All did agree that media presence should
be as soon as possible and feasible. The panel believes that such timing has to
be decided on a case-by-case basis.

8. Neither the media nor the panel agreed on use in a pool of full-time media
employees who are not U.S. citizens. The media tended to agree that, if the
parent organization considered such employees reliable, they should be allowed
to be pool members. Based on public affairs experience in Vietnam, there were
many cases where such employees proved entirely reliable; however, some did not.
The panel suggests that this has to be another case-by-case situation.

9. There was also a divergence of opinion among the media as to what news
organizations should make up a pool, although all agreed that the most important
criterion was probably which organizations cover the widest American audience.
Several media representatives suggested specific media pools, but,
unfortunately, they varied widely. The panel was not in full agreement on this
subject either, but did agree that the following types of news organizations
should have top priority. The panel further agreed that D.O.D. shold take the
factors discussed in this paragraph into account when designating news
organizations to participate in a pool.

a. Wire services, A.P. and U.P.I. to have priority. A reporter from each and a
photographer from either one should be adequate. In a crash situation where
inadequate planning time has been available, a reporter from one wire service
and a photographer from the other could provide a two- person pool.

b. Television. A two-person TV pool (one correspondent, one film/sound man) can
do the job for a brief time, although perhaps minimally. All TV representatives
agreed that a three- person team is better and can do more. A panel suggestion
that a six- person team (one cameraman, one sound man and one reporter each from
ABC, CBS, NBC and CNN) seemed agreeable to the four networks, although the load
on the two technicians would be difficult to handle. The panel has no suggestion
on this except that TV pool representatives must have high priority with two
representatives as the minimum and augmentation to depend on space available.
The question of radio participation in pools must also be resolved.  c. News
Magazines. One reporter and one color photographer.

d. Daily newspapers. At least one reporter. The panel agreed with newspaper
representatives that, although newspapers do use wire service copy and photos,
at least one newspaper pooler is needed for the special aspects of newspaper
coverage not provided by the wire services. Criteria suggested for use when
deciding which newspaper(s) to include in a pool included: Circulation, whether
the newspaper has a news service, does the newspaper specialize in military and
foreign affairs, and does it cover the Pentagon regularly. There was some
agreement among the media representatives that there are probably not more than
8-10 newspapers which should be considered for pooling under these criteria.

10. In addition to the type of embargo necessary when a pooling news agency is
notified in advance about a military operation (i.e., nothing to be said about
it until it begins) there is another type applicable to some military
operations. This second type was used with great success in Vietnam and
restricts media accompanying the forces from filing or releasing any information
about the progress of the operation until the on-scene commander determines that
such release will not impair his security by informing the opposing commander
about his objectives. Normally, this is not a problem as general objectives
quickly become apparent. In the case of a special objective, there might be some
delay in authorizing stories until either the objective is attained or it is
obvious the enemy commander knows what it is. In any case, this type of embargo
is an option to planners that the media would almost certainly accept as opposed
to not having correspondents with the forces from the outset or close to it. The
panel did not have a consensus on this matter.

11. Media representatives emphasized the readiness of corresdpondents to accept,
as in the past, the physical dangers inherent in military operations and agreed
that the personal security of correspondents should not be a factor in planning
media participation in military operations.




Recommendation 3


In connection with the use of pools, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend to the
Secretary of Defense that he study the matter of whether to use a
pre-established and constantly updated accreditation or notification list of
correspondents in case of a military operation for which a pool is required or
just the establishment of a news agency list for use in the same circumstances.




Comments


1. The panel envisions that in either case the agency would select the
individual(s) to be its representatives in the pool. In the case of the
accreditation/notification list, there would presumably be several names from
each news agency/organization to provide the necessary flexibility. The agency
would have provided the names in advance to D.O.D. In the case of the news
agency/organization list, D.O.D. would decide which agencies would be in the
pool and the agencies would pick the person(s) desired without reference to a
list. There was no agreement as to whether D.O.D. should have approval authority
of the individuals named to be pool members. The media representatives were
unanimously against such approval as were some members of the panel. However,
other panel members believed that in the case of an extremely sensitive
operation, D.O.D. should have such authority.

2. There was no agreement among either those who appeared before the panel or
among the panel itself on this matter. More in both groups seemed to favor
simply establishing a news agency list including wire services, television, news
magazines and newspapers from which to pick when D.O.D. establishes a pool.

3. This particular problem is one that should be resolved in advance of a
military operation and should be a subject of discussion in connection with the
military-media meetings suggested in Recommendation 8a.

4. This recommendation does not concern the accreditation that would have to be
given each correspondent covering an operation, either at first or later, by the
senior on-site commander. Traditionally, this accreditation is limited to
establishing that the individual is a bona fide reporter (represents an actual
media organization).




RECOMMENDATION 4


That a basic tenet governing media access to military operations should be
voluntary compliance by the media with security guidelines or ground rules
established and issued by the military. These rules should be as few as possible
and should be worked out during the planning process for each operation.
Violations would mean exclusion of the correspondent(s) concerned from further
coverage of the operation.




Comments

1. The media were in support of this concept as opposed to formal censorship of
any type, and all media representatives agreed that their organizations would
abide by these ground rules. This arrangement would place a heavy responsibility
on the news media to exercise care so as not to inadvertently jeopardize mission
security or troop safety.

2. The guidelines/ground rules are envisioned to be similar to those used in
Vietnam. Recognizing that each situation will be different, public affairs
planners could use the Vietnam rules as a starting point, as they were worked
out empirically during Vietnam by public affairs and security personnel and, for
the most part, in coopertion with news media on the scene. All media
representatives who addressed the issue agreed that the ground rules worked out
satisfactorily in Vietnam.




Recommendation 5


Public affairs planning for military operations should include sufficient
equipment and qualified military personnel whose function is to assist
correspondents in covering the operation adequately.




Comments


1. The military personnel referred to in this recommendation are normally called
escorts; however, this term has developed some unfortunate connotations as far
as the media are concerned. In any case, the panel's recommendation is designed
to provide personnel who, acting as agents of the on-scene commander, will
perform such functions as keep the correspondents abreast of the situation;
arrange for interviews and briefings; arrange for their transportation to
appropriate locations; insure they are fed and housed, if necessary, and be as
helpful as possible consistent with security and troop safety.

2. Almost all of the media representatives agreed that such escorts are
desirable, especially at the beginning of an operation, to assist in media
coverage. As the operation progresses and the reporters become familiar with
what is going on, the media representatives were generally less enthusiastic
about this type of assistance.

3. All the media were against escorts if their goal was to try to direct, censor
or slant coverage. However, most agreed that pointing out possible ground rule
violations and security problems would be part of the escort's responsibility.

4. The point was made to the panel and the media representatives that escorts
were often required in Vietnam, especially after about mid-1968, without many
problems arising. One of the major advantages of escorts was making sure the
reporters had a full and accurate understanding of the operation being covered.

5. The senior on-scene commander will decide how long escorting should continue
after an operation begins.




Recommendation 6


Planners should carefully consider media communications requirements to assure
the earliest feasible availability. However, these communications must not
interfere with combat and combat support operations. If necessary and feasible,
plans should include communicative facilities dedicated to the news media.




Comments

1. Media representatives were unanimous in preferring provision for use of their
own communications or using local civilian communications when possible. They
were also unanimous, however, in the need for access to military communications
if nothing else were available, especially in the opening states of an
operation.

2. Permitting media coverage without providing some sort of filing capability
does not make sense unless an embargo is in force.

3. Although not discussed in depth during the panel meetings, communications
availability is an obvious factor in determining press pool size. Planners
should consider the varying deadlines of the different types of media. For
example, news magazine reporters usually have more time to file, thus permitting
courier service as a possible satisfactory solution from their standpoint.

4. There was considerable discussion of the possibility of media-provided
satellite uplinks' being a future threat to security if technology permits
real-time or near real-time copy and film/tape processing. The media
representatives felt that such a possibility was not imminent. One panel member
made the point that such real-time or near real-time capability has long existed
for radio news, including the Murrow reporting during World War II.




Recommendation 7


Planning factors should include provision for intra- and inter-theater
transportation support of the media. There was no panel comment on this matter.




Recommendation 8


To improve media-military understanding and cooperation:

a. C.J.C.S. should recommend to the Secretary of Defense that a program be
undertaken by A.S.D.(P.A.) for top military public affairs representatives to
meet with news organization leadership, to include meetings with individual news
organizations, on a reasonably regular basis to discuss mutual problems,
including relationships with the media during military operations and exercises.
This program should begin as soon as possible.

b. Enlarge programs already under way to improve military understanding of the
media via public affairs instruction in service schools and colleges, to include
media participation when possible.

c. Seek improved media understanding of the military through more visits by
commanders and line officers to news organizations.

d. C.J.C.S. should recommend that the Secretary of Defense host at an early date
a working meeting with representatives of the broadcast news media to explore
the special problems of insuring military security when and if there is
real-time news media audiovisual coverage of a battlefield and, if special
problems exist, how they can best be dealt with consistent with the basic
principle set forth at the beginning of this section of the report.




Comments


1. The panel became convinced during its meetings with both media and military
representatives that any current actual or perceived lack of mutual
understanding and cooperation could be largely eliminated through the
time-tested vehicle of having reasonable people sit down with reasonable people
and discuss their problems. Although some of this has occurred from time to time
through the years, there has not been enough, especially in recent years. The
panel envisages that these meetings would be between A.S.D.(P.A.) and/or his
representatives and the senior leadership of both media unbrella organizations
and individual major news organizations. A number of media representatives
appearing before the panel said that they thought the media would be happy to
participate in such a program. The program should include use of the
chiefs/directors of public affairs of the services, some of whom are already
doing this.

2. Such meetings would provide an excellent opportunity to discuss problems or
potential problems involving future military operations/exercises such as
pooling, security and troop safety, accreditation, logistic support and, most
importantly, improving mutual respect, trust, understanding and cooperation in
general.

3. The panel does not exclude any news organizations in this recommendation, but
practicality will lead to emphasis on meetings with major organizations. It
would be equally useful for commanders in the field and their public affairs
officers to conduct similar meetings with local and regional media in their
areas, some of which are also under way at this time.

4. Both the panel and the media representatives lauded the efforts underway
today to reinsert meaningful public affairs instruction in service schools and
colleges. Many officers are sheltered from becoming inolved with the news media
until they are promoted to certain assignments where they suddenly come face-to-
face with the media. If they have not been adequately informed in advance of the
mutual with each other, they sometimes tend to make inadequate decisions
concerning media matters. In this connection, several media representatives told
the panel they would be, and in some cases have already been, delighted to
cooperate in this process by talking to classes and seminars.

5. Several media representatives also were enthusiastic about undertaking an
effort to inform their employees about the military, primarily through visits of
commanders and other appropriate personnel to their headquarters or elsewhere in
their organizations. It was also apparent that some media are concerned with
this problem to the point that they are taking an introspective look at their
relations not only with the military but other institutions.





General Comments


1. The panel agreed that public affairs planning for military operations
involving allied forces should also consider making plans flexible enough to
cover allied media participation, even in pools in some cases.

2. It was pointed out to the panel and should be noted that planners may also
have to consider the desires of U.S. Ambassadors and their country teams when
operations take place in friendly foreign countries. Some of these problems can,
of course, be handled by the commanders and senior public affairs personnel on
the scene, but they should be alerted to them in advance.

3. The media representatives all agreed that U.S. media should have first
priority in covering U.S. military operations. The panel generally agreed that
this must be handled on a case-by-case basis, especially when allied forces are
involved.



Final Comment


An adversarial - perhaps politely critical would be a better term - relationship
between the media and the Government, including the military, is healthy and
helps guarantee that both institutions do a good job. However, this relationship
must not become antagonistic - an ''us versus them'' relationship. The
appropriate media role in relation to the Government has been summarized aptly
as being neither that of a lap dog nor an attack dog but, rather, a watchdog.
Mutual antagonism and distrust are not in the best interests of the media, the
military or the American people.

In the final analysis, no statement of principles, policies or procedures, no
matter how carefully crafted, can guarantee the desired results because they
have to be carried out by people - the people in the military and the people in
the media. So, it is the good will of the people involved, their spirit, their
genuine efforts to do the job for the benefit of the United States, on which a
civil and fruitful relationship hinges.

The panel believes that, if its recommendations are adopted, and the people
involved are infused with the proper spirit, the twin imperatives of genuine
mission security/ troop safety on the one hand and a free flow of information to
the American public on the other will be achieved.

In other words, the optimum solution to insure proper media coverage of military
operations will be to have the military - represented by competent, professional
public affairs personnel and commanders who understand media problems - working
with the media - represented by competent, professional reporters and editors
who understand military problems - in a nonantagonistic atmosphere. The panel
urges both institutions to adopt this philosophy and make it work.  WINANT
SIDLEMajor General, U.S.A., Retired Chairman

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Capt. Keith Graham

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

YOUNGER V.F.W. MEMBERS RISING; VIETNAM VETERAN IN LINE FOR CHIEF

BYLINE: By E. R. SHIPP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 634 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Aug. 23


What is evident at the annual convention of the Veterans of Foreign Wars here
this week is that the veterans of the Vietnam era are coming of age in an
organization many of them once shunned.

On Friday Billy Ray Cameron, of Sanford, N. C., is expected to be elected
commander in chief. Mr. Cameron is currently the senior vice commander in chief,
the first Vietnam veteran elected to a national leadership position in the
V.F.W.

According to Wade LaDue, the organization's director of public relations, 26 of
the state commanders are Vietnam veterans. ''They have certainly come on board,
in the last four or five years primarily, as they have assimilated into
society,'' Mr. LaDue said.

More than 575,000 of the organization's two million members served in Vietnam.

World War II Veterans Aging


George Cholger, attending the convention from Escanaba, Mich., said: ''They're
coming around.''

He noted that as the veterans of World War Two became older - their average age
now is 63.5 years - the Vietnam veterans were taking over many offices.

Mr. Cameron, who is 40 years old, said that like many veterans of previous wars,
most Vietnam veterans initially wanted to ''get established in life, settle
down, get married and have a family.'' That meant little time for an
organization like the V.F.W., he said.

In addition to that, he said: ''A lot of them just wanted to forget about the
war. A lot of them had bad experiences when they returned. People called them
names and all this kind of thing. So a lot of them just decided to hide in their
communities. So for a while it was a problem.''

The turning point, he said, was the dedication of the Vietnam War memorial in
Washington in November 1982.

Older Veterans Most Visible


While it is the Vietnam veterans who are gradually taking over key posts in the
organization, it is the older veterans who are most visible at the five- day
convention that has brought some 14,000 people to this city.

According to Arthur J. Nelson and Ledrew Warren, two black veterans of World War
II who are members of Post 7186 in Evanston, Ill., more blacks are taking part
in the V.F.W.

''I see more blacks active in this convention than ever before since I've been
coming,'' Mr. Nelson said.

For many of these older veterans the main issues are national defense and
veterans' benefits.

Joe Butler, a member of Post 4102 in Rogers Heights, Mich., said he is most
concerned about the Veterans Administration hospitals that have suffered
budgetary cuts in recent years. Mr. Butler, who is 68, said he lives on a fixed
income of $340 a month and that a veterans' hospital was the ''only assured
place I can go for medical help.''

He added: ''My own personal slogan is that the veteran isn't any better than
anyone else, but he's more deserving. I think that is the bottom line.''

Lobbying for Benefits


Since 1979 the V.F.W. has had a political action committee that endorses
Congressional candidates who have strong records on defense and on legislation
affecting veterans.

In the past year the V.F.W. has lobbied for a bill pending in Congress that
would provide compensation for veterans who were exposed to the defoliant Agent
Orange.

Among the several hundred resolutions adopted at this convention were about 50
that addressed various aspects of the nation's defense policy. Among them were
resolutions urging the United States to ''continue vigorously to support a
national strategy of peace through strength,'' pledging ''an enduring commitment
to American defense primacy,'' opposing the Soviet Union and a nuclear freeze
and urging a return to ''a fair, loophole-free military draft as soon as
possible.''

The convention will conclude Friday with an address by President Reagan.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
 FRIDAY, AUGUST 24, 1984 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 847 words


Reporters would cover military operations under special provisions to be devised
by the Pentagon, under the recommenation of a panel of military officers and
journalistss appointed after the Grenada invasion. However, Defense Secretary
Caspar W. Weinberger said the paramount consideration would be what senior
civilian officials and military officers believe is necessary for military
security. (Page A1, Column 1.)

At least 17 Iranians were killed and 300 wounded when a terrorist bomb exploded
on a busy street in Teheran. Callers to foreign news bureaus in the capital
claimed responsibility for the attack in the name of two groups opposed to
Iran's revolutionary Government. (A1:2.) Republican Convention

President Reagan appealed for Republicans' help in completing the ''unfinished
agenda'' of a conservative transformation of the Federal Government. Mr. Reagan,
in accepting re-nomination, told the delegates to the Republican National
Convention that the contest between himself and Walter F. Mondale, the
Democratic Presidential candidate, presented the nation's voters ''with the
clearest political choice of half a century.'' (A1:6.)

President Reagan, appearing at an event billed as an ''ecumenical prayer
breakfast,'' said that politics and religion were inseparable and that those who
argued otherwise were ''intolerant of religion.'' The breakfast was attended by
10,000 religious leaders and laymen. (A1:4-5.)

Conservatives have been in firm control of the Republican convention. Sixty
percent of the delegates call themselves conservative, 35 percent call
themselves moderate and 1 percent say they are liberal, according to a CBS News
survey. (A10:3-6.)

The televised look of the Republican convention has reflected the patriotism,
warmth and traditionalism that President Reagan has come to personify. But
another face of the party has become visible. It is an emergent hard-line
conservatism, defined largely by the powerful presence of activist Protestant
fundamentalists, with a core of television evangelists and business
millionaires. (A11:1-3.)

Assassination memorabilia were destroyed by an intensely hot fire in Dallas that
was methodically set by an arsonist in the old Texas Schoolbook Depository, from
which the shots that killed President Kennedy were fired 21 years ago.
Ninety-three firefighters responded to the five- alarm blaze. (A8:1-3.) National


John A. Zaccaro obtained a delay of a June court hearing on his handling of an
elderly woman's estate so the matter would not ''interfere'' with the Democratic
convention that chose his wife as the Vice Presidential nominee, a court referee
said. The referee, Jonathan A. Weinstein, made the remark after Mr. Zaccaro, at
the rescheduled hearing yesterday, defended his conduct as the court-appointed
conservator. (A1:1-3.)

G.O.P. tax-cutting plans were assailed by aides to Walter F. Mondale. They
charged that six of the tax changes proposed by the Republican Party in its
campaign platform would cost the Federal Government $160 billion a year and
would mainly benefit the rich. (B5:1-2.)

New insights into Alzheimer's disease have been gleaned by scientists in
Massachusetts. They found that large molecules remain intact in frozen human
brains long after death and, by studying such molecules, they have discovered a
basic biological abnormality in senile brains destroyed by the disease.
(A1:5-6.)

Vietnam War veterans are coming of age in the Veterans of Foreign Wars, an
organization many of them once shunned. More than 575,000 of the organization's
2 million members served in Vietnam. (A8:1-2.)

A labor accord at U.P.I.  was announced by the news service and the union
representing most of its 2,000 employees. Under a 13-month austerity program,
wages would be cut immediatly by 25 percent, 200 jobs would be eliminated, and
company contributions to employee pension funds would be halted for one year. In
return, employees would be given stock equal to 6.5 percent of U.P.I.'s equity.
(B5:1-4.) Metropolitan

Lilco has reached an accord with 14 banks that will give the Long Island utility
enough cash to avert bankruptcy through early next year. Under the agreement
announced by Lilco, it must halt dividend payments on preferred stock. (A1:3.)

Progress in the health care strike in New York City was reported by negotiators
for both sides. They said they were working their way through secondary issues
and were very close to reaching a tentative settlement of the six-week walkout.
With the aid of Federal and state officials, the negotiators made a nonstop
effort to resolve the final issues. (B3:5-6.)

Three transit police officers used nightsticks to beat a man while he lay
''helpless, face down on a sidewalk, with his hands still cuffed behind his
back,'' according to court papers filed by the Manhattan District Attorney's
office. The three officers are accused of manslaughter in the death of Michael
Stewart, a 25-year-old Brooklyn man. (B2:5-6.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A MUSEUM RAMBLE ACROSS CONNECTICUT

BYLINE: By JEFFREY SCHMALZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1232 words


George and Ruth Sherwood started collecting kerosene lamps in 1949. By 1981,
they had so many (more than 500) that they did what any self-respecting
overcollector does - they opened a museum.

P. T. Barnum knew that the end was going to come some day, even for him. And
lest anyone forget just who he was, he made provisions for a little reminder - a
three-story Romanesque institute known today as the P. T. Barnum Museum.

Wentworth T. Phillips's father, a blacksmith, couldn't read and didn't know how
to use some of the instruments of his trade. The father made his son promise
that one day he would assemble all the implements and teach children how to use
them. The result? The Farm Implement Museum.

In restored mansions and rundown barns, in an airplane hangar and even aboard a
submarine, museums are everywhere in Connecticut. More than 140 of them extol
everything from the glory of trolley cars to the talent of Mark Twain.

And if there is a best time to sample them, it is during the summer and early
fall. Coupled with a drive through the countryside and a respite for brunch, a
visit to one or two of these small museums makes for just the right weekend day
trip from the metropolitan area.

At some of them, the owners show guests around as if they were grandparents
giving the grandchildren a tour of the attic, pausing at this doll or that clock
to spin a little tale.

One such place is the Winchester Center Kerosene Lamp Museum on the Old
Waterbury Turnpike, north of Torrington, in Litchfield County.

''I don't dress them up,'' said Mr. Sherwood, who retired in 1981 from
Connecticut's Transportation Department, and who was sporting a cowboy hat and
puffing on a pipe. ''I don't polish them or clean them up. They look just as
they did when they were in use. It's just lamps, lamps, lamps.''

Indeed it is - parlor lamps with crystals dangling from them, store lamps, wall
lamps, ceiling lamps, hotel lamps, library lamps with cream-color shades.

The Sherwoods keep a few of them burning all the time in the museum, a former
general store that looks out on the Berkshires. Admission is free, and the
museum is open 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. daily. In the winter, a potbellied stove
provides the heat.

And to think it all started in 1949, when the Sherwoods bought an 18th- century
house next to the general store and got a few kerosene lamps to decorate it.

''It just grew and grew,'' Mr. Sherwood said.

Dolls and Toys

That's pretty much what happened to Violet J. Meiers, too.

''I started out with two dolls,'' Mrs. Meiers said, ''but you keep wanting
another one.''

The two eventually led to 1,500. And the 1,500 led to the Memory Lane Doll and
Toy Museum, off Exit 90 of Interstate 95 in Olde Mistick Village in Mystic.

In a single-story cabin-like building, figures from Queen Anne (250 years old)
to Shirley Temple (50 years old) stare out at visitors. The museum, which also
displays a handful of dollhouses and carriages, is open daily 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Clocks and Watches

For obvious reasons, just before noon is the time to get to the American Clock
and Watch Museum, at 100 Maple Street, just off Route 6, in Bristol.

A thousand clocks from as early as 1680 and a hundred watches are on display in
an 1801 white clapboard house and in an adjacent modern building. The museum
loves to point out that it takes its clockmaker seven hours one day a week to
wind all the timepieces, including 30 grandfather clocks, some with wooden
movements.

The museum, founded 30 years ago by businessmen to preserve the clockmaking
legacy of Bristol, is open daily 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. and costs $2.50; $1.25 for
children.


Farm Implements

In the Hartford area, museums offer everything from hand-hewn farm tools to jet
fighters.

The Farm Implement Museum, at 434 Tunxis Avenue in Bloomfield, just north of
Hartford, is aimed at children. And outside there are goats and a pony and a
donkey to pet.

But it is inside the barn that Mr. Phillips, the owner, keeps the promise he
made to his father. Among the 1,400 pieces on display - including an early
tractor and an 1800 laundry stove - are blacksmith tools, and the owner is more
than helpful in explaining how each one works.

The museum, whose collection took Mr. Phillips 28 years to assemble, is open
daily 9 A.M. to 6 P.M. and costs $2; $1 for children.


Mark Twain House

In Hartford itself, the house where Mark Twain lived from 1874 to 1896 and where
he wrote many of his famous works is open daily in the summer from 9:30 A.M. to
4 P.M. (Beginning next month, it will be closed Mondays and will open Sundays at
1 P.M.)

The three-story brick Victorian mansion, at 351 Farmington Avenue, off Exit 46
of Interstate 84, retains much of Twain's furniture, in addition to personal
objects like shirts and photographs. The cost is $3.50; $1.50 for children.


Planes

For those whose adventure fantasies run more toward the skies than toward the
Mississippi, the New England Air Museum - at Bradley International Airport, off
Interstate 91 north of Hartford in Windsor Locks - displays 79 aircraft, from a
1909 French Bleriot to jet fighters of the Vietnam War.

Some are suspended from the ceiling of a new 36,000-square-foot hangar; others
are lined up outside. Usually, the policy is ''look but don't touch.'' But this
Sunday, some of the planes will be opened to give would-be aces a chance to let
their imaginations take flight in the cockpit.

The museum, which is open 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. daily, costs $4; $1.50 for children.


A Submarine

Another attraction with a military bent is in Groton, on Long Island Sound in
eastern Connecticut, a city that bills itself as ''the submarine capital of the
world.''

The submarine Croaker is now a museum, and the nonclaustrophobic can take a
25-minute tour of its interior. The tour, off Exit 85 of Interstate 95, costs
$3; $2 for the elderly, and $1.50 for children. The hours are 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
daily.


Trolleys

Even in Connecticut museums, there's no escaping New York City's subway. In East
Haven, the Shore Line Trolley Museum has more than 100 streetcars and subway
cars on display, including one from 1878 that ran on the Third Avenue El and was
pulled by steam locomotives.

The museum, whose grounds occupy more than 30 acres, includes a picnic area,
three miles of track with cars in operation and seven barns filled with cars.

Admission to Shore Line, off Exit 51 of Interstate 95, is $3; $2.50 for the
elderly; $1.50 for children. Hours are 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily.


P. T. Barnum

Closer to New York, in Bridgeport, P. T. Barnum lives on, in spirit at least,
and so does a bit of his circus and sideshow world. At the P. T. Barnum Museum,
the collection ranges from an Egyptian mummy to a stuffed baby elephant and the
clothing, carriages and furniture of Tom Thumb, who was 40 inches tall when he
died in 1883 at the age of 45.

The museum, which is open noon to 5 P.M. Tuesday through Saturday and 2 to 5 on
Sundays, costs $1; 50 cents for children. Information: (203) 576- 7320.

There are indications that Connecticut's 140 museums are only the beginning.
Many of them are brand new and just this month, Gov. William A. O'Neill
announced a grant of $25,000 to help start still another one - a museum of
espionage, in Willimantic.

A full list of the state's museums may be had by calling (800) 842-7492.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a Grumman Albatross aircraft; Photo of a 1911 trolley car;
Photo of farm implements

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PAINTING: 55 BY HISPANIC-AMERICANS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL BRENSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1152 words


The show ''IMira! The Canadian Club Hispanic Art Tour'' is being called the
first national exhibition of painting by Americans from Spanish-speaking
cultures. At the Museo del Barrio, 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street, through
Sept. 2, the show brings together 22 artists, from Americans of Puerto Rican
origin in New York to Chicanos living in Texas and California. The 55 works give
a strong sense of what it means to be a Hispanic- American. Since the viewpoint
in these paintings is essentially that of the outsider, the paintings also
provide an unusual perspective on familiar art styles.


Visitors to the show are not likely to find many artistic surprises. Some
paintings are marked by a realism and hard light that go back to Spanish masters
like Velazquez and Zurbaran. There are also images that bring to mind such
20th-century Mexican painters as Siqueiros and Tamayo.

There are traces of many other modern artists as well, from the American
Surrealist Peter Blume to Philip Guston. The artists in the show are not
particularly self-conscious about the styles they adapt. What matters is the
urgency of what they have to say.

The stories told by the works have a great deal to do with harshness and
struggle. In Louis Perez's ''Barrioscopes,'' trapped and pained faces press
against fences and bars. In the paintings of Francisco Alvarado-Juarez, the
issue is not only the present but also the past. The artist's nude women in
almost empty urban interiors are surrounded and sometimes watched by the shadows
of never-forgotten ancestors.

The works are filled with anger, pride and a sense of exclusion. Gamaliel
Ramirez's two paintings could hardly be more disillusioned. In ''Immigration,''
a young man, half-alive, half-dead, the words Puerto Rico inscribed on his
shirt, stands in the middle of a divided canvas. On the right side is a sunny
and fertile tropical paradise. On the left side, floating in the night, is a
grim tenement room with cracked walls, arrogant rats and rat-size cockroaches.
Behind the man's head is a tombstone with the dates 1949-1975.

Much of the artistic interest of the exhibition lies in the way the painters
make use of familiar styles and techniques. For example, in ''The Dance of Latin
America,'' Luis Cruz Azaceta works with the kind of linear patterns that bring
to mind Keith Haring's stylish graffiti, but here the lines resemble barbed
wire, and the forms floating in the space are dismembered parts of a body. Luis
Stand's ''New York, New York'' suggests that strips of fabric woven together can
lead to something more urgent than the colorful tributes to the good life of
pattern paintings.

Jesse Trevino is a Texas-based artist who brings to a Hyperrealist style a sharp
sense of situational and compositional irony. In ''El Alameda,'' the sign
''Alameda,'' which runs up the side of a theater, dominates the street, cars,
other buildings - everything - thereby turning the theater into something like a
church. In ''Guadalupe y Calaveras,'' presenting a moment in the life of the
''Drive Inn'' service station, the spelling of ''Inn'' creates an immediate
sense of disjointedness, which is reinforced by big-time cars waiting to be
served by a small-time operation. With Trevino, we are drawn into human
situations, rather than being told about them.

The touring exhibition, which the organizers expect to make an annual event,
will be at the San Antonio Museum of Art from Sept. 22 to Oct. 21 and at the
Plaza de la Raza in Los Angeles from Nov. 8 to Dec. 9.


Also of interest this week:

''Vietnam: Reflexes and Reflections'' (Cork Gallery, Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln
Center, Broadway and 64th Street): With renewed interest in the 1960's and the
Vietnam War, this is a topical exhibition. The organization responsible for this
traveling show is the Vietnam Veterans Art Group, founded in Chicago in 1981
with the aim of preserving a firsthand artistic and historical view of that war.

More than 120 works by 63 artists create a sense of what it was like for
soldiers who found themselves on the front lines of a war that did not make
sense to them. There is a pervading sense of bleakness and confusion in the
show. The presence of death becomes almost palpable.

The concentration of works - and they are concentrated, hung up and down the
walls like graphics in a cheap art shop - gives the exhibition a force it would
not have if individual works had to stand on their own. While the artistic
styles are familiar, a number of details stick in the mind. In James McJunkin's
photograph ''Sentry,'' a jawless skull, wearing a G.I. helmet, is impaled on a
post.

In Cleveland Wright's painting ''We Regret to Inform You,'' we enter the rural
North Carolina home of a black woman just after she has received word about her
son. In Ned Broderick's painting ''V. C. Suspect,'' a blindfolded and muzzled
Vietnamese wears a sign on his collar: ''This dude is decidedly uncool; caught
with weapon and ammo.''

There are works in the show that create a desire for more. In William Dugan's
''Foreign Prairie,'' 12 stakes and what may be a torture area clash with the
almost Minimalist purity of the small, flat sculpture tableau they occupy.

Michael Helbing's 1982 sculpture ''1, 2, 3, 4, Let's Go to El Salvador'' is the
best piece in the show. A G. I.- type figure is striding forward, gun and
flamethrower in hand, like Millet's defiant Sower, or a triumphant figure on a
war monument. But the figure is made up of fused junk. His gun is a metal pipe,
his flamethrower is a mortar tube, his right eye is a vacuum advance chamber,
and his scrawny legs seem to be slipping out from under him because of the
broken tricycle wheel that is his back foot. We seem to be watching this image
of eager and youthful idealism turn into rubble and waste.

The gallery is open Monday through Saturday from 10 A.M. until the Avery Fisher
concert hall closes. (Through Sept. 4.)



Robert Murray (East River esplanade, at 75th Street): Like much of Robert
Murray's work, the 1979 sculpture ''Saginaw'' has a disarming way of
acknowledging the world around it while stubbornly refusing to be anything but
itself. Although this roughly 10-foot-by-10-foot painted red aluminum work
suggests, among other things, a propeller, a roof, the prow of a ship and many
sculptural images, including a Matisse ''Torso'' and a Julio Gonzalez head, the
sculpture remains elusive and abstract.

The flat sheets of aluminum folded over one another like layers of skin or
crumpled sheets of waxed paper create a sense of fragility and
two-dimensionality, yet the sculpture seems, in the end, not only solid but
voluminous as well. In this busy and picturesque setting by the East River - an
installation sponsored by Linda and Harry Macklowe - the sculpture is the model
of discretion, but it has no trouble holding its own. (Through Oct. 31.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of painting by Jesse Trevino

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Revere, Reorganizing, Names New President

BYLINE: By Kenneth N. Gilpin

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 405 words


Revere Copper and Brass Inc., which has been operating under bankruptcy
protection for nearly two years, announced yesterday that Hugh H. Williamson 3d
will become president and chief executive officer effective Sept. 1.

Mr. Williamson, who is 42, succeeds William F. Collins, who has held the top
posts at Revere since 1975. The company said that Mr. Collins, 65, would serve
as chairman of the board pending completion of its reorganization under Chapter
11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Act.

For the last three years, Mr. Williamson, a former Air Force captain, has served
as president and chief executive officer of the Edgcomb- Metals Company, one of
the Williams Companies of Tulsa, Okla. Mr. Williamson joined Edgcomb in 1977 as
a vice president.

Revere traces its origins to the construction in 1801 of a copper mill in
Canton, Mass., by Paul Revere, the Revolutionary War hero. The company's
best-known product is Revere Ware cookware, but it also manufactures aluminum,
copper and brass products for industrial use.

Revere filed for protection from its creditors in October 1982, citing the
severe impact of the recession and high interest rates on demand for its
aluminum and aluminum products.

Mary Berthel, a company spokesman, said that the company's reorganization is
expected to be completed before the end of the year. She added that Mr.
Williamson was on vacation and could not be reached for comment on his
appointment.

Before joining Edgcomb-Metals, Mr. Williamson held a variety of management
positions with O'Neal Steel Inc., a private steel fabricating and processing
company based in Birmingham, Ala.. and spent four years in the data processing
division of the International Business Machines Corporation as a salesman and
marketing program administrator.

A 1964 graduate of the Air Force Academy, Mr. Williamson served as a tactical
fighter instructor pilot during the Vietnam War from 1964 until 1969.

The continued slump in the aluminum industry appears to continue to act as a
drag on Revere's business.

In the second quarter, the company reported net income of $14.3 million, up from
the $1.3 million it earned during the same period a year ago. However, in this
year's second quarter the company had a $51.7 million provision for
reorganization claims and settlements, taxes and extraordinary items. After
effecting the special provision, Revere reported a loss of $37.1 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. TROOPS TERMED ABLE TO FIGHT FOR 30 DAYS IN CONVENTIONAL WAR

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1307 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 23


The Defense Department's senior official responsible for military readiness says
American forces could fight in a conventional conflict of the intensity of World
War II for at least 30 days with the supplies on hand, twice as long as four
years ago.

The official, Lawrence J. Korb, also said in an interview that the readiness of
the armed forces and their ability to continue fighting would double again by
the end of the decade, to 60 days, if Congress approved President Reagan's
military budgets.

Mr. Korb, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for manpower, installations and
logistics, provided the most specific defense of the Reagan Administration's
posture on military readiness since the release of a critical report by the
staff of the House Appropriations Committee a month ago.



Disputes With Democrats


The report contended that military readiness had declined, despite rising
military spending, and that United States forces could not sustain combat
against the Soviet Union or many lesser powers.

The Appropriations Committee is controlled by Democrats, and since it released
the staff report Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and other
Administration officials have traded charges with leading Democrats over
military readiness. Walter F. Mondale, the Democratic Presidential candidate,
has contended that too much money has been spent on nuclear arms and not enough
has been spent to make conventional forces ready.

In the interview Wednesday, Mr. Korb said American forces could sustain a war of
the same intensity as the Korean War for 30 days in the region around the
Persian Gulf. After that, he said, arms and supplies could be taken from
American forces elsewhere.



Confident on Counterinsurgency


In a third case, that of a counterinsurgency similar to the early days of the
war in Vietnam, Mr. Korb asserted, ''We would have no trouble with something
like that.'' American forces have trained for counterinsurgency operations in
Central America.

Mr. Korb said further that four million people, twice the number in the armed
forces today, could be under arms in a matter of days by calling up reserves and
recalling retired personnel.

But he acknowledged that, despite improvements, the armed forces were far short
of the air and sea transport needed to carry reinforcements, new weapons,
ammunition and spare parts to sustain American forces on distant battlefields.

Switch from Carter Strategy


After the Reagan Administration came to office in January 1981, it adopted a
military strategy fundamentally different from that of the Carter
Administration. The change required a basically different policy on military
readiness and the capacity to sustain forces in war.  Readiness in military
terms means the ranks are filled with trained troops, the proper officers and
noncommissioned officers are assigned and a unit is armed, equipped and supplied
with a basic load of ammunition for the first day of combat. Units are measured
as fully, substantially or marginally ready, or not ready.

The ability to sustain forces means having a stockpile of weapons, ammunition,
food, fuel and other supplies that would enable a unit to continue fighting
until American industry could produce enough to replace losses in battle. That
capacity is usually measured in the number of days' supplies on hand.

The Carter Era Assumption


In military policy, the Carter Administration assumed that a war with the Soviet
Union would be fought with conventional arms for 30 days, then with nuclear
weapons, and so ammunition and spare parts would be needed for only a month.

In contrast, the Reagan Administration has asserted that a nuclear standoff is
possible with a stronger United States deterrent. But the Soviet Union,
officials reasoned, might then be tempted to war on the United States and its
allies with its much larger conventional forces.

To deter Moscow, the Administration has set a goal of having all forces ready
for combat on the first day of a war and the capacity to sustain battle until
American industry could shift into large-scale wartime production.

'We Would Have Enough'


Mr. Korb, who is Mr. Weinberger's senior adviser on readiness, said in the
interview that the armed forces were ready for about 15 days of intense battle
when the new Administration took over in 1981.

If a war in Europe on the scale of World War II broke out tomorrow, he said,
''We would have enough to get involved, to deal with the situation and to buy us
time to do all the other things we need to do.'' He referred to conscription and
industrial mobilization.

''We could fight in Europe in a war as intense as the so-called Six-Day War with
the supplies we have on hand, against a maximum threat, easily for a month,''
Mr. Korb said, referring to the war between Israel and Arab nations in 1967,
which was notable for heavy firepower on both sides.

He said that by using older munitions in reserve stocks, such a war in Europe
could be extended to closer to 45 days. ''By the end of the decade,'' he said,
that time ''will be twice as much as we have now,'' assuming that funds were
approved by Congress, many members of which would prefer spending for lucrative
weapons programs in their home districts.

Confident on Supplies


If American forces are sent to the region around the Persian Gulf to protect the
industrial world's oil sources, ''they're not going to run out of ammunition
within a month,'' Mr. Korb said, adding, ''Longer than that, they'll take the
materiel from someplace else.''

''Assuming that you didn't have trouble in other parts of the world,'' he said,
''you would be able to drain those stocks.'' Implicit in that assumption,
however, is the danger of hostilities in two places, such as the Persian Gulf
and Korea, at the same time.

While senior civilian officials and military officers in the Pentagon have
focused on procuring new weapons for the future, field commanders have
complained that they have been shorted on ammunition and spare parts to fight a
war now.

Mr. Korb, who has been a spokesman for the field commanders in debates within
the Defense Department, said that decisions to cut back on ammunition and spare
parts as the military budget has come under pressure have been reasonably
balanced.

Not the 'Easy Way Out'


''We haven't taken the traditionally easy way out of budget cutbacks,'' he said.
That way would have been to slice into mundane accounts for bullets and repairs
rather than airplanes and tanks.

Mr. Korb, however, cautioned Mr. Weinberger in a memorandum in February that
military readiness could become a public issue and added, ''Any time one tries
to simplify and summarize a subject as complex as defense readiness, he is
vulnerable to challenge.''

In the interview, Mr. Korb said that to expand the forces rapidly ''we could get
the people we have our hands on now within days.'' There are 2.1 million men and
women on active duty and 1.5 million more in the individual reserves.

In addition, retired officers and noncommissioned officers under the age of 60
could be recalled to relieve active duty personnel at desk jobs. ''We have
retirees walking around with orders right now,'' Mr. Korb said.

Cargoes and Capacities


As for air and sea transport, Mr. Korb acknowledged, there is a long way to go.
His staff said that in 1981 the armed forces had a capacity of 28 million
ton-miles a day, the equivalent of moving 28,000 tons of cargo a thousand miles.
That has been increased to 33 million ton-miles a day this year.  The staff said
that airlift capacity was scheduled to reach 50 million ton- miles a day in 1990
but that the goal of 66 million ton-miles a day would not be reached until 1996.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of military readiness (page 11)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

V.F.W. ELECTS FIRST VIETNAM VETERAN

BYLINE: By E. R. SHIPP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Aug. 24


It was a package of nourishment from home that his Marine Corps unit in Da Nang
received in 1967 that led Billy Ray Cameron to the Veterans of Foreign Wars.

Today, on the last day of a weeklong convention held here, he was elected
commander in chief of the 85-year-old veterans' organization. Mr. Cameron, who
is from Sanford, N.C., is the first veteran from the Vietnam era to hold that
position.

His election was the first highlight of a day that concluded with an address by
President Reagan. People who had begun lining up two hours before the
President's appearance greeted Mr. Reagan with cheers of ''Four more years!''

For Mr. Cameron, who introduced the President and pledged the organization's
''undivided loyalty to this great nation,'' it all began 17 years ago in
Vietnam, where he was known as ''Pops,'' because, at the age of 23, he was the
old man in the unit.

A Package From Strangers


Newspapers from home carried accounts of antiwar protests and morale among the
troops was low, he recalled. But one day a package arrived from strangers, a
ladies' auxiliary of the Veterans of Foreign Wars from someplace in Illinois.
Along with the canned goods and candies in the package, he recalled in an
interview, were 18 letters ''telling us how much they appreciated us, supported
us and loved us.''

''That day,'' Mr. Cameron said, ''12 of us committed ourselves to joining the
V.F.W. when we got back home.''

This morning, as he assumed office, he told the veterans, ''I want you to know
at the outset that I do not intend to let anyone, in or out of Government,
degrade the Vietnam veteran and the honorable service he provided in the name of
his Government.''

Three Issues of Concern


Mr. Cameron, who is married and the father of two children, has taken a leave of
absence from his job as coordinator of the Sanford-Lee County Office of Civil
Preparedness. He will use his year as commander in chief, he said, to focus on
three issues: ''peace through strength,'' a posture that coincides with Mr.
Reagan's stance; medical care for veterans, including Vietnam veterans who were
exposed to the defoliant Agent Orange, and an accounting of soldiers still
listed as missing in Southeast Asia.

Mr. Cameron wears a bracelet that bears the name of one of those men, Sgt. W.
Darrell Johnson of Rocky Mount, N.C., who has been missing since Jan. 19, 1968.

As for medical benefits, Mr. Cameron said: ''We all understand that there is a
big deficit in the Federal budget.  We understand that there's got to be
cutbacks, but we want to be sure that the Veterans Administration hospitals are
funded at a level that will take care of all the veterans.''

Noting that the average age of World War II veterans was 63.5, he said, ''It
only takes common sense to realize there will be more and more asking for
assistance.''

Reminder of Soviet Threat


On Thursday, John O. Marsh Jr., Secretary of the Army, spoke to his fellow
V.F.W. members of a threat posed by the Soviet Union.

''What really is at stake,'' he said, ''is not just Soviet military power - a
threat we cannot ignore. Rather, it is the ultimate resolution of key social and
political issues. The conflict we are in, but did not choose, is a challenge of
ideas and contrasting values.''

The Veterans of Foreign Wars has two million members in the United States and
abroad. In many communities, the V.F.W. post is a major social center, but
Clifford G. Olson Jr., the retiring commander in chief, said there was more to
the organization than that.

''The old concept of a veterans' club being a place where you just go drink and
party and carouse, put a cap on your head and tell war stories, that's gone,''
he said.

Conflict With Another Group


The organization, with about 575,000 Vietnam veterans, has been in conflict with
the Vietnam Veterans of America, which has been seeking a Federal charter from
Congress designating it as a bona fide veterans' organization.

Mr. Olson has written to Congress condemning the 17,000-member V.V.A. for its
direct dealings with the Governments of Vietnam and Cambodia in an attempt to
obtain an accounting of 2,483 American soldiers listed as missing after the war.
The United States has no formal diplomatic ties to Vietnam.

Mr. Cameron, who agrees with his predecessor, said, ''We don't deal with any
country our Government doesn't have diplomatic relations with.'' He condemns
leaders of the Vietnam Veterans of America but praises its members, some of
whom, he said, are his friends. ''They do a lot of good community service
work,'' Mr. Cameron said. ''I wish them the best.''

He said he expected to work with the group for common legislative objectives.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Billy Ray Cameron

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MODERATES AND CONSERVATIVES DISAGREE ON WHY G.O.P. TURNED TO THE RIGHT

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 822 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Aug. 24


Republican conservatives and moderates differ on why their party took a turn to
the right and whether conservative domination is likely to continue into the
next decade.

The party's moderates tend to attribute their decline to being outworked,
outspent and outmaneuvered by the conservatives. Conservatives were quick to
master the new political technology, such as the use of computers to identify
voters.

The moderates themselves note that the word ''moderate'' connotes a certain
reserve, while they say the conservatives were zealous in pursuit of control of
the party.

''The conservatives work very hard, while the moderates get so involved in the
issues that they sometimes forget party mechanics,'' said Senator Charles McC.
Mathias Jr. of Maryland, a moderate.

But the conservatives contend they were able to rout the moderates only because
they were riding the tide of history, which they helped to change.

Free Spending Is Cited


''We moved the country,'' said Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada, a conservative,
attributing the movement's success to the political skills of Ronald Reagan as
well as the ideology he represented. ''There's no greater bully pulpit than the
White House, and Ronald Reagan has used it effectively.''

A key factor in their success, conservatives contend, was voter disenchantment
with the free-spending Democrats, many of whose policies were supported by the
Republican moderates. The free-spending Presidency reached reached its
apotheosis under Lyndon B. Johnson, they say, and created a vacuum filled by the
conservative Republicans. The Democrats' policies were underscored by the
Republican Presidential candidacy of Barry Goldwater in 1964 and the birth of
the modern Republican conservative movement.

''I was a liberal Democrat,'' said Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, a
conservative Republican. ''Then I looked at the way the Democrats were spending
this country blind. It's tough when the liberal Democrats outpromise and
outspend, but we've had to sell our party as the party of hope.''

The conservatives also contend that Vietnam and Watergate gave government a bad
name and made the voters more receptive to the conservative dictum that less was
better. They also say that disillusionment with Vietnam and Watergate allowed
conservatives to capture the flag and espouse patriotism along with prayer and
family life.

''The Vietnam War started under Kennedy, and Lyndon Johnson blew it up without
intending to win,'' said Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, a
conservative. ''Because we didn't win that war, we created a feeling that the
U.S. is a paper tiger, which conservatives deeply resented.''

Finally, conservatives say the New Deal created a middle class that became
increasingly Republican, and conservative.

Today, Republican conservatives control not only the White House but also their
party's representation in both the House and Senate. ''Conservatives are the
core of the Republican Party, as liberals are the core of the Democratic
Party,'' said Senator Pete V. Domenici, a conservative from New Mexico.
''Conservatives will continue to control this party long after the Reagan
Presidency.''

For many moderates, their failure within the Republican party has been a failure
of resolve. ''They don't work at it,'' said Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of
Connecticut, a moderate himself. ''They don't contribute to help their
candidates. They don't do the pick and shovel work.''

'They're too Cerebral'


The Senator recalled quitting the Wednesday Group, made up of moderate
Republican senators, because the organization failed to support a candidate for
the Senate leadership in 1980. ''They won't fight,'' Mr. Weicker said of the
moderates. ''They're too cerebral.''

Representative Silvio O. Conte of Massachusetts, another moderate, said: ''It
all started in '64. They won the convention. They came out of the woodwork. It
was hard work, dedication, money and zeal.''

Charles W. Dunn, chairman of the political science department at Clemson
University, a conservative who is a delegate to the convention from South
Carolina, said ''Ronald Reagan was able to combine conservative ideology and
theology,'' uniting the conservatives with the religious fundamentalists.

But while many conservatives predict their continued ascendance in the party,
some moderates disagree. They question whether Mr. Reagan won because he was a
conservative or because the voters were disillusioned with President Carter.
They also note that the conservatives are a minority nationally and that the
Republican party is itself a minority party in terms of voter identification and
registration.

''Everyone thinks we're an extinct species,'' said Senator John H. Chafee of
Rhode Island, a moderate. ''You can't write us off. We have a number of moderate
Republican governors, and they could hold the key to the party's future.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE PENTAGON;
WEINBERGER AND THE PRESS: AN EBB IN THE FLOW

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1180 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 24


When Caspar W. Weinberger became Secretary of Defense nearly three and a half
years ago, he started out with a candor in public that was refreshing to some
and distressing to others.

He said the new Administration would help improve Saudi Arabia's defenses,
produce the neutron bomb and expand military spending.

Mr. Weinberger occasionally turned a catchy phrase, pleading the need for
''rearming America'' and calling Soviet pressures on Poland ''an invasion by
osmosis.''

Over the years, however, Mr. Weinberger has steadily become more reticent in
public and has gradually sought, with some success, to tighten the controls over
the flow of information from the Defense Department.

Pentagon and Congressional officials who know Mr. Weinberger say he was
surprised in the early days by the reactions, often vociferous, that his remarks
often aroused around the world. Senior White House officials, dismayed by an
appearance of disarray in policy, sought to curb Mr. Weinberger. Then,
disclosures of information about confidential policies or disputes or dissent
irritated him.

The Hand on the Valves

But the underlying reason, those officials say, is that Mr. Weinberger is
fundamentally secretive and instinctively seeks to have his own hand

on the valves through which information flows.

Mr. Weinberger's instructions on how to carry out recommendations in a Pentagon
panel's report on press coverage of military operations such as the invasion of
Grenada appear to fall into that pattern.

At first glance, the recommendations accepted by Mr. Weinberger from a panel of
military officers and journalists in the report, made public Thursday, would
seem to provide wide access to a battlefield.

But closer scrutiny suggests that the Defense Department, while eschewing formal
censorship of news and pictures before they are transmitted from combat zones,
has left itself plenty of room, in the name of military security, to impose
stringent limits on coverage.

It could censor information before it is released, restrict the access of
correspondents to units and people, retain control over transportation and
communications, and make clear to military commanders that news coverage takes a
low priority.

The panel, headed by Maj. Gen. Winant Sidle, a retired Army officer, said, ''It
is essential that the U.S. news media cover U.S. military operations to the
maximum degree possible consistent with mission security and the safety of U.S.
forces.''

'The Secretary Can Dictate'


In putting that principle into practice, however, the Pentagon's chief
spokesman, Michael I. Burch, threw it into another light. ''How the press is to
operate must be decided on a case-by-case basis,'' Mr. Burch said at a briefing.
''The Secretary can dictate a national policy on how an operation is covered.''

Information to be released, Mr. Burch said, ''must go through a security review
process.'' Guidelines for security would be set down by military commanders.
''If your organization does anything that jeopardizes the security of the
mission and endangers the lives of American servicemen and women,'' he said,
''your accreditation would be pulled and we would not give you any more access
to our units and commanders.''

Military commanders would decide whether correspondents would be permitted on
the scene. ''No commander is ever going to want you to take the seat of a
soldier or to take up the space of a box of ammo,'' Mr. Burch said.

If a small pool of reporters and photographers must be chosen to cover the early
stages of an operation, Mr. Burch said, ''it will more or less be selected by us
- there will be some consultation, but the final decisions are ours.''

Security Is Stressed


Mr. Burch emphasized: ''The most important thing is the security of a mission
and the safety of the lives of our force.'' Most longtime correspondents have
never quarreled with that. History shows few premature disclosures of tactical
moves in World War II, the Korean War, or the war in Vietnam.

In sum, the report by the Sidle panel and the briefing by Mr. Burch, who is a
retired Air Force officer, underscored the deep distrust of many military
officers for the press and television that is an abiding legacy of the Vietnam
War. Almost all the senior military officers of the present were middle-ranking
commanders in Vietnam, and many harbor bitter beliefs that the war there was
lost because the press and television eroded public support at home.

Moreover, that distrust colors the attitudes of many senior officers to advisers
on public affairs. The Sidle panel said, ''Some commanders take the position
that telling something to his public affairs officer is tantamount to telling it
to the media.''

The Rules on Interviews


Added to that appears to be Mr. Weinberger's penchant for secrecy and control.
In the Defense Department today, interviews with senior officials must have the
approval of either Mr. Weinberger or Mr. Burch and a press officer must be
present during the conversation.

The Pentagon press office, with more than a dozen experienced public affairs
officers or civilian officials, has been cut out of most of the inside
information flow. Press officers there are often unable or reluctant to answer
any but the most routine questions.

Even news that the armed services want published is often under wraps. In
Lebanon, the Army employed a new device that spots enemy artillery by tracing
the trajectory of an incoming round and feeding that data through a computer to
guns that fire back. The device worked fine, officers said, but when reporters
asked for details, the Army was told to keep quiet because the Administration
wanted little attention on Lebanon, where 261 Americans had been killed.

The Fear of Budget Cuts

Similarly, Secretary of the Navy John F. Lehman Jr. has said repeatedly that the
Navy has been taking delivery on new ships coming in earlier than specified in
the contract, and under cost.

But it took the Navy two months to come up with information to prove the
Secretary's case, because senior officers feared that Congress would cut its
budget.

This week the Air Force announced that it, the Army and the Navy had stopped
payments to the Hughes Aircraft Company because of poor quality in several
missiles it makes. Mr. Weinberger and Mr. Burch, according to Mr. Burch, were
upset because they had not been notified first.

The Marine Corps, sensing that its press relations weren't all that they could
be, has hired a private public relations firm to find out why. Public relations
specialists have been interviewing reporters, news executives and Marine Corps
officers for a report due in October.

But the basic attitude is set by Mr. Weinberger. After he arrived at a luncheon
with several reporters a few days ago, Mr. Burch said the session would be off
the record. Mr. Weinberger was his engaging and humorous self, but he said
little that he had not said before in speeches or Congressional testimony.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DALLAS, DESPITE PROBLEMS, PULLS AHEAD OF HOUSTON

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1416 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Aug. 24


For a time it seemed that Dallas was losing the race to become the capital of
the Southwest to Houston, its huge, muscular and unruly rival to the south.
While Houston soared ahead in the energy boom, staid Dallas just lumbered along
like the tortoise in the race with the hare.

Now it appears that Dallas, like the deliberate turtle, is coming out the winner
against the careless hare, which was held back by collapse of the energy boom.
Dallas's far more diversified economy, based on computers, electronics, military
manufacturing, wholesale trade, banking, insurance and other services, has
emerged as much more resilient and prepared to compete in the new world economy
than Houston's.

The contrast between Texas' two largest cities was all the more evident with the
Republican convention in town.

Building in Dallas Apace


As the delegates left today, they saw a skyline dotted with construction cranes,
while building has all but stopped in Houston, now vastly overbuilt. They also
saw a smoothly run, squeaky clean city, with neat streets and sidewalks, while
Houston, mired in traffic, gives a messy appearance, with weedy curbs and broken
sidewalks, where there are any. (At 1.7 million population, Houston is nearly
twice the size of Dallas, about 940,000, although if Dallas is combined with
nearby Fort Worth the two areas are about equal.)

The statistics also paint a vivid contrast. Last year, the Houston area lost
96,100 jobs, while employment grew in the Dallas-Fort Worth area by 41,400 jobs.
Total construction in the Houston area fell 28 percent in 1983 from 1982, while
it swelled by 45 percent in Dallas- Fort Worth. June unemployment in Houston was
6.3 percent, still below the national average, but unimpressive against Dallas's
3.4 percent.

Still, economists say such statistics may exaggerate the differences. ''Don't
get the idea Houston is in disastrous straits - it's just not booming like
Dallas,'' said William Gruben, regional economist with the Federal Reserve Bank
here.

Uneasy About Building Boom


Moreover, there is growing uneasiness in Dallas about the construction boom,
which appears to be driven as much by naive out-of-state and foreign investors
as by real demand for office space. Sixteen million square feet of space here is
already vacant, and 21 million feet is under construction.

''Dallas is a great place, but it's hard for me to imagine where the tenants are
going to come from,'' said Shad Rowe, a stockbroker here. Like Mr. Rowe, many
knowledgeable people here expect a painful shakeout in Dallas's real estate
market. It is already occurring in multifamily housing construction, down 43
percent this year from last year.

Houston and Dallas have many similarities. Both cities have few natural
advantages but have created their own futures through sheer determination and
the free-enterprise spirit. Both are typical of the sprawling automobile- based
economies of the Southwest. And, given Texans' penchant for conspicuous
consumption, they are a retailer's delight. Per capita retail sales in 1982 in
the two cities were higher than in any major metropolitan area: $6,246 for
Houston and $6,013 for Dallas-Fort Worth, against $4,372 for New York.

There Is Rivalry Between Them


There is much sibling rivalry. Houstonians, who generally vote Democratic, tend
to consider Dallas a smug, sanctimonious and boring place, run by an
authoritarian business oligarchy. Dallasites, mostly Republicans, return the
compliment, calling Houston an unruly, disorganized, smelly place with weak
leadership.

Such urban stereotypes are almost always dated, but there is a measure of truth
to them, and they help explain why Dallas leads Houston today. Dallas is
well-placed with a mostly white- collar service economy, while Houston's economy
is heavily based on blue- collar industries like manufacture of oil-drilling
equipment.

The very factors that held Dallas back in the past are turning out to be its
salvation today. Dallas was never able to ride the energy boom as well as
Houston, but it built a more diversified economy in financial services, film-
making, apparel and wholesaling, aerospace and electronics that let it share the
current economic boom better than Houston could with the present oil surplus. In
particular, Texas Instruments, originally founded to serve the oil industry,
shifted into the information business, and spawned a major high-technology
industry here.

Many High-Tech Jobs


In 1983, the Dallas-Fort Worth area had 87,000 high-technology jobs, and 28
percent of its manufacturing jobs were in such industries. By contrast, the
Houston area had only 18,700 such jobs, many of them in energy-related
technologies, and they made up only 9.2 percent of manufacturing.

''We have the right mix of industries that have not fallen on hard times,'' said
Ed McClelland, vice president and economist at the Dallas-based RepublicBank
Corporation. ''They may be cyclical, but they certainly don't shut down.''

Thomas Plautt of the Bureau of Business Research at the University of Texas at
Austin, said, ''Dallas is very strong now because of the strength of the U.S.
economy and high-tech and defense industries.'' He recently projected that
employment in Dallas would grow 6.4 percent this year over last, as against 2.6
percent for Houston and a national average of 4.1 percent. He added that Houston
had begun to recover and he predicted ''nice growth'' for 1985, assuming a
recovering in oil drilling.

A cornerstone of the Dallas economy is Dallas Market Center, a wholesale
merchandise mart that annually draws half a million buyers who spend more than
$5.5 billion on apparel, furniture, gifts and floor coverings. In addition,
Trammell Crow, the Dallas developer, is building a 1.5 million-square-foot
Infomart, modeled after the Crystal Palace in London, to be a trade center for
computer and electronics makers.

Impact of War's End


However, Dallas-Fort Worth has not been immune to bad times. It sank into deep
recession in 1969-70 as the Vietnam War ended and General Dynamics began to halt
manufacturing of the F-111 fighter-bomber. It also suffered more than Houston in
the last recession, and it will presumably continue to be sensitive to national
ups and downs and to rising interest rates.

Morever, ironically, it was the Dallas banks, particularly the InterFirst
Corporation, that made imprudent energy loans and is now fighting a major run on
its deposits, while the Houston- based banks, such as Texas Commerce, knew
better and are stronger than ever.

But the Houston economy was not prepared for the energy downturn. Because it was
the world center for manufacture of drills, bits and other heavy equipment for
pumping oil and gas, it was left with a vast inventory that had no market, as
well as an oversupply of labor. It was also a major center of Mexican
purchasing, both retail and commercial, and suffered when the peso collapsed in
1982. It remains to be seen whether it can attract other industry. It does not
have much of computer industry to build on, and its airport does not offer
service as good as the Dallas-Fort Worth airport.

Mobility a Big Factor


What is perhaps just as important is that Houston, in contrast with Dallas, is
widely considered nationally to be a poor place to live. It is now paying for
past lapses in its business and political leadership, which allowed growth and
boom to outstrip city services, sewers and roads.

Most obvious is Houston's ''mobility'' problem, said Gerald D. Hines, a
Houston-based developer. For the moment, he has almost entirely stopped building
in Houston and operates in Dallas, Boston, New York and other stronger markets.
In retrospect, Mr. Hines and other say, Dallas is reaping the payoff now from
cohesive leadership in the past, which put special emphasis on roads, sewers and
other amenities. The Dallas-Fort Worth area has about the same land area (2,400
square miles) and population (3.2 million) as the Houston area. But Dallas-Fort
Worth has 445 miles of limited-access highway and Houston only 230 miles.
Moreover, planning was stronger in Dallas, so that more of its roads are through
streets; in Houston they are likely to dead-end in developments, snarling
traffic.

But many believe that if Dallas does not move quickly to accommodate its sudden
growth, it too will soon face the same urban problems as Houston.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dallas; photo of Houston

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COMPUTERS WORRY HISTORIANS

BYLINE: By DAVID BURNHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1798 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 25


A number of administrators, archivists and historians have become concerned that
the rapidly growing use of computers and word processors may be undermining the
Government's administrative and historical record.

Their worry focuses on the effect that several computer technologies may be
having on collecting and storing such Government documents as the drafts of
speeches and preliminary memorandums outlining policy options.

These are the kinds of papers that are essential to a new agency head who is
attempting to understand the reasoning behind a decision by a predecesor, to a
Federal judge seeking to weigh the issues in a lawsuit on a subject like the
Government's use of the herbicide Agent Orange, or to a historian trying to
explain why policymakers of a distant era decided to sign a treaty.



Paper-Saving vs. Tape-Saving


When these documents are written on paper, the bureaucracy tends to save them
systematically. When a computer or word processor is used to write a document,
there is sometimes pressure to erase the electronic copy and use the storage
space for fresh material. In addition, the very accuracy of information on
computer tapes can deteriorate over a long period.  None of the problems are
considered insoluble, and some preliminary steps are being taken to deal with
them.

But, according to interviews with dozens of experts in and out of government,
budget constraints and the natural inclination of officials to concentrate on
the immediate problem rather than the distant problem have led to a situation in
which most Federal agencies do not appreciate the threat posed to their records
by the rapid introduction of new information-handling technologies.

William Price, director of the State Department's Foreign Affairs Information
Management Center, referring to the growing number of personal

 computers being used in the department, said, ''Unless we get some firm rules
in place pretty quickly, a lot of information is going to go down the P.C. rat
hole.''

William Slany, the State Department's chief historian, said in an interview that
the computerization of government records presented a number of ''distinct, very
real challenges.''

''The interest in manipulating the record has always been present, but the new
media upon which it now is being recorded is even more susceptible to
mishandling than the old,'' he said. ''My overall feeling is that, with all the
problems of the past, the historical record today is nowhere near as accessible
as it used to be.''

A Vanished Memo Author


One recent example of a problem concerned the inability of several House
committees to determine who had written a number of memorandums allegedly put
into the word processors in the office of Rita M. Lavelle, the former
Environmental Protection Agency official who was convicted of lying to Congress
last December.  James H. Burrows, head of the Institute for Computer Science and
Technology at the Bureau of Standards, said he believed the new technologies
could ultimately lead to an improvement in the ability to store and retrieve
records but that this would require adopting a variety of specific new policies.

''There is one underlying reality out there,'' he said. ''Once you use a piece
of paper it cannot readily be re-used, so it almost automatically becomes a
target for storage. But because the floppy disk is expensive, there is pressure
to re-use it over and over again. This means material almost routinely gets
erased.'' Floppy disks are thin plastic platters used to record information fed
into small computers.

'Hard to Throw Away Paper'


Frank Reeder, an information policy expert in the Office of Management and
Budget, generally agreed, saying: ''The historical record of government could be
truly endangered. Over a period covering many centuries, we have developed a
cultural habit that makes it very hard to ever throw away a piece of paper. But
that ethic clearly has not developed yet for electronic records.''

The concern about preserving the administrative and archival records of
government initially appears to contradict the widespread view that computers
have generated a vast increase in records. But officials like Mr. Reeder point
out that while the computer is very good at collecting records of such regular
transactions as monthly Social Security payments or yearly Internal Revenue
Service returns, preserving textual information is an entirely different matter.

Most experts agree that the computer industry as a whole has not focused on the
problem.  ''Computer people tend to concentrate on getting things done fast,
more efficiently, and they don't think in terms of keeping records for
administrative and historical purposes,'' said David K. Allison, the Historian
of Navy Laboratories, now working at the David W. Taylor Naval Ship Research and
Development Center, up the Potomac from Washington.

''The people designing the information-handling systems now being put in place
all over government give relatively little thought to maintaining records,'' Mr.
Allison said. ''This is unfortunate because once a system is in place it's going
to be there for a fairly long time.''

Hope Seen for Better Records


The experts, however, acknowledge there are scattered developments that run
contrary to their broad concern and could ultimately lead to better
record-keeping.

Under the specific mandate of a new law requiring President Reagan and his
succesors to preserve and protect White House documents, for example, John
Rogers, the President's special assistant for admininistration, has adopted
several special new procedures to guard the work papers increasingly generated
by word processors and distributed by an elaborate electronic mail system.

For the time being, White House speechwriters have been told to keep paper
copies of each draft of Presidential speeches as the speeches are being
prepared.

Looking more to the future, Mr. Rogers has also taken action to modify the
technology that senior White House officials are starting to use. Beginning in
October, Mr. Rogers said, the computerized work stations now used by about 10 of
the officials will be equipped with a new key marked ''Archives'' that will
automatically send historical material to an electronic file for later
examination by historians.

A Warning on Complexity


''The White House is not just a series of disconnected administrations - it is a
continuing institution,'' Mr. Rogers said. ''If we lost in November, the new
administration would find we have put together an electronic system to greatly
improve the ability of staff to handle their assignments and to keep good
records of how they did it.''

As a first, tentative step for the Government in general, the General Services
Administration, the Government's warehouse and supply agency, has distributed a
draft memorandum telling Federal agencies that ''large computers, remote
time-sharing services, minicomputers, personal computers, word processors and
other electronic devices'' are ''adding great complexity to records
management.'' The memorandum, prepared by Claudine J. Weiher, assistant United
States archivist, and Patricia Aransson, director of the Documentation Standards
Staff, recommended some first steps to deal with the problem.

These included recommendations that every agency adopt standardized procedures
to insure that important electronic records are not accidentally erased and all
such records are properly indexed. The archivists also suggested that the
agencies begin considering purchasing personal computers that are attached to a
network, to facilitate the central collection of electronic records.

The concern over the current threat to government records has not been limited
to government. Three national scholarly organizations, using funds from the
Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation, have formed a joint committee to investigate how the new information
technologies may have undermined current government procedures designed to
protect essential documents, and to identify possible solutions.

The 'Institutional Memory'


The chairman of the privately supported Committee on the Records of Government,
Ernest May, a history professor at Harvard University, said:

''We were asked to undertake this study because of the perception both inside
and outside of government that the new technologies are making it harder and
harder to remember things, that the institutional memory of both administrative
and historical positions currently is being eroded.''

The technical problems are widely varied and may require fairly substantial
funds to resolve.

According to studies by the National Bureau of Standards, the accuracy and
completeness of information stored on computer tapes cannot be guaranteed for
more than 20 years, thus requiring the adoption of systematic programs by many
government agencies to periodically place old information on new tapes.

The growing use of word processors means that drafts of statements charting
development of important policies recorded on small plastic disks are
automatically erased when the disks are re-used for other jobs. In addition,
visits to offices in many government agencies indicate that the information
stored on the disk is frequently not properly labeled.

The Dangers in Obsolescence


Government archivists have become aware that information recorded in one form
can be difficult to retrieve if the technology it was recorded on becomes
obsolete and the machines needed to make the information available have been
dropped from government inventories.

At a 1983 conference of Vietnam historians, Donald Harrison of the National
Archives explained that one series of records about the war had been placed on
more than 100 rolls of a kind of microfilm that required a special device to
enable historians to read them.

''Unfortunately,'' he said, ''the machines don't exist anymore. There is no way
to get to these records, to get the index and point out what frame you are
trying to find.'' He added that there was no money available now to transfer the
information to a more accessible medium.

Dr. May, head of the private joint investigating committee, said he believed the
record problem had been aggravated by the paradoxical fact that the new
technology was recording so much information that it had become extraordinarily
difficult to keep track of it.

''There are a lot of serious transitional problems with the new technologies,
but I also am worried that we are drowning in information, retaining so much
that we can't sort out the important material,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THAILAND IS SEEKING SEAT ON SECURITY COUNCIL

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 639 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 25


Government officials said this week that Thailand intends to make a strong bid
for a seat on the United Nations Security Council this fall.

Bangkok's campaign for the rotating Asian regional seat on the Council,
officials and Western diplomats here say, grows out of a belief in Thailand and
among other members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations - Malaysia,
Singapore, Indonesia, the Philippines and Brunei - that the region's economic
growth and relative political stability have created a base from which to begin
seeking influence in the wider world.

''This is a stepping out into the international community, like a debutante's
ball,'' a Thai Foreign Ministry official said.

Thais say the impetus to internationalism springs from several sources. Thailand
is encouraging foreign investment here and entering into more trade agreements.
In addition, Thailand's unsought role as host to hundreds of thousands of
refugees from Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam has involved the country with countless
international organizations.

''Our refugee problems have made us much more experienced in international
affairs,'' Sawanit Kongsiri, the Foreign Ministry spokesman, said in an
interview this week. ''We have developed, and shown our colors.''

Emergence of Regional Groups


After World War II, he said, as Thailand and other Southeast Asian nations
became independent, they took an active interest in the United Nations. But they
soon found that the organization, even in its regional units, tended to become
unwieldy because too many diverse interests had to be satisfied. Around the
world, smaller nations began to look for more manageable, regional groupings.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations, founded in Bangkok in 1967, was one
of these.

The need for strong regional cooperation, Mr. Sawanit said, was further brought
home to Thais by the experience of South Vietnam. ''We learned the lesson not to
be too closely allied with faraway powers,'' he said.

Thailand is expected to be challenged for the Security Council seat by Mongolia,
which will have the support of the Soviet bloc. Diplomats say the Thais,
regarded as pro-Western, will have to concentrate on gaining support among
nations of the third world outside Asia, many of which have had little contact
with Bangkok and have voted in the past with the Soviet Union.

Thai officials at the United Nations and here say they expect to face strong
criticism from Vietnam when General Assembly sessions begin in September.
Bangkok has diplomatic relations with Hanoi, but it refuses to recognize the
Vietnamese-backed Government of Cambodia and allows rebels fighting that
Government to be supplied through Thailand. This adds another irritant to the
historically bad relationship between Thais and Vietnamese.

Border Dispute With Laos


With the campaign getting under way for the Security Council seat, Thailand
wants to settle quickly a border dispute with Laos, another country under strong
Vietnamese influence, if not control.

This week, after talks with a Laotian delegation broke down in Bangkok, the Thai
Government offered to have the border area surveyed and to give Laos the three
small villages in dispute - Mai, Ban Kang and Savang - if they were found to be
in the Mekong River watershed. The area involved, according to the Thai
Government, is only about seven square miles.

Laos has not responded to the proposal, and Thailand is now considering asking
for help from a third party, possibly the United Nations, in settling the
problem.

There is some suspicion among Thais, who feel closer to the Laotians than to
other Southeast Asians, and among Western diplomats here that the border problem
may be prolonged by the Vietnamese, who could then accuse Thailand of aggression
against a neighbor.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEHIND BECKER'S UNHAPPY BREAKUP

BYLINE: By Fred R. Bleakley

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3246 words


On Monday morning, Aug. 6, the denizens of Wall Street arrived at work with a
sense of glee. Only a few days earlier, the stock market - finally - had snapped
out of its year-long slump and had started to generate the heady gains that
reminded brokers of the glory days of August 1982. There was money in the air
that morning and everyone felt it.

But at 55 Water St., in the three upper floors that made up the headquarters of
Becker Paribas Inc., there was only apprehension. For days it had been abuzz
with rumors that its French banking parent, the venerable Compagnie Financi ere
de Paris et des Pays-Bas, was preparing to bail out because of Becker's heavy
losses.

By 9:30, Becker employees watching the Dow Jones news wire spotted the
announcement: Merrill Lynch would acquire Becker Paribas for $100 million in
Merrill shares but would absorb only a few hundred of the firm's 2,000
employees. As the rest of Wall Street scrambled to begin trading at 10 A.M.,
with the delight of children on a Christmas morning, Becker's brokers and
traders were staggered.

''It was like being poked in the eye with a sharp stick,'' said one long- time
investment banker at the firm.

Indeed, a sense of disbelief greeted the announcement, and still persists three
weeks later at Becker - and elsewhere on Wall Street. Only a month and a half
before the announcement, Paribas had seemed to make a lasting commitment to
Becker by increasing its ownership of the New York operation to 100 percent from
57 percent and by injecting $100 million in new capital. What's more, the sale
price - only $100 million in Merrill Lynch stock - was at least $125 million
less than Paribas had invested in Becker in recent years. And in deciding to
sell to Merrill, Paribas had turned down a higher offer for Becker from Paine
Webber.

One must go behind the scenes to understand what happened at Becker, and how its
sale reflected economic forces that make survival increasingly difficult for any
mid-sized Wall Street firm trying to serve many different investment markets. In
fact, one must go back to an earlier Wall Street merger in order to understand
the mystery of why Paribas was willing to invest so much new money in Becker in
June and then bail out in August at a fire sale price that totaled only Becker's
book value.

In May, Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb, a mid-sized firm that in many ways resembled
Becker, was merged into Shearson American Express. Becker had been losing money
all year and as its losses continued to mount in June and July, Paribas's top
executives reflected on the speed with which the Lehman deal had taken place -
and the hefty $350 million pricetag, which was 2.8 times the book value of
Lehman shares.

''We perceived this as a signal that a firm like ours could work out an
arrangement to sell itself to another firm in a matter of a few days or a
week,'' said Herve M. Pinet, the executive whom Paribas chose to head Becker 15
months earlier. Mr. Pinet claims that Paribas ''never wanted to be the 100
percent owner'' of Becker Paribas, but had bought out Becker employees in June
largely because the employees were alarmed about the losses and the impact of
those mounting losses on their Becker holdings. Mr. Pinet added that Paribas had
no intention of selling the company when it made that investment.

The countdown to the end of Becker Paribas began in earnest on July 17. Top
officials of Paribas, which thinks of itself as France's Morgan Guaranty Trust
Company, gathered with Becker's executive committee in a general review of
operations. Becker had been losing money at the rate of about $15 million a
month since March and as one Becker official recalled, ''We were destroying
Paribas, which earned $143 million last year. It wasn't as if we were owned by
General Motors.''

At that meeting, Becker's top American executives were told that within two
weeks the decision would be made to either sell off major pieces of the firm or
to dispose of it entirely.

Mr. Pinet, who attended the talks, had already been approached by Paine Webber
Inc., another securities firm, to see if his firm were interested in selling its
commercial paper operation. Becker Paribas is a leading force in that business
of raising short-term funds for corporations, and the unit handling this work
was viewed as the star in Becker's crown. In fact, Mr. Pinet said, eight firms
had expressed interest in acquiring the commercial paper unit in the months
prior to the talks with Merrill.

Mr. Pinet said in an interview last week that when Donald B. Marron, Paine
Webber's chief executive, first suggested buying only the division, ''I told him
we had no interest in disposing of only one aspect of the firm. But then we met
another time and the possibility of doing something larger was discussed.''

Prompting Paribas's decision to opt out of Becker, Mr. Pinet said, was the
recognition that ''the first six months of 1984 accelerated the changes in the
markets and the securities industry.'' The sharp volatility in prices of fixed-
income securities and the slump in trading volume of stocks led to Becker's big
operating losses, which totaled $77 million in the nine months ending July 31.
Although Wall Street firms had all suffered from the Dow's decline, Becker's
losses were proportionately greater.

In fact, they convinced Paribas, Mr. Pinet said, that ''more and more it was
difficult, if not impossible, for a medium-sized firm to continue. We reached
the conclusion that it would be better to combine the firm into a larger, major
one.''

Insiders at Becker and on Wall Street are quick to point to government
securities trading as the culprit for much of Becker's losses this year. But it
wasn't. The real problem was high overhead and a lack of revenues in the equity,
fixed income and investment banking divisions. Government securities trading, on
the other hand, was profitable through the nine months ending July 31, according
to documents filed with the Federal Reserve Board. The fixed income division
lost $27 million in that period, in part because of a huge buildup in
high-priced traders and salesmen, many of them hired recently with hefty
up-front bonuses.

Apparently, Paribas's sense of wanting to throw in the towel was one that a
number of employees felt several months earlier. In June, when Paribas bought
out 200 Becker shareholders for $43 million, it reflected the desire of
employees to withdraw their capital before it was too late. The price Paribas
paid for those shares was well above the book value at the time and as losses
continued, employees breathed a sigh of relief when their deal went through.

But in the negotiations with Paine Webber, Paribas hit a snag.  Paine Webber
became less than enthusiastic when the discussions focused on the sale of the
entire firm rather than one division, but the firm made a bid anyway for the
entire company.

That bid, early this month, apparently disappointed Paribas. Becker officials,
who asked not to be named, said it came to approximately $50 million, only about
half the $100 million book value represented by the equity ownership of Paribas.
Mr. Marron declined to comment on Paine Webber's discussions with Becker. Nor
would Mr. Pinet discuss any of the financial details of the merger talks.

While top officials of the firm sought to keep their talks with Paine Webber
under wraps, anxiety among Becker employees was mounting. Although the firm had
not said it was in merger talks, the awareness of continuing losses and the
presence of Paribas's French executives pouring over the books in New York
filled the air with expectation that something big was about to happen.

During the week before the Merrill Lynch merger announcement, speculation was
rampant within the firm and on Wall Street that a merger was being worked out
with any one of a number of firms. There was a ''rumor du jour,'' as one wag put
it. First Paine Webber was named as the marriage partner. Then it was Morgan
Stanley. And then Nomura Securities, the big Japanese brokerage, was said to be
in the picture. That, in fact, led to the phonetic play on a new name for the
fast-fading firm - Nomura Becker. Both Morgan Stanley and Nomura deny they had
discussions with Becker Paribas about a merger.

Gallows humor went only so far, however. On Wall Street, other firms move in
quickly to hire key employees when a firm is on the ropes. ''We were well aware
that if something was going to be done, it had to be done fast,'' said John G.
Heimann, Becker's deputy chairman.

Mr. Pinet had prepared for the possibility of a low bid from Paine Webber.
Several days earlier he had telephoned William Schreyer, Merrill Lynch's chief
executive, whom he described as ''a very good friend,'' to ask if Merrill would
be interested in Becker if the occasion arose.

Even though Merrill Lynch itself had lost money in the second quarter and was in
the midst of a major cutback in personnel, Mr. Schreyer said he was interested.
He alerted several Merrill Lynch executives to get ready, recalls Jerome P.
Kenney, the Merrill Lynch chief of investment banking. He eventually headed his
firm's negotiating team and worked out the merger.

The call from Mr. Pinet came on Friday morning, Aug. 3. By that afternoon a half
dozen or so Merrill executives were meeting with the Becker executive committee
at the 425 Park Ave. offices of the investment banking firm headed by and named
after James Wolfenson, who represented Paribas.

After adjourning Friday evening, the group agreed to convene again at 10 A.M.
the following day and to bring in lawyers and accountants so questions could be
resolved quickly. Throughout Saturday afternoon and until 10 o'clock that
evening, with short breaks for pizza and sandwiches, executives of both
organizations compared notes on people, customers and market share to determine
how much of Becker Merrill would find attractive, said Mr. Kenney.

Despite Merrill's size and its broad penetration of virtually all securities
markets, including commercial paper, it found a surprising number of uncovered
niches in its operations, officials said. They were primarily in investment
banking and fixed income trading, areas that Becker personnel could fill.
Merrill's first bid was for Becker Paribas, according to Mr. Kenney, was for
about $85 million.

But Paribas was determined to receive at least its $100 million book value for
Becker. ''It would have been embarrassing for them to sell for less,'' said Mr.
Kenney. In addition, if Paribas sold below book it would have had to report
another loss on the parent company's financial statement.

So suddenly Paribas sweetened its side of the deal by throwing in Becker
Paribas's $125 million in tax loss carry forwards, a sizable portion of which a
profitable firm could then use to offset its own income taxes. The talks resumed
again at 10 A.M. on Sunday and continued throughout the day. After accountants
reported how much of Becker's tax losses were applicable to Merrill's
operations, Mr. Kenney and his team felt comfortable in increasing their bid by
another $15 million to approximately $100 million.

Meanwhile, Paine Webber had been informed that there was now another bidder and
that tax loss carry forwards were part of the deal.


THAT evening, while Merrill

Lynch executives were meeting

in one suite of Mr. Wolfenson's offices with their own lawyers and accountants,
Mr. Marron of Paine Webber was in another sector of the complex talking to
Becker Paribas's executive committee for several hours. Neither Paine Webber nor
Merrill Lynch were told who the other bidder was.

Paine Webber's bid, said Mr. Kenney, ended up about 15 percent higher than
Merrill's and Paribas then asked Merrill to reconsider and go higher. Merrill
gambled and decided to stay where it was at $100 million in stock, he said,
partly because that was the limit it had set and also because ''we felt we had
the upper hand.''

In addition, said Mr. Kenney, ''We knew there was an urgency to do something and
we were in a position to benefit. We saw no reason to provide a premium over
book value.'' He was right.  Despite the premium Paine Webber offered, in the
end Paribas chose Merrill largely because they already had a business
relationship, according to Merrill executives. Merrill and Paribas each own 25
percent of Sun Hung Kai, a leading Hong Kong securities firm.

Merrill stands to gain from several standpoints. First of all, the deal is
virtually risk free. In return for its $100 million in stock, Merrill will
receive the tax loss carry forwards, plus $60 million in cash on hand at Becker
and an assortment of other fees - all of which could come close to, if not go
beyond, the $100 million that Merrill was paying, making it what Mr. Kenney
called ''a very tight deal.'' In addition, the firm picks up several hundred of
Becker's top professionals in areas that bolster Merrill's penetration of
securities markets, especially in commercial paper.

The merger announcement, of course, did not sit well with Becker employees, or
at least some of them. The following day, an unsigned internal memo was
addressed to Mr. Pinet. It said Paribas displayed ''about the same level of
commitment the French showed in WWII and Vietnam.'' That evening, Mr. Pinet's
office was burglarized.

Paribas also drew widespread ridicule from Wall Street executives for appearing
to push the panic button. ''It looks as if they tossed themseves at the mercy of
the bidders,'' said the executive vice president of one large firm. The head of
investment banking at another added, ''By the way this was handled, Paribas
obviously is an amateur at the divesting game.''

Paribas, in its defense, claims that the Merrill deal was a good one. ''What we
had always wanted was to have a minority interest in a major U.S.-controlled
investment banking concern,'' said Mr. Pinet. ''We view this combination as the
way to strengthen an already-existing relationship with Merrill Lynch and to
make it easier to expand international cooperation.''


WHAT surprised most observers, other than Paribas's decision to get out of
Becker, was that the firm's 800-person equity division was to be set adrift
without Paribas receiving any compensation. Merrill Lynch did not want the unit.

Becker had paid dearly to build up its institutional and retail equity presence.
Besides adding a number of all-star analysts, the firm had a month or so earlier
paid out $12 million in incentive bonuses to about 40 Lehman personnel, mostly
salesmen, to join.

Becker had hoped to get out of some of its financial obligations by transferring
its equity business as a unit to another firm. Some Wall Street firms considered
the possibility and others, such as Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., agreed to take
specific retail offices. But since Becker had no way of guaranteeing it could
deliver its people assets, the likelihood that any one firm would step up for
the unit disappeared.

Meanwhile, the same aggressive bidding for talent was taking place in Becker's
profitable commercial paper division, which Merrill sought. Merrill moved in
quickly with its own bids and as of late last week it had attracted 40 of the
professionals in the unit, about 75 percent of the number it sought. Most of the
others, including the head of the money markets division, John Ward, have joined
Merrill's rival in the Becker bidding, Paine Webber.

Mr. Kenney called Paine Webber's recruiting ''remarkably underhanded, lacking in
integrity and a breach of merger discussion etiquette.''

Merrill had one card in its deck that other firms did not, however. Ten percent
of the stock Paribas would receive from Merrill was to be set aside for use as
bonus payments to be made to Becker employees to join Merrill.

Those not so lucky to be invited to join Merrill Lynch or to be star attractions
in Wall Street's bidding for talent were on their own to scramble for new jobs.
''This place is like a resume factory. No one is doing any work,'' said one
investment banker last week.

In addition, in the days immediately after the merger announcement, no one knew
who would be asked to join Merrill Lynch and there was no word on how long
paychecks would be forthcoming.

One research analyst compiled a list for his peers of 18 executive recruiters
who specialize in placing analysts. The head of institutional research, John
Hindelong, personally contacted most of his counterparts on Wall Street to see
if they were interested in some of the lesser known analysts in his department.
''I have a responsibility to people who have been loyal to me and the
organization. This is just one of the things you do at a time like this,'' he
said.

For about half of Becker's employees the bell will toll this week. Last
Wednesday, Becker said that on Aug. 31 it would end the jobs of all employees
not joining Merrill or continuning on until November to wind down Becker's
operations. That means approximately 1,000 Becker employees will be let go, with
at least four weeks severance pay each.

Thus will end the brief life of Becker Paribas. The firm had its roots in 1974,
when Paribas and S.G. Warburg, the London merchant bank, took a 40 percent
interest in the Chicago-based A.G. Becker. In 1982, Becker and Warburg had to
inject new capital into the firm to prevent it from being in violation of New
York Stock Exchange capital rules, and that increased their ownership to 51
percent. Early in 1983, after Sir Siegmund Warburg died, his firm wanted to sell
its share and Paribas was a willing buyer. In 1984, as events turned out,
Paribas became a willing seller.





WHY PARIBAS KEEPSA WALL STREET STAKE


Herve M. Pinet, chief executive officer of Becker Paribas, is quick to protest
when anyone suggests that Paribas ''sold'' Becker. ''I do not use that word,''
he said. ''We consider it very important that Paribas keep a presence in the
U.S. investment banking market.''

Indeed, under the terms of the merger with Merrill Lynch, Paribas will own 3
percent of the giant securities firm. What's more, when the deal is completed on
Aug. 31 or shortly thereafter, Paribas will buy at least 2 percent more of
Merrill's stock, either in the open market or through a new stock issuance by
Merrill, said Jerome Kenney, chief of investment banking at Merrill.

Based on the current price of Merrill's stock, the additional cost to Paribas
for the purchase will be about $60 million. There is good reason why Paribas is
stepping forward for a further investment in the American securities industry so
soon after taking a bath on its Becker investment, however. It is determined to
preserve its status as one of only 17 foreign banks allowed to own more than 5
percent of an American investment banking firm.

That privilege was granted to Paribas under a ''grandfather'' provision of the
International Banking Act of 1978 that said only foreign banks already owning
more than 5 percent of an American investment banking firm could continue to do
so. If Paribas dropped below 5 percent, it would not be able to go back above
that level, according to Federal Reserve guidelines.

But Merrill wants to make sure Paribas doesn't become too big a shareholder, at
least for now. Part of its merger agreement is that Paribas will not own more
than 5.1 percent of Merrill for the next 10 years unless Merrill invites Paribas
to do so.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jerome Kenney of Merrill Lynch; Photo of Herve Pinet of Becker

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LETTERS;
A REPUBLICAN REVISE OF THE CARTER YEARS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 296 words


To the Editor:


Always it is the apostates, the Whittaker Chamberses and Jeane Kirkpatricks of
this world, who burn with the hardest, brightest flames of new truth.

Poor Jimmy Carter. To belittle and denounce him (and of course Walter Mondale),
as Mrs. Kirkpatrick did last Monday, is the prescribed rite of passage to the
new Republicanism. He must be recognized and proclaimed as the symbol of a
tired, weak, bumbling national, but particularly international, policy -
everything that red-blooded Republicanism stands strong against.

If there was pusillanimity in Vietnam, it was the Carter policy (try that one as
a creative piece of revisionist history). If there were hostages taken in
Teheran (the ''most humiliating'' experience in American history), it was
clearly another example of Carter's weakness. And if they were released without
loss of life among them, the triumph was that of this ''strong'' new
Administration. If there are unprecedented national deficits, the root cause is
the Carter Administration. If enormous increases in military expenditures have
nevertheless left us less prepared, the fault is Carter's.

It is time to stop acquiescing to this unmitigated nonsense. The fact is that
the Carter record of foreign policy accomplishments, taken with all its
blemishes, was one of the stronger performances in recent U.S. history.

Where are the Camp David agreements, the SALT II's and the Panama Canal treaties
of this Administration? What had the Nixon-Ford-Kissinger record of cumulative
disasters to compare? Or for that matter the Johnson Administration? Are we so
swept by voguish notions of ''success'' and ''failure'' in foreign policy that
we have taken leave of our senses?

ALBERT G. SIMS

Riverside, Conn., Aug. 22, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS Aug. 26, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1485 words


Fiction1

34

FIRST AMONG EQUALS, by Jeffrey Archer.  (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
Three young men vie to be chosen Prime Minister of Britain.  2

111

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932.  3

2

10

LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency.  4

14

2

THE FOURTH PROTOCOL, by Frederick Forsyth.  (Viking, $17.95.) A London jewel
robbery leads to plots and counterplots behind the Iron Curtain.  5

6

24

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  6

4

25

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  7

5

14

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.  8

7

20

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  9



1

TOUGH GUYS DON'T DANCE, by Norman Mailer.  (Random House, $16.95.) A murder
mystery set in Provincetown, Mass. 10



1

MIKO, by Eric Van Lustbader. (Villard Books, $16.95.) An American businessman
struggles with a vengeful Japanese sorceress in a high-stakes battle involving
oil.  11

8

13

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.  12

11

14

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.  13

9

2

SILVER WINGS, SANTIAGO BLUE, by Janet Dailey. (Poseidon/Simon & Schuster,
$15.95.) The adventures and romances of the women pilots of World War II.  14



6

THE GREMLINS STORYBOOK, by Mary Carey.  (Golden Books, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the current film ''Gremlins.'' 15



1

THE REVENGE OF THE ROBINS FAMILY, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $10.95.) The publisher offers a prize of $10,001 for the
correct solution to seven murders committed in glittering settings.







































































  Nonfiction1

19

THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and David Horowitz. (Summit,
$20.95.) The dark as well as the glamorous sides of four generations of a
prominent family.  2

28

IN GOD'S NAME, by David A. Yallop. (Bantam, $16.95.) A British journalist argues
that Pope John Paul I's death in 1978 was a case of murder.  3

3

11

WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The troubled life of the
late entertainer John Belushi.  4

7

10

GOOD MORNING, MERRY SUNSHINE, by Bob Greene. (Atheneum, $14.95.) The syndicated
columnist's journal of his child's first year.  5

4

12

THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent.  6

8

49

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  7

6

25

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard, $10.) The novelist recalls
her childhood in Mississippi.  8

5

15

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  9

9

6

D.V., by Diana Vreeland. Edited by George Plimpton and Christopher Hemphill.
(Knopf, $15.95.) Memoirs of the one-time ''Empress of Fashion.'' 10

10

16

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  11

11

24

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  12



3

AT SEVENTY: A Journal, by May Sarton. (Norton, $15.95.) The veteran
poet-novelist grapples with new and old personal problems.  13

14

2

A VERY PRIVATE EYE, by Barbara Pym.  (Dutton, $19.95.) An autobiography of the
late English novelist, derived from her letters and diaries.  14

13

93

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.  (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  15



4

REGGIE, by Reggie Jackson with Mike Lupica.  (Villard Books, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the controversial baseball player.












































 And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)


THE CHRONICLE OF THE LODZ GHETTO, 1941-1944, edited by

Lucjan Dobroszycki. (Yale University, $35.) A heartbreaking day-

to-day history, written on the scene, of the Nazi extermination of

the Jews of the second largest Polish ghetto.

DIVERSITY AND DEPTH IN FICTION: Selected Critical Writings

of Angus Wilson, edited by Kerry McSweeney. (Viking, $27.50.) A

lively collection of essays by the English novelist, mostly about

English novelists, not excluding Mr. Wilson himself.

THE ENGINEER OF HUMAN SOULS, by Josef Skvorecky. (Knopf,

7.95.) A huge, polemical novel by the Czech emigre writer about

a man who, like the author himself, fled his country to take up a

new life in Canada as a college professor.

HUBERT HUMPHREY: A Biography, by Carl Solberg. (W. W.

Norton, $19.95.) An absorbing life of the ''Prairie Progressive''

who was mayor of Minneapolis, Congressman, Senator, Vice

President to Lyndon Johnson, but not President, his ultimate goal.

REQUIRED WRITING: Miscellaneous Pieces 1955-1982, By Philip

Larkin. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux; cloth, $17.95; paper, $9.95.)

Lively reviews, lectures, essays, interviews, acceptance speeches,

introductions and memoirs by one of the best living English poets.

SELECTED POEMS, by Octavio Paz. Edited by Eliot Weinberger.

(New Directions; cloth, $14.95; paper, $4.95.) A representative

selection of the poetry of the eminent Mexican, translated by such

hands as Elizabeth Bishop, Paul Blackburn and Mark Strand.

THE WAR OF THE END OF THE WORLD, by Mario Vargas Llosa.

(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) A large, exciting novel, by the

Peruvian writer, about Brazil at the end of the 19th century and the

suppression of a revolutionary millenarian sect.

Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

122

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

287

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  3

321

WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard work updated in 1983.  4

4

2

ZIG ZIGLAR'S SECRETS OF CLOSING THE

SALE, by Zig Ziglar. (Revell, $13.95.) How to ''sell'' your ideas, products and
services. 5



1

WEBSTER'S II: NEW RIVERSIDE UNIVERSITY

DICTIONARY, edited by Anne H. Soukhanov.  (Houghton Mifflin, $14.95.) A new
dictionary with more than 200,000 definitions and many unusual features.



























 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.  *An asterisk before a
book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling
industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By Shirley Horner

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 13, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1259 words


WINNING times are welcome times and, with good reason, the following - all New
Jersey related - are flying the colors of champions these days.

 ''The de Nemethy Years: One Man's Influence on American Riding,'' by Paula
Rodenas (Arco, New York, $14.95), describes the creation of the United States
Equestrian Team in 1950 and lauds Bertalan de Nemethy, a resident of Far Hills
since 1961 and now an equestrian- course designer, for his role in the team's
remarkable progress.

From 1960 to 1980, Mr. de Nemethy, a native of Hungary, served as a coach for
the team, based in Gladstone, and this enthusiastic biography, rich in
photographs, diagrams and charts, aptly demonstrates why his lifelong devotion
to the sport of show jumping - and his insistence on classical techniques - has
secured him a place in equestrian history.

The team won two gold medals in the Summer Olympic Games in Los Angeles, where
the jumping course was designed by Mr. de Nemethy.



For Lester Goldberg of Cranford, his high point early this year, he recalled
recently, was a letter that opened with ''Congratulations'' and went on to say
that his short story, ''Hardware,'' was 1 of 62 winners in a national
competition, the Syndicated Fiction Project, conducted by the National Endowment
for the Arts Literature Program and the PEN American Center, a major writers'
organization. The acronym PEN is formed from ''Poets, Playwrights, Editors,
Essayists and Novelists.''

''It was a big boost for me,'' Mr. Goldberg said, ''to learn that the only other
winner from New Jersey is the distinguished Joyce Carol Oates. She doesn't need
the encouragement as much as I do. I've been writing these past 15 years for a
pay scale of about a half-cent a word.''

Why was ''Hardware'' chosen to be one of the stories that, to courage the
reading of fiction, are being sent free to 10 newspapers around the country?

Perhaps the judges felt that the story, set in pre-riot Newark - ''Where,'' Mr.
Goldberg said, ''some residents were idealists, trying to live according to
conscience'' - has something to say to those who remember the city for
nightmarish headline events only.

''I tried to depict a liberal Jewish family and to convey how agonized they feel
when confronted by the growing black hostility,'' Mr. Goldberg said.
''Hardware'' describes the good memories of growing up in Newark - of a senior
year at Weequahic High School (''I ran all the way home the day I made
varsity.'') - followed by unhappiness, as when the narrator's grandfather, after
being robbed, closed his store. (''No one wanted it.'')

In

''One More River,'' (University of Illinois Press, Box 5081, Station A,
Champaign, Ill. 61820; $4.45 postpaid), a collection of Mr. Goldberg's
previously published pieces - skillful, unforgettable tableaux of Jews of
wide-ranging eras, the Depression years, the period of the Rosenberg trials, the
Vietnam War - he assumes their voices and their brooding as they seek to affirm
their principles and their faith.



Miss Oates, a resident of Princeton, where she teaches at Princeton University,
enjoys international fame; she is the brilliant author of 15 novels and many
volumes of plays, poems, essays and short stories. Her mastery of the latter
first brought her before the public, and her prize-winning ''Shelter,'' her
entry in the PEN contest, is a good introduction for those unfamiliar with the
strength of her art.

''Shelter,'' like so much of Miss Oates's fiction, constructs a plausible
situation: Cecilia and Philip, Americans on tour abroad, follow an embassy guide
into an underground bomb shelter. At story's end, one realizes that the action
has no relevance to politics or time; rather, one's credulity is assaulted - can
the reader, like Cecilia, believe what is happening? If she is going mad, and
one believes her, well then, perhaps. . .

''Last Days'' (Dutton, New York, $15.95) collects 11 of Miss Oates's previously
published short stories - sensitive excursions into disordered worlds. With
Dostoyevskian power, Miss Oates creates characters whose distorted ramblings
about their settings and relationships are disturbing because, like the stunning
soliloquies of the deranged student of the title story, they are cruelly
intertwined with logic and reality.



Brookdale Community College, the county college of Monmouth, in Lincroft, is
sometimes associated with equestrian sports because its campus was formerly part
of the famous Brookdale Farm, a celebrated horse farm early in the century and
home of the filly that won the Kentucky Derby in 1915.

The college, a two-year institution founded in 1967, has equal reason to be
proud for retaining an enviable record of literary distinction: For five
consecutive years, up to the present, Brookdale's Collage, a student
publication, has won first prize in the nationwide ''Literary Magazine'' contest
conducted by the Columbia University Scholastic Press Association.

By now, the other contestants must realize that Collage and its faculty adviser,
Kevin Hayter of Manalapan, a professor of literature at the university, are
surely names to reckon with. The quality of this publication's graphics (many in
color) and the variety and vitality of its literary pieces are indeed awesome.

Generously, Brookdale is inviting requests for free copies as long as they last.
Write to Brookdale College, Newman Springs Road, Lincroft, N.J. 07738.



''Lottery losers might soon end up winning books here, too,'' Hazel Gluck of
Lakewood, director of the New Jersey Division of the State Lottery, said the
other day. Mrs. Gluck was referring to the ''New York's Lottery Book Giveaway,''
which recently held four special drawings for book gift certificates. To take
part, players were directed to mail their losing tickets, designating a
bookstore, to lottery headquarters.

''It's a terrific idea and we're talking about it.'' Mrs. Gluck said.


What impact will Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro's candidacy as the
Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee have on the status of women in American
politics? Two books, both candid and engrossing, add new insights to the
discussion.

''Revolutionary Women: Gender

and the Socialist Revolutionary

Role,'' by Marie Marmo Mullaney (Praeger Publishers, New York, $32.95; $14.95,
paperback), cites in its discussion of five remarkable European women of the
last century, including Dolores Ibarruri, ''the fiery heroine of the Spanish
Civil War,'' the ''continuing legacy'' of idealism that they have ''bequeathed
to today's world.''

Dr. Mullaney, a professor of history at Caldwell College in Caldwell, is a
resident of Livingston.

''In the Running: The New Woman

Candidate,'' by Ruth B. Mandel (Beacon Press, Boston, Mass. 02108, $9.95),
describes the exhausting experiences of women ''who have been running for
various elective offices across the country in the past 10 years.''

Mrs. Mandel, director of the Center for the American Woman and Politics at
Rutgers University in New Brunswick and a resident of Princeton, writes:

''In political reality, women are outsiders'' confronting ''some closed doors.''
To open them, she says, they must possess ''determination and a will to win.''

''Shy, retiring people do not become candidates,'' one is told in accounts of
how ''campaigns eat up prodigious amounts of time.'' (Mrs. Ferraro is reported
to have said about her race for Congress in 1978: ''Every night I shook a
thousand hands.'')




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing; ABOUT BOOKS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 27, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LAWRENCE CARDINAL SHEHAN DIES; RETIRED ARCHBISHOP OF BALTIMORE

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 718 words


Lawrence Cardinal Shehan, a retired Roman Catholic Archbishop of Baltimore and a
prominent advocate of racial integration and religious ecumenism, died yesterday
in Baltimore. He was 86 years old.

Cardinal Shehan was admitted to Mercy Hospital July 30 and his health steadily
deteriorated in succeeding weeks.

For over two decades, first as the first Bishop of the Diocese of Bridgeport,
Conn., and later as the Archbishop of Baltimore, Cardinal Shehan personified the
liberal wing of the Catholic hierarchy in the United States. He spoke out
against racial discrimination and the Vietnam war, and he worked for the
reconciliation of Catholics, Protestants and Jews.

As head of the Archdiocese of Baltimore, the oldest Catholic see in North
America, and therefore honorary primate of the United States, he encouraged
democratic practices in the affairs of his Archdiocese.

A Native of Baltimore


Born in Baltimore in 1898, Lawrence Joseph Sheehan was the son of an operator of
a tailors supply business. After graduating from a parochial high school, he
entered St. Mary's Seminary in Baltimore and was ordained in Rome in 1922.

From 1923 to 1941, he served, first as a curate and then as pastor of St.
Patrick's Church in downtown Washington.

He was consecrated a Bishop in 1945 and moved to Baltimore early the next year
where he served until 1953 as Auxiliary Bishop for the Archdiocese.

From 1953 to 1961 he served as Bishop of the newly created Diocese of
Bridgeport. In 1961, he returned to his native Baltimore where he acceded to the
Baltimore see.

In 1962, he ordered the desegregation of all the Catholic schools in the
Archdiocese. In 1963, when the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. organized a march
on Washington, Cardinal Shehan joined the demonstration.

''These two things that are most important are the work we have done for
Christian unity and racial justice,'' he said in 1965.

Booed at Hearing on Housing


In 1966, he was jeered and booed when he testified in a public hearing in favor
of open housing legislation. In 1967, he joined other members of the Catholic
hierarchy in petitioning the Supreme Court to knock down state bans on
interrcial marriages.

Increasingly concerned about the Vietnam war, Cardinal Shehan appealed in 1966
to Catholics in this country to exert their influence to keep the war ''within
moral bounds.''

In 1971, he condemned the war as ''a scandal the Christian conscience can no
longer endure.'' And he called for a three-day period of ''repentance and
renewal'' over the war in Indochina.

An early advocate of ecumenism, Archbishop Shehan formed a Commission of
Christian Unity shortly after taking over the Archdiocese of Baltimore.
Breaking ground in the field, he addressed Episcopal clergymen in an Episcopal
Church and a Jewish congregation in a synagogue.

Recognizing his interest in the field, Pope Paul VI appointed him to the Vatican
Secretariat for the Promotion of Christian Unity. With the Secretariat, he
helped repair relations between the Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic
Churches, which had excommunicated each other in 1054.

Pope Paul VI also elevated the Archbishop to Cardinal in 1965.  In his new
office, Cardinal Shehan, continued a lifelong spirit of humility.

A man of small stature, he was often given to jokes about his height. Once when
asked about his success as a fund raiser, he quoted ''Shehan's Law'': ''The
smaller the individual, the more likely he is to receive help from others.''

In his pursuit of democratic process in the church, he often sought the views of
priests and members of the laity in naming bishops.

At a national meeting of Priests in 1969, he told the gathering that the concept
of a bishop, instead of ''telling his priests what they are to do'' should be
''bound up to them by the spirit of brotherhood.'' He also cautiously favored a
redefinition of the doctrine of papal infallibility.

Obeying a papal guideline on retirement at 75 years of age, Cardinal Shehan
retired in 1974 at age 76.

About a week before his death, Cardinal Shehan received a telegram from Pope
John Paul II. It said, in part, ''I wish to assure you of my spiritual closeness
at this time.''

Prayer services are to be held at the Baltimore Basilica today.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lawrence Cardinal Shehan

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 27, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1088 words


BLOODS. An Oral History of the Vietnam

War by Black Veterans. By Wallace

Terry. 311 pages. Illustrated. Random

House. $17.95.  For most American soldiers Vietnam was like a bad, surreal
dream. They went there, equipped with old-fashioned ideals about duty and
warfare, and lost their innocence in a jungle war, devoid of rules and moral
imperatives.

Some used drugs and alcohol to numb the horror; others became obsessed with
killing, collecting enemy fingers and ears as souvenirs. The absurdities piled
up: body counts were grossly exaggerated, atrocities were covered over and men
died, shot by friendly fire. The goal became simple survival. Those who did
survive came home to another war of attrition: scorned by the left as war
criminals, they were pensioned off by the Government they'd served to wait in
unemployment lines.

For black soldiers, it was even worse. Not only were they dying at a
disproportionate rate - they made up 23 percent of the fatalities during the
early years of the war - but they also faced discrimination within the military
in terms of decorations, promotions and duty assignments. If they initially
supported the war effort, as the journalist Wallace Terry contends, by 1969 - in
the wake of the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and growing
civil unrest at home - ''a new black soldier had appeared,'' more militant and
angry than his younger brothers. These soldiers called themselves ''Bloods'' -
the name Mr. Terry uses as the title of his new oral history.


In compiling ''Bloods,'' Mr. Terry says he ''sought a representative
cross-section of the black combat force. Soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines.
Those with urban backgrounds, and those from rural areas. Those for whom the war
had a devastating impact, and those for whom the war basically was an
opportunity to advance in a career dedicated to protecting American interests.''

No matter how skillful the editing, an oral history is as interesting and
revealing as the individuals who are quoted, and at times, Mr. Terry's
determination to provide a perfectly balanced spectrum of viewpoints seems
strained. Similar anecdotes are related again and again by different voices; and
several veterans appear to have been chosen on grounds of their rank or
background - rather than on the basis of their perceptions or eloquence. Still,
''Bloods'' is a powerful and disturbing book. Many of the individuals featured
in its pages speak about their experiences with exceptional candor and passion;
and in doing so, give the reader a visceral sense of what it was like, as a
black man, to serve in Vietnam and what it was like to come back to ''the real
world.''

As far as poor, young blacks were concerned, Vietnam provided an alternative to
the bleak job market at home. It was ''the only thing left to do,'' a way ''out
of the ghetto,'' a way to ''get ahead in life.'' Many went, though, with a
strong sense of patriotism and duty.

''I was brought up on the Robin Hood ethic, and John Wayne came to save
people,'' says Pfc. Reginald (Malik) Edwards. ''As a black person, there wasn't
no problem fightin' the enemy. I knew Americans were prejudiced, were racist and
all that, but, basically, I believed in America 'cause I was an American.''

''When they beat me, I always kept in mind I was representing 24 million black
Americans,'' recalls Col. Fred V. Cherry, who spent nearly eight years in Hanoi
prison camps. ''If they are going to kill me, they are going to have to kill me.
I'm just not going to denounce my government or shame my people.'' Because he
refused to talk, Colonel Cherry was repeatedly tortured and he spent 700 days in
solitary confinement. Dying from various wounds and infections, he owes his life
to a fellow prisoner - a prejudiced white Southerner - who nursed him back to
health.


In the field, Specialist 4 Richard J. Ford 3d observes, blacks and whites ''had
the utmost respect for each other, because when a fire fight is going on and
everybody is facing north, you don't want to see nobody looking around south. If
you was a member of the Ku Klux Klan, you didn't tell nobody.'' Back in base
camp, though, it was often a different story: confederate flags were brandished
as symbols of white supremacy; and black soldiers were frequently subjected to
verbal abuse and stuck, in one soldier's words, with ''the jobs that were the
most dangerous, the hardest or just the most undesirable.'' Race, in fact, was a
constant subtext in the war. In propaganda broadcasts, the North Vietnamese
dwelled upon the assassination of Dr. King in attempts to goad enlisted blacks
into deserting. And black officers, reports First Lieut. Archie (Joe) Biggers,
had to contend with resentment from whites in their command, as well as the
expectation of special favors on the part of blacks.

Coming home, for many of the veterans in this book, was the hardest part of all.
There are, of course, stories with happy endings. Luther C. Benton 3d, who
''heard the voice of God'' during a rocket attack, returned to the states to
study theology and later became a Baptist minister. And Specialist 4 Robert L.
Mountain, a hospital counselor who lost his foot in the war, recently set the
world record for amputees in the 100-meter dash.


Others have had a harder time adjusting. The unemployment rate for black
veterans is more than double that for whites, and many of the men in ''Bloods''
have been unable to find jobs. A few joined the Black Panthers - one, because he
figured ''we had already fought for the white man in Vietnam,'' and now ''it was
only proper that we had to go out and fight for our own cause''; another,
because ''it was a warlike group,'' and he couldn't get the violence of the war
out of his head.

Indeed, the war haunts the imaginations of all the veterans. Richard J. Ford 3d
found he couldn't deal with the Fourth of July - the sound of firecrackers made
him pick up his .22. Specialist 5 Harold Bryant says he hears things other
people can't hear - for him, the ticking of a watch has become a frightening
thing. And Specialist 4 Arthur E. (Gene) Woodley Jr. still has nightmares 12
years later of shooting a soldier who begged to be killed after being mutilated
by the Vietcong.

''I used to think that I wasn't affected by Vietnam,'' says Reginald Edwards.
''But I been livin' with Vietnam ever since I left. You just can't get rid of
it. It's like that painting of what Dali did of melting clocks. It's a
persistent memory.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Wallace Terry

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 27, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MCCARTHY IS RECIPIENT OF MACDOWELL MEDAL



BYLINE:
By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words

DATELINE: PETERBOROUGH, N.H., Aug. 26


Mary McCarthy, literary lioness, received the Edward MacDowell Medal here today
for her career as an author. She proceeded to show that, at the age of 72, she
still has her growl and her claws.

''As a person and a writer, I seem to have had little effect on improving the
world I came into,'' Miss McCarthy said in her acceptance speech at the
MacDowell artists' colony here. ''I can see deterioration in every area of life.
The belief in progress that animated my youth has vanished.''

The only exception, Miss McCarthy went on, is in the invention of labor- saving
devices, all of which she appears to abhor. In her rambling, 20- minute
acceptance speech, she reviled Cuisinarts, word processors and credit cards.
''The more labor, the better,'' she said. ''I like labor-intensive implements
and practices, even if I cannot persuade anyone to agree with me.''

That would hardly mark the first time Miss McCarthy has staked out the unpopular
position. Her opinions have ignited so many artistic and political brushfires
over the decades that she once kept a file folder in her Paris apartment labeled
''Controversy.''

Costly and Controversial Suit

Miss McCarthy assailed J. D. Salinger when he was at his height and defended
James Farrell when it was chic to dismiss him. She was a stout anti-Stalinist
from the time of the Moscow purge trials, yet she remains far to the left in
American politics and visited North Vietnam during the war.

And in the incident that brought her perhaps more fame than any of her books,
Miss McCarthy was sued for libel by Lillian Hellman in 1980, after calling her
''a bad writer and dishonest writer'' on ''The Dick Cavett Show.'' Miss
Hellman's $2.25 million suit never reached trial before her recent death, but it
polarized American intellectuals, revived the split between American Stalinists
and anti- Stalinists of the 1930's and cost Miss McCarthy $26,000 in legal fees.

Still, Miss McCarthy declared in an interview here Saturday night that she
regretted none of it. She added that had she known in advance that Miss Hellman
also had received the MacDowell Medal, in 1976, she would ''probably not'' have
accepted hers today. (But she also pointed out that the MacDowell Medal -
instituted in 1960 in memory of the American composer and given to such
luminaries as Aaron Copland, Georgia O'Keeffe and Thornton Wilder - went in 1964
to the critic Edmund Wilson, her former husband, giving the honor credibility
with her.)



'I'm Absolutely Unregenerate'

''I'm absolutely unregenerate,'' Miss McCarthy said of her comments on the
Cavett show. ''I suppose that if I had thought about it, I might have. . . .''
She paused. ''No. If someone had told me, 'Don't say anything about Lillian
Hellman because she'll sue you,' it wouldn't have stopped me. It might have
spurred me on. I didn't want her to die. I wanted her to lose in court. I wanted
her around for that.''

On the literary front, however, Miss McCarthy expressed some regrets, both about
her own stature with critics and about what she considers a decline in literary
standards since her days of setting them on the Partisan Review.

''I felt at that time that we were fighting the literary battles,'' said Miss
McCarthy, ''and we expected someone else would pick up the weapons. But no one
did. We were trying to insist on artistic standards - trying to deflate what we
considered false reputations - and we were pretty good at it. No one ever took
our place. If it was J. D. Salinger, no young people would criticize him. It had
to be me.''

Miss McCarthy herself has been a prolific writer - with more than 20 books of
fiction, essays and reportage to her name - and yet, today's recognition
notwithstanding, she has not generally been accorded a place in the pantheon of
American letters. Her last two novels, ''Birds of America'' and ''Cannibals and
Missionaries,'' both received tepid responses, and many of her earlier novels,
such as ''The Group'' and ''A Charmed Life,'' were labeled roman a clefs - or,
as one critic once put it, ''clever, malicious gossip.''



'I've Gotten a Raw Deal'

''I think I've gotten a raw deal, especially on the last two novels,'' Miss
McCarthy said. ''When I was in Paris, there was a French student who was doing a
thesis on the literary criticism of my books. She went through all the clippings
I had in my attic and showed me the results. I had thought my press was better
than it actually was.''

But she continued, ''Who's going to esteem you - that's the question. To be
disesteemed by people you don't have much respect for is not the worst fate.''

In part, Miss McCarthy said, her combative streak derives from her Irish
ancestry. She also had to become a fighter and a survivor in childhood, when,
after the death of both her parents in 1918, she was placed in the household of
cruel guardians. And finally, she speaks of the thespian blood in the family.
Her brother Kevin is an actor, and Miss McCarthy said she held ambitions for the
stage until her boyfriend savaged her performance as Leontes in a college
production of ''The Winter's Tale.''

Now, there are a few signs of slowing down, or of summation. Miss McCarthy is
recovering from surgery on her scalp - a subject on which she will not elaborate
- and wore a cloth hat to cover it today. She had to deliver her address from a
chair. And her current project is a self-described ''intellectual
autobiography'' tentatively entitled ''How I Grew.''

But if anyone expected a humbled dowager today, Miss McCarthy disappointed.
''Why should I care that I have lived my life as a person and as a writer in
vain?'' she asked rhetorically of an audience of several hundred. ''Most of our
lives are in vain. At best, we give pleasure to some. I had hoped to turn around
the readers of 'The Group' by going to Vietnam and writing against our
involvement. Maybe in that case, my voice among many was heard. Once a girl
thanked me in Harvard Square. That was one high point and I suppose so is this
medal. But I wonder if anyone will listen to me make a pitch for Mondale.''

Raucous applause rose from the crowd.

Mary McCarthy smiled and said, ''Maybe so.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mary McCarthy and Elizabeth Hardwick

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 28, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW ASSERTS STRATEGIC PARITY

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 27


In a newly revised publication on American military power, the Soviet Government
reiterates assertions that the Reagan Administration is seeking military
superiority and maintains that East and West are in rough strategic balance.

The 96-page book, titled ''Whence the Threat to Peace,'' is the third such
volume released by the Soviet Embassy here in an English-language format that
closely resembles the Pentagon's annual survey of Soviet forces.

The newly revised edition concludes that in manufacturing abilities, quality of
weapons and manpower, NATO and Warsaw Pact countries exist in ''rough military
equilibrium.'' Soviet military expenditures, it says, ''have stayed practically
the same over the recent years.'' It accuses the Reagan Administration of
''whipping up the arms race,'' especially in Europe and in space.

According to Vladimir S. Mikoyan, a spokesman at the Soviet Embassy, no special
effort was made to distribute the document, which appeared in the mail today at
congressional offices and other locations on the embassy's mailing list. Mr.
Mikoyan said the book was published in the Soviet Union earlier this summer and
arrived here in English translation about 10 days ago.

No Comment From Pentagon

A spokesman at the Pentagon declined comment on the study, saying that a copy
had not been received from the Soviet embassy.

Like the Defense Department's yearly assessment, ''Soviet Military Power,''
which for 1984 filled 136 pages, the Soviet analysis uses color-coded maps that
purport to show the deployment of United States military forces worldwide. While
Soviet estimates of the number of American weapons fielded are generally higher
than figures issued by the Reagan Administration, they reflect the same penchant
for quantitative measurement that has characterized recent Pentagon reports.

The report charges the Administration with playing an ''unfair trick'' regarding
the number of nuclear warheads on Soviet intercontinental-range missiles,
''where the U.S.S.R. does have a certain advantage.'' The study asserts that
''it is carefully played down that the U.S. has about 6,000 nuclear warheads on
its submarine- launched ballistic missiles, while the Soviet Union has only
about two-fifths of that number.''

Unlike the latest Pentagon volume, which displays figures for American forces
side-by-side with Russian forces, the Soviet book contains no comparative
numbers. It relies on photographs from Western defense magazines, in one case
simply clipping an artist's conception of space-based laser weapons from an
issue of Aviation Week and Space Technology, the industry journal.

The Soviet assessment places special attention on the militarization of space
and on development of chemical and biological weapons. ''Manned shuttle
spaceships are being put to obviously military uses,'' it says, noting the
substantial fraction of National Aeronautics and Space Administration funds
devoted to Pentagon applications.

'Crash Preparation'


In a section that reflects similar emphasis in the 1984 Defense Department
survey, the Soviet volume charged the Reagan Administration with making ''crash
preparation of the U.S. armed forces for chemical warfare'' and of
''implementing an extensive biological program.''

A section devoted to the ''industrial base of U.S. militarism'' discusses
expansion of the American defense industry under the Reagan Administration. It
mentions the General Dynamics Corporation's construction of cruise missiles and
nuclear submarines as an example of businesses ''which specialize mainly in
producing offensive systems.''

Like the Pentagon report, which contains a world map titled ''Soviet Global
Power Projection,'' the Soviet assessment shows the globe divided into spheres
of military influence. It does not, however, indicate the presence of Soviet
forces in Cuba or Afghanistan, and it does not show North Vietnam, Laos,
Cambodia or Mongolia as being Communist countries allied to the Soviet Union. It
lumps all of these in a group of countries that includes neutral and Western
nations.

Three full-page color maps are devoted to United States medium-range nuclear
weapons in Europe, including aircraft and missiles, showing their range into
Soviet territory. The report says that three SS-4 or SS-5 Soviet nuclear
missiles have been removed for every new SS-20 missile deployed, bringing the
total number of such missiles facing NATO to 473 - ''almost half of them aged
ones.''

''For the ordinary person, it's useful to see that the Soviets regard us with
the same hostility we view them,'' said Representative Thomas J. Downey,
Democrat of Long Island, who has studied previous editions of the assessment. He
likened the Soviet document and its American counterpart to ''two ships passing
in the night.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 28, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EMBASSY ROW;
BEYOND KANGAROOS, BILLABONGS AND KOALAS



BYLINE:
By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1120 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 27


Since taking up his post here two years ago as Australia's Ambassador to the
United States, Sir Robert Cotton has discovered that Americans experience a bit
of a tussle when it comes to titles.

''Sometimes I'm called Lady Cotton,'' he said with a chuckle, ''or Lord Cotton,
or Mr. Ambassador, or just plain 'you.' The nice thing about being a diplomat is
that you are called rude names very much less than when you are a politican.''

The business of being knighted is all very simple, Sir Robert added: ''The
Government recommends to the Queen that she confer a title; in her wisdom, she
agrees; then you receive a communication asking if you would accept such a title
and you say, 'Yes, for sure,' and in due course you get it.''

But no matter how he is addressed, Ambassador Cotton says he has felt ''very
welcome'' and at home here. He has discovered, he said, that Americans and
Australians are very much alike, and not just because they speak the same
language, albeit with vastly different accents.

Attitudes and Instincts


He finds a reassuring commonality in the backgrounds and origins of Australians
and Americans, in their openness to people and ideas, in their attitudes and
instincts, in their forms of government. What is more, he senses that there has
been a recent strengthening of ties, that although there are some
Government-to-Government differences, for the most part the United States and
Australia are being drawn ever closer together by trade, tourism, sport and
cultural exchanges.

Ambassador Cotton says that as a result of the many Australian films, television
dramas and popular novels that have recently made their way to the United States
- not to speak of the Australian yachtsmen making off with the America's Cup
last year or of Rupert Murdoch, the Australian newspaper czar, buying up
American newspapers right and left - Americans no longer think of the country
''down under'' as strictly the land of kangaroos, cuddly koala bears, swagmen
and billabongs. Americans have even taken to drinking Australian beer in
significant amounts.

But the Ambassador finds that Americans continue to have one misconception about
his country. ''Americans will say 'Gee, you're kind of like the way we used to
be,' '' he said. ''We get all kinds of inquiries from people who want to go to
Australia and take up a big cattle ranch.''

In fact, more than 100,000 Americans, informed or otherwise, visited Australia
last year, and Australia lists the United States as its second most important
trade partner, after Japan.

A Big, Open Land


Musing on why Australia and the United States have so many things in common,
Ambassador Cotton pointed out that Australia, like the United States, is a big,
open land that was settled by people who came a long way to begin a new country.
''Mostly they came from deprived backgrounds, or they were persecuted and they
came to make a better life for themselves and families,'' he said. ''Both
countries have opened their borders to people from all over the world. We in
Australia have a great ethnic mixture, as do you.''

He said that in 1901, when Australia, a British possession made up of six
colonies, became a nation state, it drew upon the United States Constitution for
some of its governmental form. ''For instance,'' he said, ''our Senate is
elected in almost the same manner as yours and has the same kind of authority.''

A relaxed, jovial man, Ambassador Cotton is not a diplomat by trade and he
irreverently says of his job: ''I'm the chief import for politics here.''

There is little he has not tried in his 69 years. A rancher, farmer,
industrialist and businessman, he was an early member of the Liberal Party and
was first apppointed, and then was elected, to the Australian Senate in 1965, a
position he held for more than 10 years. He has also served as Australia's
consul general in New York City and has been appointed to any number of boards,
commissions and Cabinet ministerial posts.

'They Still Pay Me'


Although the Labor Party came into power in March of 1983, Ambassador Cotton has
remained as Australia's envoy to Washington. ''I didn't leave and they didn't
ask me to - and they still pay me,'' he said with a laugh as he chatted in his
spacious office in the Australian Embassy on Scott Circle, a half-dozen blocks
from the White House.

''I have a phrase for Washington,'' he said, looking out windows that give him a
view down 16th Street. ''The Imperial City. I call it one of the world's
Imperial Cities. For someone working in government you are dealing in one of the
centers of world power, importance and influence. And it is a noble city with
classical buildings and great vistas and avenues.''

One measure of the current Australian view of the United States is the size of
its diplomatic contingent in this country. It has 1,150 officials posted in
various cities and military installations, one-third of that number in
Washington, where Australia maintains its largest overseas government presence.

A measure of the current United States view of Australia can be found in the
plans being made for the 1988 Australian Bicentennial celebration. Charles W.
Parry, chairman and chief executive officer of Alcoa, is head of a group of
Americans who are working with Australians in planning for that celebration.
Alcoa is one of 850 American companies that do business in Australia, almost
twice the number of Australian companies active in this country.

'We Must Work at It'


There always has been and will continue to be an Australian-United States nexus,
Ambassador Cotton said. ''But we must continue to work at it,'' he added, ''not
only on a nation- to-nation basis but on a people-to-people basis.''

One issue on which the United States and Australia part company is recognition
of Vietnam, where the two countries fought as allies in the 1960's and early
1970's.  ''What we are trying to do is to act as honest brokers to see that
Vietnam is not just wedded to Russia but becomes more a part of the region and
less intransigent,'' Ambassador Cotton said. ''We live out there and we want
peace and progress out there.''

The United States and Australia, along with New Zealand, are treaty partners and
allies under the Anzus agreement. But last week there was an international
flurry of sorts when some Australians took umbrage that the Republican Party
platform included no mention of Anzus in its foreign policy plank.

Ambassador Cotton dismissed it as ''a non-event.'' ''They just cut and shortened
the platform some and they also cut a reference to NATO,'' he said. ''We have no
doubts about the strength of the alliance.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sir Robert Cotton

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 28, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES ;

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 744 words


DOS PASSOS: A Life. By Virginia Spencer

Carr. Illustrated. 624 pages. Doubleday. $24.95.  IF a biography of an important

author turns readers to his

books instead of to the everyday facts of his life, it serves a good purpose.
Most serious writers would prefer to be remembered through their books instead
of their personalities. For they live their real lives - or the lives they
imagine they would like to live - through their venturesome, opinionated
characters.

The life of John Dos Passos (1896- 1970) spanned the excitement and creativity
of the first half of the 20th century. At the time of his death, at 74, some
people were surprised to learn that he was still alive. In a literary sense, his
death had been decreed by critics during the last two decades of his life. He
was considered a museum piece, a totem admired behind glass but not to be
touched. Three American writers of his generation - Hemingway, Faulkner and
Steinbeck - had received the Nobel Prize in Literature. Dos Passos, once
considered their equal, received only diminishing respect.


Virginia Spencer Carr's ''Dos Passos: A Life'' is a diligent job of
archeological spadework with few shards left unturned. Nothing is discarded. Yet
any admirer of the novelist's early achievements can be grateful for her
biography as a reference, though not an interpretive, work. It might serve to
inspire the unfamiliar reader to click off the television set (Dos Passos
believed, his biographer informs us, that television had numbed the American
people) and discover his lasting novels: ''Three Soldiers'' (1921), ''Manhattan
Transfer'' (1925), and his great ''U.S.A.'' trilogy - ''The 42nd Parallel''
(1930), ''1919'' (1932) and ''The Big Money'' (1936).

Long before all the talk of nonfiction novels, Dos Passos broke the ground. He
used cinematic techniques, juxtaposed real and imagined people and
conversations, reinvented words as an American Joyce. Truman Capote's ''In Cold
Blood'' and E. L. Doctorow's ''Ragtime,'' built upon the trailblazing of Dos
Passos. In ''U.S.A.,'' Dos Passos combined fictional men and women from
different walks of life, minibiographies of heroes and scoundrels, snatches of
''Newsreel'' headlines and songs, ''Camera Eye'' sections of actual events such
as the Sacco-Vanzetti trial.

Miss Carr, author of ''The Lonely Hunter,'' a biography of Carson McCullers, is
a professor of English at Columbus College in Georgia. She divides Dos Passos'
life into sections: his youth, when he began life as ''Jack Madison,'' an
illegitimate child of a wealthy New York lawyer- businessman; as John R. Dos
Passos, Jr., legitimatized, going to Harvard, with the Ambulance Corps during
World War I, his radical writings during the postwar years and the Depression,
his break with the Left after the Spanish Civil War, and his conservative views
and writings after World War II when his career was in decline.

Among the more ephemeral essays cited here are those he wrote for the National
Review and elsewhere, blaming the protesting youth on campus for the defeats in
the Vietnam War and praising President Nixon for invading Cambodia. After
reproaching Dos Passos for a review-essay in National Review, his old friend,
Edmund Wilson, wrote him: ''You've been railing against 'the liberals' all your
life, and my impression is that your conception of them is a projection of some
suppressed alter ego that you perpetually feel you have to discredit.''


His 1952 trilogy, ''District of Columbia,'' included ''Adventures of a Young
Man'' (1939), ''Number One'' (1943) and ''The Grand Design'' (1949). It did not
come close to ''U.S.A.'' as art. In fairness, Miss Carr cites positve and
negative reviews on this and other works, but she herself does not interpret for
the reader why his radical years produced his best work and his conservative
years his worst. One must read other critics, such as John K. Hutchens, who,
writing about ''Midcentury,'' published in 1961, summed up Dos Passos in
decline: ''The mind is that of a cultivated man of good will. But the fires are
banked.''

This is a semiauthorized book, written with the cooperation of Dos Passos'
widow, who provided materials and, as the author notes, ''upon my request she
also read the manuscript and offered suggestions where she felt I had erred in
fact or nuance.'' The perils of having a book examined by a protective family
are apparent in this useful, but deferential, biography.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Virginia Spencer Carr

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 354 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 29, 1984 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

DANISH 'PHOENIX' AND 'NEIGHBOR'S SON'

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section C; Column 2; Cultural Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 475 words


THE quest for truth that tempts its seekers to employ the techniques of fiction
becomes an issue in two provocative Danish films - ''Phoenix Bird'' and ''Your
Neighbor's Son: The Making of a Torturer'' - opening today at the Film Forum 1.

''Phoenix Bird,'' the work of Jon Bang Carlsen, employs staged flashbacks and
other dramatic episodes to enhance its portrait of James R. Jarrett, a Vietnam
veteran and former policeman who runs the Phoenix Fire Arms Training Center in
Arizona. There, Mr. Jarrett - who smokes Camels, always wears a glove on his
right hand (even when sleeping), frequents topless bars and is fearful of
socialism - teaches families, husbands, wives, children, how to use firearms to
defend themselves. Guns, he maintains, are a guarantee of liberty.

Though the staged footage indisputably lends visual excitement to ''Phoenix
Bird,'' giving it the atmosphere of an adult cops-and-robbers game, the fact
that it casts Mr. Jarrett as an actor makes him a collaborator in a process that
should confine him to the role of subject. And that may account for the fact
that what ''Phoenix Bird'' seems most to need is a determination to plumb Mr.
Jarrett's psyche more than to record his machismo.

As for ''Your Neighbor's Son,'' it is an examination by Joergen Flint Pederson
and Erik Stephensen of the process by which the military junta that ruled Greece
from 1967 to 1974 turned seemingly decent young men into torturers.

Though some of these men themselves attest to their crimes, the film re-creates
the training that brought them to a point at which they willingly brutalized
their fellow men. Though the training is indeed harsh, the film's re-creation of
it makes it seem but slightly crueler than the training at other military boot
camps. And if not all of the men subjected to the training became torturers,
might not the fictional footage have been more fruitfully exchanged for
documentary inquiry in an effort to once again explain the banality of evil?

What makes ''Your Neighbor's Son'' memorable and unnerving, though, is the sight
of one of the victims, years after his torture, half- paralyzed, groping for
words to express his ordeal.

It is possible to take issue with the techniques of ''Your Neighbor's Son,'' but
it is impossible to regard its torturers or its victims without realizing that
the view may be a view into a mirror.

Guns and Victims

PHOENIX BIRD, directed by Jon Bang Carlsen; photographed by Alexander
Gruszynski; edited by Anders Refn; produced by Ebbe Preisler. Running time: 50
minutes.

YOUR NEIGHBOR'S SON: THE MAKING OF A TORTURER, directed by Joergen Flint
Pedersen and Erik Stephenson; in Greek with English subtitles; photographed by
Alexander Gruszynski; edited by Peter Engleson; produced by Ebbe Preisler. At
the Film Forum, 57 Watts Street. Running time: 55 minutes. These films are not
rated.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 29, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE TALK OF CLEVELAND;
TRYING TO SELECT AN IMAGE FOR A CITY WHOSE MAYOR ONCE SET HIS HAIR AFIRE

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 891 words

DATELINE: CLEVELAND, Aug. 25


Which is the best phrase to describe this city of rusty blast furnaces and
abandoned railroad lines: ''Cleveland's a plum'' or ''Cleveland - love it or
leave it''?

Cleveland is in a battle over the correct answer.  With buttons, bumper stickers
and T-shirts, a coalition of advertising executives recently began promoting the
love-it-or-leave-it slogan. They were unhappy with the plum phrase, which had
been the city's unofficial motto for more than a year.

Victor Zalupo, who heads the coalition, maintains that ''Cleveland's a plum''
was ''a poor imitation of New York and its Big Apple image.''

''The trouble is,'' he said, ''everyone knows plums are much less interesting
than apples.''

Mr. Zalupo said he did not see political connotations in his substitute slogan
and was surprised when some Clevelanders linked it to ''America - love it or
leave it,'' which was popular among conservatives in the Vietnam War.

''We all agree we're no longer fair game for anybody to pick on,'' he continued.
''But all the other campaigns were designed to entice out-of-state people to
come here, and those slogans weren't believable. Those of us who know you can't
get a pair of socks after 6 in downtown Cleveland know we're not perfect.''



There is a more serious tone to municipal affairs these days than in the 1970's,
when a mayor set his hair afire at a ribbon-cutting ceremony and a state police
officer arrested a school board president for indecent exposure.

Cleveland defaulted on $14 million in bank loans in 1978, but the city has since
recouped on the default and resumed borrowing. The current Mayor, George V.
Voinovich, now cites the $30 million renovation of three old theaters downtown
and the new Standard Oil headquarters as signs that the city is making a
comeback.

But whether Cleveland can attract new jobs is an open question. The
steelworkers' union maintained that the merger of the LTV Corporation's Jones &
Laughlin steel division with Republic Steel would cost the city jobs, and other
efforts to reinvigorate the steel industry are lagging.

For months last winter, city officials argued about a $35 million loan to help
build a new high-technology steel mill. It was approved, but now officials say
the developer, Robert Alpert of Houston, has changed his mind about the project.

''It does not look like he's going to do that project, and he's looking at
alternatives,'' said Claire Rosacco, an aide to Mr. Voinovich. Mr. Alpert,
through an aide, declined to comment.


Dorothy Fuldheim got a job as a television commentator when she was 54 years old
and quickly became so well known that when someone in Cleveland mentioned
''Dorothy'' it was not necessary to use a last name. That was 37 years ago.

At 91, Miss Fuldheim was still appearing on station WEWS-TV three times a day,
conducting interviews and reading commentaries that the station says she wrote
herself.

But one evening in July, a few hours after she taped a long-distance interview
with President Reagan, she was taken to Mount Sinai Hospital in Cleveland,
complaining of a persistent headache and numbness. That night her doctors
discovered and removed a large blood clot near her brain.

So many viewers called the station to ask about her condition that it connected
an answering machine to its switchboard to provide recorded reports.

Miss Fuldheim, who was in critical but stable condition immediately after the
operation, was taken off the critical list 10 days ago. A hospital spokesman
said she had regained consciousness, understood what was going on around her and
answered questions with a nod or a shake of her head. Miss Fuldheim cannot talk
because she has had a tracheostomy, but the spokesman said her throat was
healing and that the doctors hoped she would be able to speak in a few days.

''Dorothy is pretty much the first lady of television,'' said Miss Rosacco.
''She's a household word here. If you'd met her, you wouldn't have believed she
was 91. She was that sharp, and I don't know anyone who isn't hoping she pulls
out of this.''



He was young and combative when he was Mayor in the late 1970's. He dismissed
the Police Chief and battled the banks, which he still says were responsible for
Cleveland's $14 million plunge into municipal default.

These days, Dennis J. Kucinich, who succeeded the hair-on-fire Mayor, answers
his own telephone and quotes Huey Long and Ralph Waldo Emerson.

''As Mayor I had a scorch-the-earth mentality: Anybody who got in the way, I'd
run over,'' said Mr. Kucinich, a Democrat who lost an election on his removal
from office in 1979 but won a seat on the City Council last year. ''Time has
shown that I was right on the decisions I made, but you can assume a zealotry
that causes you to go past the mark.''

Now that he represents a working- class ward on a Council dominated by his old
foes, Mr. Kucinich said he was trying to ''let go of the concept of enemies.''

''I spend most days now talking on the telephone about getting chuck holes
filled, street lights fixed, catch basins cleaned out, weeds cut, vacant homes
inspected,'' he said. ''I'm a practical politician, but to paraphrase Emerson,
work and live so the questions and answers become one, and practicality
resonates with an expanded view of the world.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 29, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
A Lebanon Footnote

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 255 words


The Marine Corps is planning to

add ''Lebanon'' to the list of

military engagements inscribed on the granite base of the Iwo Jima Memorial just
across the Potomac in Virginia. The proposal has received the necessary
clearance from the National Park Service, the keeper of the nation's monuments,
but this reminder of one of President Reagan's most controversial ventures may
not actually happen until after the November election.

A Marine spokesman confirmed that Lebanon was to be added to the battles of
corps history, just after Vietnam in chronological order. He said officials
hoped to have the change made by Nov. 10, the anniversary of the founding of the
corps, which is usually celebrated with a ceremony at the memorial.

After a brief tour of duty there in August 1982, a Marine contingent was ordered
by President Reagan to go into Lebanon in September 1982 as part of a
multinational force to contain unrest. Before they were withdrawn in Feburary of
1984, the Marines had suffered more than 250 casualties, most notably in the
bombing of their compound at Beirut airport in October 1983.

In anticipation of this year's anniversary, the Iwo Jima statue is getting a
thorough cleaning by the combined forces of the National Park Service and Marine
Corps volunteers. In addition, at the request of Congress, the name of Joe
Rosenthal is being added to its base. He was the photographer for The Associated
Press who took the classic flag-raising picture on which the statue was based.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 30, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CENTRAL AMERICA: POINTS FOR A MONDALE POSITION

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 450 words


To the Editor:


Bravo, bravo, bravo Alan Tonelson for pointing out the lack of a clear
Democratic alternative to the Administration's policy toward Central America
(Op-Ed Aug. 24). I would like to suggest four points Walter Mondale should be
making.


* The domino theory is largely fallacious. The Vietnam experience tends to
disprove it, particularly when American culpability for the fall of Cambodia is
considered. When the secret bombing began in 1969, the Khmer Rouge were weak,
numbering some 4,000.

Moreover, the domino theory is inconsistent with faith in a Supreme Being in
charge of history but consistent with Marxist doctrine (the notion of inevitable
world victory of the proletariat is the mirror image of the domino theory).


* Land reform is the answer, as John F. Kennedy knew. Land reform has worked
well in Taiwan, for example, where yields of rice per acre dwarf corresponding
American yields. Land reform is the law of the land in El Salvador - a law that
is ignored but on the books all the same.  Furthermore, it is justified by
history. Oppressive laws of 1880 and 1881 actually stole land from the
Salvadoran poor and quickly brought about the concentration of land in the hands
of an oligarchy.

* Nicaragua is not a Marxist dungeon. C.I.A.-backed contras were the root cause
of problems with the Miskitos (admittedly, there were abuses by the
Sandinistas).  The economy is mostly private. Agriculture Minister Jaime
Wheelock openly seeks a middle way between capitalism and communism, and there
is an important role for profits at state-owned farms. Major progress has been
made in health (e.g., immunizations), education, housing (adobe construction and
R.& D.), roads, sewage and public safety (the sharp drop in street crime).

Throughout Nicaragua, there is great interest in religion, contrary to Marxist
doctrine; harassment of priests is the exception, not the rule.


* To admit our mistakes is not to wallow in guilt, as Ambassador Jeane
Kirkpatrick would have it. Rather, it is a sign of humility, a basic Judeo-
Christian virtue.

No person or nation is free from sin. Democrats and Republicans have made
mistakes. For example, F.D.R. made mistakes leading up to Pearl Harbor, but then
isolationist Republicans tended to force him into consciously or unconsciously
seeking a backdoor to war with Germany. The Bay of Pigs invasion was a mistake,
and so was sending in the Marines in opposition to Sandino and in support of
Somoza some 50-odd years ago.

Vice President Mondale has shown plenty of courage on taxes and the deficit. Let
us see more of the same on Central America.

MARK B. PETERSON Washington, Aug. 24, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SIX ASTRONAUTS SHARE LIFELONG LOVE OF FLIGHT AND A DREAM TO SEE THE STARS

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 838 words


Henry W. Hartsfield Jr.


Commander of Discovery has been an astronaut since 1966 space, an orbital tour
in the shuttle Columbia in 1982 . . . has been enjoying flying since 1955, when
he became an Air Force pilot after graduation from Auburn University in Alabama
. . . remained in the service 22 years . . . born Nov. 21, 1933, in Birmingham,
Ala. . . . graduate of test-pilot school at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., has
logged more than 5,000 hours in variety of jet aircraft . . . served as test
pilot instructor and in 1966 joined astronaut corps for Air Force Manned
Orbiting Laboratory . . . shifted to NASA astronaut corps in 1969, where he
worked at earthbound assignments and training and waited through the Apollo and
Skylab projects without getting into orbit . . . with wife, Judy, has two grown
daughters.



Michael L. Coats


He surprised no one when he became a pilot and then an astronaut . . . son of an
Air Force bomber pilot, grew up with airplanes and decided that flying was for
him . . . after graduating from the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis in
1968, became a fighter pilot and flew 315 combat missions in Vietnam . . .
received 46 awards for his flying skills and heroism, including two Navy
Distinguished Flying Crosses . . . has flown more than 3,500 hours in 22
different kinds of aircraft and is now a commander in the Navy . . . although
pilot for the Discovery's first mission, he was making his first flight in space
. . . born in Sacramento, Calif., 38 years ago, now lives in Riverside . . .
earned a master's degree in administration of science and technology from George
Washington University and a master's degree in aeronautical engineering from the
Naval Postgraduate School at Monterey, Calif . . . joined astronaut corps in
1978 to train especially for the shuttle program . . . with wife, Diane, has two
children.



Steven A. Hawley


Married to Sally K. Ride, the first American woman to fly in space . . . as a
mission specialist, will help deploy a satellite . . . born in Ottawa, Kan.,
Dec. 12, 1951, son of a Presbyterian minister . . . received B.A. in physics and
astronomy from University of Kansas in 1973 . . . has Ph.D in astrophysics from
University of California in 1977 . . . became astronaut candidate in 1978 . . .
was member of astronaut support crew for shuttle test and checkout . . . plays
basketball, softball and tennis.



Richard M. Mullane


Prefers nickname Mike . . . became interested in rocketry and outer space in
early days of space program . . . grew up in Albuquerque, N.M., where he built
small rockets and launched them in the desert, winning first prize in high
school science fair . . . received B.S. in military engineering from the
Military Academy in 1967 and was awarded M.S. in aeronautical engineering from
the Air Force Institute in 1975 . . . trained as a weapon systems operator,
served in Vietnam and completed 150 combat missions . . . after a four-year tour
in England, completed Air Force flight test engineer course at Edwards Air Force
Base, Calif. . . . applied to become an astronaut in 1978 . . . in the space
program, was assigned responsibility for launching a new type of communications
satellite, Leasat, the first designed specifically for shuttle launching . . .
born in Wichita Falls, Tex., 38 years ago . . . is an avid outdoorsman and
backpacker . . . with wife, the former Donna Sei, has two daughters and a son.



Judith A. Resnik


The second American woman to fly in space . . . mission specialist, will operate
robot arm . . . 35 years old, born in Akron, Ohio . . . received B.S. in
electrical engineering from Carnegie-Mellon University in 1970 . . . got Ph.D.
in electrical engineering from University of Maryland in 1977 . . . worked with
RCA Corporation on missile and naval radar . . . worked for National Institutes
of Health on neurophysiology . . . later became a systems engineer with Xerox
Corporation . . . became astronaut candidate in 1978 . . . worked at Johnson
Space Center on software development and use of shuttle's robot arm . . . 5 feet
4 inches tall . . . likes to play piano, run, ride bicycle . . . single.



Charles David Walker


Astronaut application was turned down in 1978, but he never gave up dream of
flying in space and is now first person from private industry to be assigned to
shuttle mission . . . 35-year-old engineer employed by McDonnell Douglas
Corporation . . . will operate machine of his own design to separate large
quantities of protein materials and produce type of hormone purer than any that
could be manufactured on earth . . . sees his role as first commercial payload
specialist as being initial step in opening space flight to wide variety of
private interests . . . born in Bedford, Ind. . . . 1971 graduate of Purdue
University . . . now chief test engineer for the McDonnell Douglas Continuous
Flow Electrophoresis Operations in space project . . . with wife, Melissa, lives
in St. Louis.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FRANK N. TRAGER, 78, AN EXPERT ON ASIA, DIES

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section D; Page 14, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 518 words


Dr. Frank N. Trager, a professor emeritus of international affairs at New York
University who served for many years as a consultant to the Government on
Southeast Asia and national security, died of heart disease last Sunday in
Carmel, Calif. He was 78 years old and lived in Carmel.

Dr. Trager, who retired in 1977 from N.Y.U.'s Graduate School of Public
Administration, was director of the American aid program in Burma in the early
1950's and an outspoken opponent of Communism in Southeast Asia in the 1960's
and 1970's.

In countless lectures, scores of articles and 15 books, he voiced support for
successive American administrations in waging the Vietnam War, warning that the
loss of the conflict would lead to the fall of neighboring countries to the
Communists.

Defender of Ties to Taiwan


As an adviser to the State Department and a consultant to the Rand Corporation,
the Hudson Institute and other institutions, he also defended American ties to
the Nationalists on Taiwan and argued vehemently for economic and political
isolation of the People's Republic of China.

''The opponents of the view I hold believe that by being nice to the Chinese
Communists you can woo and win them,'' he said in an interview in 1966. ''This
is equivalent to those in the 30's who said, 'Let's be nice to Hitler and he'll
be a good boy.' ''


Dr. Trager supported dhe Philippine President, Ferdinand E. Marcos, scoffing at
charges that he was a dictator. Although Dr. Trager favored strong American ties
to Indonesia, he warned that the leftward course of President Sukarno in the
1960's was a serious cause for concern.

He was born in New York City and earned bachelor's, master's and doctoral
degrees at N.Y.U. As a young scholar, he was first captivated with socialism and
worked in the Presidential campaigns of Norman Thomas in the 1930's.

He became secretary and treasurer of the New York State Socialist Party in the
mid-1930's and was elected to the party's national executive committee in 1940,
advocating a platform favoring the socialization of the nation's industries and
natural resources.

From 1938 to 1943, he was program director of the American Jewish Committee and,
after service with the Army Air Force in World War II from 1943 to 1945, he
became program director of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith.


After two years as director of the United States aid program in Rangoon, Burma,
he joined N.Y.U. as a research professor in 1953, becoming professor of
international affairs in 1958. He also taught at the Center for International
Studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Yale and the National War
College.

Among his books were ''Building a Welfare State in Burma,'' ''Marxism in
Southeast Asia: A Study of Four Countries'' and ''Burma, From Kingdom to
Republic, a Historical and Political Analysis.'' The book that drew most
attention was ''Why Vietnam?'' In it, he argued in favor of United States policy
in Vietnam.

Dr. Trager was married in 1936 to the former Helen Gilbson, who survives him.
They had no children.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Frank N. Trager

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PBS GETS 9 NEWS EMMYS



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Page 41, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 161 words


The Public Broadcasting Service garnered 19 awards, topping the three major
networks, as the National Academy of Television Arts And Sciences presented its
1983 National News and Documentary Emmy Awards Thursday night. ABC won 11
awards, CBS 10 and NBC 6.

Six episodes of the PBS series ''Vietnam: A Television History'' each won Emmys
for news and documentary excellence. The series also won six of the seven Emmys
for outstanding informational, cultural or historical programs. PBS's ''Rain
Forest'' won the seventh.

ABC, CBS and NBC shared the award for outstanding investigative journalism, for
segments of news programs. ABC won for ''Growing Up In Smoke,'' shown on
''20-20''; CBS for ''Lenell Geter's In Jail,'' on ''60 Minutes,'' and NBC for
''Poison On Your Plate,'' on ''First Camera.''

ABC's ''20-20'' won four Emmys and CBS's ''60 Minutes'' won three. The PBS
''Inside Story'' also won three. ''The CBS Evening News With Dan Rather'' won
five.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LETTER: ON EVIDENCE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 517 words


SUSPICIONS ABOUT AGENT ORANGE

To the Editor:

We take exception to your opinions regarding the extent to which American ground
troops were exposed to Agent Orange while serving in Vietnam, and the strength
of the Air Force Ranch Hand morbidity study (''The Truth About Agent Orange,''
editorial Aug. 13). Although the American Legion has not involved itself in the
Agent Orange litigation, we are in the forefront on all legislative and
administrative aspects of the health effects of dioxin exposure on Vietnam
veterans.

There are certain important factors about the Ranch Hand study that should be
taken into account. The Ranch Hand personnel had much better methods of
sanitation than ground troops. They had the opportunity to shower and change
clothes after every spraying mission. We have seen documentary evidence which
seriously questions the repeated assumptions that the Ranch Hand personnel were
the most heavily exposed group that served in Vietnam.

Official films of Ranch Hand spraying operations during different time frames,
and film footage of Army application of Agent Orange by helicopter and wheeled
vehicles in Vietnam showed much greater exposure to the Army personnel. In
addition, contrary to your editorial, Agent Orange was not by any means
exclusively sprayed over triple-canopy jungle. A large amount was sprayed along
roadsides, around base camps and other perimeters, and in areas where trees were
small and sparsely located. This information was all pointed out by the Legion
during a Congressional hearing in July 1983.  As for the manner in which the
Ranch Hand study was conducted, the Air Force itself admits that the exposure
index is not entirely accurate. We believe it is crude, at best. Equally
alarming is the fact that the comparison group is made up entirely of other Air
Force veterans who served in Vietnam. Therefore, theoretically, some or all of
the control group may also have been exposed to Agent Orange as well as other
herbicides and environmental hazards.  Your editorial did not mention the
increases in cancers in the Ranch Hand population, increases which the Air Force
contends are ''statistically insignificant.'' Statistical significance is not
the only factor for consideration when you see two cases of bladder cancer in
individuals under the age of 50 in the Ranch Hand group. Bladder cancer is
rarely detected in humans prior to age 50; thus two cases with an early age of
onset serve as a signal of concern.

Because of the anomalies in reported exposure, the differences in availability
of sanitation and the foregoing and other finds of the study, concerns about the
health effects of dioxin exposure on ground troops that were exposed to Agent
Orange are heightened.

The American Legion does not serve as an alarmist. But as a consumer advocate
for veterans, it believes in responsible reporting on the important issue of
Agent Orange.

JOHN F. SOMMER JR.  Washington, Aug. 13, 1984

The writer is deputy director of the American Legion's National Veterans Affairs
and Rehabilitation Commission.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Limiting Libyans At U.N. to New York

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 273 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Aug. 31


The United States told Libya's United Nations diplomats today that they cannot
travel outside New York City without special permission.

The note gave no reason for the stricter curbs, but a spokesman for the United
States Mission cited unspecified security considerations.

The spokesman said the new restriction was announced in a note to the Libyans,
whose diplomatic staff and families were previously allowed to travel within a
25-mile radius of the city.

If United Nations business requires travel outside any of the city's five
boroughs, United States authorities must be given 48 hours' notice.

The restriction will also apply to any Libyan diplomats who come to New York for
the General Assembly session that opens Sept. 18.

The spokesman said the United States estimated that the restriction, which went
into force immediately, would affect between 55 and 60 people, including Libyan
diplomats, their staffs and families. It will not apply to any Libyans working
for the United Nations Secretariat.

The missions of others restricted to a 25-mile radius of New York City represent
Afghanistan, Albania, Cuba, Iran, Cambodia, Mongolia, North Korea, Vietnam and
the Palestine Liberation Organization.

Lesser restrictions apply to Soviet and Chinese diplomats, who have to notify
the American authorities of their travel plans beyond the 25-mile zone.



WASHINGTON, Aug. 31 - A high- ranking State Department official said today that
the move limiting Libyans at the United Nations was part of a general
''tightening up'' on the Libyans, but did not say if it was sparked by any
particular incident.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. CONSIDERS SENDING GUNSHIPS TO EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 541 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Aug. 31


The United States is considering providing rapid-fire AC-47 gunships to the
Salvadoran Air Force, according to the United States Ambassador, Thomas R.
Pickering, and other American officials here.

If approved, the AC-47 would represent a significant increase in the firepower
available to the Salvadoran military.

''The AC-47 gunship is under consideration for the Salvadoran Air Force,'' Mr.
Pickering said. ''I don't want to comment beyond that.'' A final decision has
not been made on whether to provide the warplanes, he added.

American officials would not speculate on when the planes might arrive, should
they be approved. But Mr. Pickering said a portion of the recently passed $70
million in supplemental military aid for El Salvador could be spent on the
gunships this year.

18,000 Rounds Per Minute


The Salvadoran Air Force may also receive 10 to 15 new UH-1 helicoptors this
year, according to another United States official.

The slow-moving, twin-propellor AC-47 is a heavily armed version of the DC-3
cargo and passenger plane. It was widely used in Vietnam where, in tandem with
the Cobra helicoptor gunship, it was developed as a major weapon.

Dubbed ''Puff the Magic Dragon,'' the plane can saturate an area the size of a
football field with bullets by firing 18,000 rounds per minute from three
7.62-millimeter guns.

The guns are ''normally controlled by the pilot of the aircraft,'' a Western
military official familiar with the plane said. ''He has a sight, and it's very
precise. It's extraordinarily accurate.''

The Salvadoran Air Force has five DC-3 cargo planes that a Western military
official said could easily be converted into AC-47 gunships. Alternatively, the
United States could provide already equipped AC-47's to the Salvadorans.

Bombing of Villages Charged


The official said any Salvadoran pilot capable of flying a DC-3 could quickly
learn to fly one of the gunships and fire its weapons.

Asked if such a weapon represented a change in American military policy here,
which has generally concentrated on providing low-technology weaponry to the
Salvadoran military, an embassy spokesman, Gregory Lagana, said, ''All military
equipment for El Salvador is considered on a case-by- case basis, with an eye
toward appropriate safeguards for their use.''

Human rights groups, including Americas Watch, have recently charged that the
Salvadoran Air Force has been guilty of indiscriminately bombing villages in
guerrilla- held areas, in an effort to deprive the rebels of civilian
supporters. The Salvadoran high command has formally denied the charges.

A Western military official asserted that the accuracy of the AC-47 gunship
would presumably make accidental destruction of civilian areas less likely and
might be one factor in deciding to provide the planes.  The Salvadoran Air Force
currently uses six United States-provided A-37 jet attack planes to drop 500-
and 750-pound bombs, according to a Western military official here. The air
force also has 22 UH-1 Huey helicopters, 18 of which are equipped with machine
guns. It also has at least one other helicoptor equipped with a gun of the type
used in the AC-47 gunship, according to Mr. Pickering.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE REGION ;
;
 Murder-Suicide In Jersey Town

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 108 words

DATELINE: DENVILLE, N.J., Aug. 31


A Massachusetts man, reportedly upset that his girlfriend had left him, doused
her with gasoline and set her on fire, then set himself ablaze in a
murder-suicide early yesterday, the police said.

The man - Nguyen Thuan, 37 years old, of Springfield - and the woman - Hoan
Uong, 30, who lived in this Morris County community - were pronounced dead
shortly after the incident, said Charles Coe, chief investigator of the County
Prosecutor's office. Both were immigrants from Vietnam.

The incident, witnessed by several people, occurred in the parking lot of the
St. Francis Health Resort, where Miss Uong and her family lived, Mr. Coe said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Barbara Oliver

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 571 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on
page 41.

1. A Latin-American country with a long history of leftist insurgency is dealing
with it in an unusual way. Which country did what?

2. Which inhabitants of Death Valley are being shipped out for adoption?

3. A kit has made a hit at Pennsylvania State University. Explain.

4. Why did a five-pound bluefish attract over 4,000 fishermen to Long Island
Sound?

5. If you are reasonably healthy, a ''good communicator,'' and an elementary or
secondary school teacher you might be eligible for a free trip. Where might you
travel?

6. A competitor won a race in Chicago at an age that stretched credibility. Who
was he and what did he win?







Hold for cut no.7






7. In a campaign for a city motto, the challenger shown above has recently been
championed by a coalition of advertising executives. Which city is trying out
this new image?  8. A new form of hepatitis, delta hepatitis, has been found to
be more virulent than those previously known. What is different about it?

9. Though a 47-day strike by hospital and nursing home employees is over, there
is still a dispute about the contract. Why?

10. In elections open to the Indian minority in South Africa (17/37/67) percent
of the registered Indian voters turned out to select members of Parliament.

11. Since its publication in 1946, which book has over 30 million copies

 in print, making it the second-best selling book in American history, next to
the Bible?

12. ''The last thing this exciting in Palenville was 10 years ago when the
bowling alley burned down.'' To what event was this upstate New York resident
referring?

13. An experimental link allowing nighttime trading of three types of currency
futures in the United States was approved by the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission. Which exchanges will participate?

14. A grueling event, new to to city, began in the upper New York Bay, continued
on the West Side Highway, and ended in Central Park. What was it?

15. An expanse of 1,233 miles of concrete or steel pipes will be used in a
construction project being built by Americans and South Koreans. Where is the
construction and what is being built?






Hold for cut no. 16





16. The dancers pictured above are the first to perform on this stage. Where are
they appearing?

17. A little-known Congresswoman was selected by her party's delegates for their
No. 2 spot. The title is secretary general. Who is she and what country is she
from?

18. This year's grain harvest in the Soviet Union is expected to surpass its
goal for the first time in six years. True or false?

19. The newly elected commander in chief of the two- million-member Veterans of
Foreign Wars is the first veteran from the Vietnam era to hold that job. How
many members of the V.F.W. are Vietnam era veterans?

20. Tax-exempt government bonds are being sold increasingly with the backing of
insurance companies. Accounting for only 3 percent of the market in 1980, they
now account for (7/14/21) percent of the total sold?

21. The average number of days spent in the hospital by Medicare patients has
decreased from 9.5 over the last five years to 7.5 this year. To what is the
change attributed?

22. Now that Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island have a new area code, will calls
from Manhattan and the Bronx cost more?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PILOT LOSES RULING OVER SEX CHANGE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 404 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Aug. 31


A Federal appeals panel, finding that civil rights laws do not protect
transsexuals from discrimination, has overturned a ruling that ordered Eastern
Airlines to reinstate a pilot who was dismissed after a sex-change operation.

The ruling was issued Wednesday in the airline's appeal of a lawsuit brought by
Karen Frances Ulane, 43 years old, of Darien, Ill. She sued Eastern over her
dismissal in 1981, seeking reinstatement to her $50,000-a-year job as well as
back pay and benefits.

''She is very disappointed'' with the ruling, Dean Dickie, Miss Ulane's
attorney, said Thursday. Mr. Dickie said he would seek a rehearing of the
decision before the full appeals court.

Eastern is withholding comment on the matter until its legal department can
review a copy of the appellate decision, a spokesman, Mark Wegel, said in a
telephone interview.

25 Missions in Vietnam


Miss Ulane, as Kenneth Ulane, flew 25 missions in the Vietnam War and was
awarded an Air Medal. Before undergoing the sex-change operation in 1980, the
pilot worked for the airline for 12 years.

In February 1983, Federal District Judge John Grady ruled that transsexuals were
protected from discrimination under the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1964.

But the three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh
Circuit said in its 12-page decision that the civil rights measure did not
''outlaw discrimination against a person who has a sexual identity disorder.''

''While we do not condone discrimination in any form,'' the court said, citing
the civil rights act, ''we are constrained to hold that the act does not protect
transsexuals, and this count must be reversed for lack of jurisdiction.'' The
decision, was written by Judge Harlington Woods Jr.

Noting that the 1964 act did not define sex in barring discrimination on the
basis of sex, the judges said that if the term ''is to mean more than biological
male or biological female, the new definition must come from Congress.''

Issue of Safety Hazard


Judge Grady said the airline's contentions that the pilot's presence in the
cockpit posed safety hazards were ''a pretext and sham of the first order,'' and
later ruled that Eastern had discriminated against Miss Ulane because she was a
woman.

But the appeals panel rejected that finding also, saying Judge Grady had not
made the necessary factual findings to support his conclusion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver, Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 617 words


Your Name, Please

After President Reagan delivered his acceptance speech at the Republican
National Convention in Dallas, it was widely interpreted by friends and foes as
being negative in tone, heavy with attacks on Walter F. Mondale, the Democratic
Presidential nominee.

Some of the interpretation was attributed by reporters to Reagan campaign
officials who did not want their names disclosed. Now, to stanch the flow of
internal criticism, the campaign leaders have agreed to talk to reporters only
on the record. One reporter who covers the campaign, speaking on condition that
his name not be used, said he did not think the new rule would last long.

Honoring Lieut. Bush

On Sept. 2, 1944, Lieut. (j.g.) George Bush, a Navy pilot, was shot down on a
bombing run over the Pacific island of Chichi Jima. Before jumping out of his
torpedo bomber, Lieutenant Bush inflicted heavy damage on his target, a radio
station. His two crew members were killed, but Lieutenant Bush was rescued,
after several hours in the sea, by the Finback (SS-230), a submarine. Later he
was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross, and much later he became Vice
President.

The 40th anniversary of the event is to be celebrated tomorrow at the Navy base
in Norfolk, Va. At the invitation of the Secretary of the Navy, John F. Lehman
Jr., Mr. Bush will speak briefly, then make a tour of the new Finback (SSN-670)
and have lunch with members of his old outfit, Torpedo Squadron 51. The public
and the news media have been invited, and the gates of the Norfolk Naval Station
will be open for them from 11:30 A.M. to 1:30 P.M.

In a Diamond's Shadow

An emerald as big as a chicken egg went on exhibition this week at the National
Museum of Natural History, just a short walk across the museum from the Hope
Diamond. John S. White, curator of the Smithsonian Institution's National Gem
Collection, said the 168-carat emerald was believed to be ''the largest fine
emerald ever to go on public exhibition.'' Mr. White allowed that there might be
a larger emerald ''in some sultan's private hoard or in the Iranian crown
jewels.''

The emerald was bequeathed to the Smithsonian by Anna Case Mackay, a former
Metropolitan Opera soprano who died in January in New York City at the age of
95. She received the gem in 1931 as a gift from her husband, Clarence H. Mackay,
who was then chairman of the Postal Telegraph and Cable Corporation. The gem is
about two inches high and an inch and five-eighths wide, and it is set in art
deco platinum pendant attached to a diamond link chain. Mr. White said that gem
was almost certainly mined in Colombia, the source of most of the world's great
emeralds since Spaniards began mining them and sending them to Europe in the
16th century.

The Smithsonian's collection of emeralds has several other large stones,
including the uncut, 858-carat Gachala emerald crystal. Still, Mr. White said,
the Hope Diamond outdraws all the other stones in the museum. Moreover, the
curator said, the Hope still attracts more visitors than anything the
Smithsonian has, and that includes items like the Spirit of St. Louis in the
National Air and Space Museum.

Memories of Vietnam

The Vietnam Memorial, which will be two years old in November, seems to be
established as second most popular memorial in Washington. The memorial, a
trenchlike slash in the earth, is a short walk from the Lincoln Memorial. The
Vietnam memorial attracted 1,219,226 people from Jan. 1 to July 31, according to
the National Park Service. Only the Lincoln drew more people in the same period,
2,099,443. No. 3 in popularity was the Jefferson Memorial with 715,190, and No.
4 was the White House, 627,618.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICAL AND RELIGIOUS SHIFTS REKINDLE CHURCH-STATE ISSUE

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1810 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 1


In 1965, when priests, nuns, rabbis and ministers were marching in Selma, Ala.,
in an effort to secure a national voting rights act, fundamentalist religious
groups across the country were aghast at what they saw on television.

The Rev. Jerry Falwell, for one, in a sermon titled ''Ministers and Marchers,''
said: ''Believing the Bible as I do, I would find it impossible to stop
preaching the pure saving gospel of Jesus Christ and begin doing anything else,
including fighting communism, or participating in civil rights reforms.
Preachers are not called on to be politicians but to be soul winners. Nowhere
are we commissioned to reform the externals.''



Times Have Changed


Since then, Mr. Falwell has become deeply involved in politics and, as founder
of Moral Majority, has led hundreds of thousands of religious fundamentalists
into partisan support of President Reagan and the Republican Party.

At the same time, leaders of the denominations whose adherents marched at Selma
have moved into a myriad of new political causes.

So profound has been the change in both religious and political institutions
that the historic controversy over mixing religion and politics, dormant for
many years, has become a prime issue in the current Presidential campaign.



Considerable Uncertainty


How the issue evolved from the 1960's to the 1980's is disputed to a degree, but
changes in the political system and in the religious fundamentalists' view of
American society were clearly important to the shift.

Students of government and politics agree that the complexity of American
religious groups, along with the rapidity and depth of the change, has led to
considerable confusion and uncertainty. Some of the President's campaign aides
have privately expressed fear that Mr. Reagan's embrace of the religious right
and his call for the re- entry of religion into the political arena may have
offended more people than they drew to him.

Walter F. Mondale, the Democratic Presidental nominee, quick to attack Mr.
Reagan on most issues, acknowledged the explosiveness and sensitivity of the
religion issue by announcing a few days ago that he intended to respond to Mr.
Reagan's position but needed time to think it through and draft a carefully
worded statement.

Meantime, theologians, public officials, pundits and others are debating the
issue and what it means to the relationship between church and state. Although
people of various faiths, including political leaders, are split on the issue,
all acknowledge that over the past two decades there has been a movement away
from the strict ''wall of separation'' enunciated by Thomas Jefferson. The
Supreme Court has encouraged that movement with a series of rulings that stress
accommodation of religion in government.

Through much of the nation's history the dispute was over whether the United
States was in fact a Christian nation. In the last century organized religious
groups made repeated efforts to have Congress officially declare the national
Government to be Christian. After years of struggle, however, the Jeffersonian
argument for strict separation prevailed.

Shift to Social Issues


By the 1960's the mainstream Protestant churches - Methodists, Episcopalians,
Congregationalists, Presbyterians and the like - had turned away from trying to
make the nation ''a Christian commonwealth'' to supporting civil rights,
opposing the Vietnam War and making active efforts on a number of other social
issues, usually on the side embraced by political liberals.

At the same time, however, the political system was undergoing a basic change.
The major political parties, which once assimilated and assigned priority to
issues, were being replaced by a host of individual interest groups that
competed directly for government assistance and recognition. For several years
the fundamentalist Christians, generally those who stress a literal
interpretation of the Bible, stood on the sidelines and watched other religious,
economic and social groups compete in the public arena, while in their view
national morals were in steep decline.

Mr. Falwell and others said that under the circumstances they had no choice but
to enter the political arena themselves if Christian traditions were to survive.
In the late 1970's the fundamentalists began to organize around the issues that
interested them and became, in effect, a new actor on the national political
scene.

'Back to Basics' Stance

Emphasizing ''back to basics,'' they opposed abortion, homosexuality, a Federal
equal rights amendment, busing to achieve racial integration and the teaching of
evolution in schools. They favored, among other issues, aid to church-related
schools, free enterprise and a stronger military. Although many fundamentalist
churches still refrained from political activism, Moral Majority and similar
groups reached out to claim some members from the ranks of Orthodox Jews and
conservative Roman Catholics.

Robert Maddox, a former Baptist minister in Texas, currently director of the
Washington-based Americans United for Separation of Church and State, said that
aside from the opposing goals of the fundamentalists and the other Protestant
groups, there was another difference more important to the issue of religion in
government.

''Helping the poor and other causes churches have supported in the past are
secular issues,'' he said. ''The other side is bringing in religious issues -
prayer in the schools, aid to parochial schools and all that - and that is where
the conflict with the First Amendment comes in. It is the kind of issues they
are pushing, not their political participation, that is causing trouble.'

In 1980 the newly activated groups attached themselves to Mr. Reagan's
Presidential candidacy and won inclusion of a number of their positions in the
Republican platform. The difference this year is that the fundamentalist groups
seem to be stronger in numbers and have been successful so far in having the
President not only embrace their issues but the groups themselves.

Prominent at Convention


They were a prominent force in the recent Republican National Convention in
Dallas where the President, addressing them at a prayer breakfast, said religion
ought to have a more prominent role in government. And his campaign sent letters
to fundamentalist ministers urging them to organize voter registration drives to
assist the President's re-election, a project that Moral Majority and other
groups were already pursuing.

There have been other changes since 1980 that have enhanced interest and concern
about the issue.

While the fundamentalist churches have been gaining members and resources,
partly through television broadcasts, mainstream churches have had no such
growth and have been involved in internal disputes over their positions on
political issues: how far they should go, for example, in condemning the Reagan
foreign policy and in criticizing the practices of capitalism.

This year, as they have in the past, these churches have acted in support of
various issues but are generally not involved in partisan support of candidates
or parties.

Catholic Bishops More Active


In the meantime, the Roman Catholic bishops, seeking to fill a void they say has
been left by the declining influence of the mainstream Protestants, have become
increasingly active on a range of political issues.

Their increased prominence on the scene has complicated the situation because
the Catholic bishops support some of the positions favored by the
fundamentalists, such as aid to parochial schools and opposition to abortion,
among others, and some of the mainstream Protestants' positions, such as a
nuclear freeze and increased assistance to the poor.  Over all, there has been a
shift to the position of more accommodation of religion by government. The
Southern Baptist Convention, the largest Protestant denomination, at one time
favored a fairly strict adherence of separation of church and state. ''It was a
stalwart of separatism,'' according to Mr. Maddox.

In the wake of the Republican National Convention in Dallas, The Texas Baptist
Standard published an editorial last Thursday advising its members, ''The vote
in the Presidential election this year is not a vote for who will be pastor but
who will be President.''

New Book a Rallying Point


But in recent years many of the Baptist churches have drifted on the separation
issue and favor, along with Mr. Falwell and President Reagan, more government
accommodation of religion.

A controversial new book by a respected Lutheran theologian, Richard John
Neuhaus, has within a few weeks become a rallying point for those who agree with
Mr. Reagan. In ''The Naked Public Square: Religion and Democracy in America,''
Mr. Neuhaus writes that when religion is banned from public life the public
square is left naked to a takeover by the state. He says the ''new Christian
right,'' even though it demands conformity to its beliefs, may help restore real
democracy to a public arena shorn of moral values.

Critics of the new Christian right disagree. ''I don't think the public square
is all that naked,'' said Mr. Maddox, asserting that it is open to debate by
people of all religions.

And Samuel Rabinove, legal director for the American Jewish Committee, said the
entire movement toward inclusion of religion in government - in Congress, the
White House, in the courts and in politics - was ''disquieting'' to many in
America because it ''tends to blur the line between religion and government.''

President Defends Position


Recent correspondence between President Reagan and Norman Lear, the television
producer who heads People for the American Way, points up the President's
growing allegiance to ''the new Christian right'' and the seeming inability of
Mr. Reagan and proponents of a stricter separation of church and state to reach
agreement.

The President, defending his position, said in one letter: ''I am not using this
office as a pulpit for one religion over all others, but I do subscribe to
George Washington's remark regarding high moral standards, decency, etc., and
their importance to civilization and his conclusion that to think we could have
these without religion as a base was to ask for the impossible.''

''Obviously,'' he continued, ''when I'm addressing an audience who share my own
religious beliefs - indeed, a religious group - I see nothing wrong with talking
of our mutual interests. I can recall no instance where I have ever tried to
proselytize others or impose my beliefs on those of other faiths.''

Mr. Lear, responding that the correspondence had been ''enlightening, but alas,
not encouraging,'' concluded: ''Perhaps we must simply agree to disagree.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan and Rev. Jerry Falwell (page 20)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SAID TO WEIGH OFFER TO RECEIVE HANOI PRISONERS



BYLINE: , Special to the New York Times
By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1228 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 1


The Reagan Administration is nearing a decision to offer asylum to thousands of
Vietnamese prisoners held by Vietnam in ''re-education'' camps, senior
Administration officials said today.

The contemplated American action would be in response to earlier Vietnamese
offers to release the prisoners, many of whom had close ties to the United
States during the Vietnam War, if the United States would agree to resettle
them. The prisoners are believed to number between 6,000 and 15,000.

In the past the Administration reacted skeptically to the proposal by Hanoi. But
at the urging of refugee groups, some members of Congress and some high-ranking
American officials, Washington is said to have decided in principle to test
Vietnam's sincerity and to be forthcoming in seeking the release of the
prisoners.



'No One More Deserving'


''I personally feel that there is almost no one more deserving of admission to
the United States as a refugee than the people who are suffering in prison
because of their past association with us,'' said Paul D. Wolfowitz, Assistant
Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs. ''Securing the release of
these political prisoners is one of the foremost goals of the U.S. refugee
program.''

Officials said in interviews today and earlier this week that details of the new
American approach were being worked out so that they could be discussed by
Secretary of State George P. Shultz when he meets with key Congressional
committees on refugees on Sept. 11.

On Aug. 10, 13 members of Congress, led by Representative Stephen J. Solarz,
Democrat of Brooklyn, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on
Asian affairs, wrote to Mr. Reagan urging that the United States ''seize the
initiative'' and ''send a clear signal to Vietnam that the United States is
genuinely interested in freedom for those political prisoners'' by allocating
10,000 places for them and their families.  ''These political prisoners were
people who worked for U.S. programs in Vietnam,'' the letter said. ''Computer
programmers, drivers, language teachers, officials of the former Republic of
Vietnam, officers of the army, policemen and Catholic, Buddhist and other
clergy. These are people who were left behind in the evacuation when the war
ended or who stayed behind to save their families. In some sense, for those
Vietnamese who have spent the last nine years in Communist prisons, the war has
never ended.''

''We must find room for this small, clearly defined group which has a legitimate
claim to our attention,'' the letter said.



Offer by Foreign Minister

In 1982, Nguyen Cao Thach, Vietnam's Foreign Minister, said his Government would
release all the prisoners if the United States would take them.

The offer was repeated last May by Prime Minister Pham Van Dong, who said in an
interview in Newsweek magazine: ''We are quite prepared to allow all of those
left in the camps to leave tomorrow for the United States, but the U.S.
Government has rejected that suggestion. They prefer to leave these criminals
free in Vietnam but not in the United States.''

The United States actually had not rejected the offer, but officials dealing
with refugee matters had expressed the view publicly and privately that the
Vietnamese were not sincere because they had not allowed the International
Committee of the Red Cross into the camps and had not provided a list of the
prisoners. Some senior officials still doubt the Vietnamese will live up to
their offer, but are willing to test their sincerity in an effort to free the
prisoners.

After the Communist takeover of South Vietnam in 1975, the Vietnamese
authorities set up a network of so- called ''re-education'' prison camps, mostly
in the north, to which thousands of pro-American and other anti-Communist
Vietnamese from the south were sent. At one time as many as 50,000 people were
said to be in the camps, but Vietnamese authorities now say the number is closer
to 10,000, and refugee experts believe the figure is between 6,000 and 15,000.

Conditions Said to Be Grim


By all accounts, conditions for the prisoners are grim. The State Department's
human rights report for this year said that those in the camps ''are regularly
provided food rations below subsistence levels, denied medical care and assigned
to hard labor.''

''Prisoners are punished severely for minor infractions of camp rules, for
example, by several months' solitary confinement and by beatings,'' the report
said. ''These practices result in acute suffering, permanent physical impairment
and sometimes death.'' Information cited in the report was provided by former
inmates who have made their way to the West.

The United States has accepted about 700,000 refugees from Indochina since 1975,
about half of the worldwide total of 1.4 million who have been settled abroad.
It has taken about 50,000 a year in recent years, most of them former ''boat
people'' who had made their way to Thailand and other countries.

In recent months, in the aftermath of Prime Minister Dong's statement, refugee
groups, members of Congress and some high officials in the Administration have
said that the highest priority should now be given to freeing those in the
''re-education'' camps.

U.S. 'Impotence' Criticized


On July 23, Roger P. Winter, director of the United States Committee for
Refugees, wrote to President Reagan urging him ''to break through the impotence
that has characterized U.S actions on this matter.'' In an interview today, Mr.
Winter said he had proposed that the Administration set 10,000 immigration slots
for camp inmates and their families in the fiscal year beginning on Oct. 1. This
would be above the 50,000 already planned for Indochinese refugees.

List of Prisoners Requested


Mr. Wolfowitz of the State Department wrote to Mr. Winter on Aug. 22 that the
United States had always been ready to receive the camp inmates and had asked
the International Committee of the Red Cross to seek a list from the Vietnamese
of the prisoners they held. This was to no avail, he said.

He said that although there was reason to doubt the ''good faith'' of the
Vietnamese, ''I share your view that we should continue to make every effort to
explore the possibility that the offer is genuine, and ideas such as yours are
being given careful consideration as we develop our Fiscal Year 85 refugee
admission proposals.''

''If the Vietnamese authorities would demonstrate a willingness to meet our
reasonable procedural needs, we are confident that the Congress will readily
authorize as many admission numbers as we need,'' Mr. Wolfowitz said.

He expressed hope that the Vietnamese would begin freeing those who would be
eligible for resettlement here, and would allow the Red Cross to have access to
the camp prisoners.

Questions to Be Answered


A senior official said today that among the questions for which answers needed
to be found by Sept. 11, when Mr. Shultz testifies, is whether the United States
should establish a set goal - such as the 10,000 advocated by Mr. Winter and Mr.
Solarz's group - or leave the numbers open. There is some uncertainty on how to
approach the Vietnamese - directly, or through the United Nations High
Commisioner for Refugees or the International Committee of the Red Cross.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW PLAN SEEKS TO SPUR RESCUE OF 'BOAT PEOPLE'

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 651 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Sept. 1


International refugee officials say they have worked out a plan that they hope
will encourage ship captains to rescue ''boat people'' in distress rather than
abandon them to starvation, drowning and pirates.

They said many ships refused to pick up Vietnamese refugees at sea mainly
because the captains, having taken them on board, faced difficulty in finding a
port at which they would be allowed to disembark.

The new plan, reported in interviews in Tokyo last week with officials assigned
to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, involves the cooperation
of a number of seafaring countries. Each country would agree to take in a
pre-established quota of refugees regardless of how many are rescued at sea by
ships sailing under its flag.

Twenty countries have been asked to take part and 11 have agreed, the officials
said. They declined to identify those that have agreed and said the plan would
go into effect when ''several'' others confirmed their acceptance. But they said
the United States planned to take part and Japan was giving the plan
consideration.

The other countries approached by the United Nations High Commissioner's office
were listed as Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Britain,
West Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Sweden, Spain and Switzerland.

Fewer Being Rescued at Sea


United Nations refugee officials said the plan grew out of concern over a recent
steep drop in the proportion of boat people rescued by passing ships.

''The dramatic drop in percentage of persons rescued indicates that, very
probably, large numbers of refugees are perishing at sea,'' a recent High
Commission statement said.

In one recently reported tragedy, 68 refugees from southern Vietnam died of
hunger and cold during 32 days adrift in the South China Sea. The 16 survivors
who arrived in the Philippines in early July said 40 ships had ignored their
pleas for help.

Aid officials said they hoped individual captains would be more likely to rescue
boat people if their countries agreed to the new plan.

Now, countries whose flag ships rescue boat refugees must generally pledge to
resettle them before they are allowed to disembark in first- asylum countries in
East and Southeast Asia. High Commissioner officials say some captains are under
pressure from their governments not to add to the refugee resettlement burden.

'More Equitable Share of Burden'


The United Nations officials said the plan would also allow each resettlement
country to know in advance how many refugees it would resettle over a certain
period rather than, as now, deal with unpredictable peaks when ships pick up
boat refugees.

''The scheme would encourage more rescue at sea and at the same time would
create a more equitable share of burden among resettlement countries,'' Iqbal
Alimohamed, the United Nations High Commissioner's representative in Tokyo, said
in an interview.  The High Commission is asking participating countries to
pledge a total of 4,000 resettlement places for the first year of operation, a
figure based on past arrival and rescue rates for boat people.

Resettlement quotas for individual countries have been proposed in relation to
the number of refugees taken by each country since the exodus from Vietnam by
sea began in 1975. Any refugees rescued by a country's flag ships above that
quota would be resettled by other participating countries.

Pirate Attacks Are More Savage

More than 540,000 Vietnamese have landed safely in first-asylum countries since
the Communist takeover in their homeland in 1975. The boat exodus has declined
considerably in the last three years, however, and some aid officials believe
tens of thousands of refugees have either perished in rough waters or been
killed by pirates in the South China Sea and the Gulf of Siam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

130,000 REFUGEES IN THAILAND WAIT TO GO ABROAD

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 925 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 1


More than 130,000 Indochinese refugees are in Thailand awaiting resettlement
abroad, nearly 10 years after the Communist takeover of Saigon and five years
after the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia.

The Thai Government is beginning to fear that a substantial number of these
people will never find new homes, but will instead become permanently displaced
persons, according to Thailand's national security chief.

The official, Prasong Songsiri, Secretary General of Thailand's Office of the
National Security Council, monitors the country's borders and makes
recommendations to the Government in matters of defense, narcotics control and
refugee affairs. He said in an interview Wednesday that the problem would be
raised next week with Poul Hartling, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. Mr. Hartling is due to visit Bangkok as part of a Southeast Asian
tour.

This week, Mr. Prasong said, a census was begun in one of the largest and best
known of the refugee camps in Thailand, Khao I Dang, where Cambodians are
housed, to determine how many of them are likely to be accepted by third
countries. He said that about 40,000 Cambodians remained in Khao I Dang, and
that as many as 10,000 of these might never find recipient countries.

Thais Firm About Their Role


Thailand, citing its own problems of development as well as an agreement
pledging it to serve only as a country of first refuge, has said repeatedly that
it will not resettle any of the Indochinese here. Mr. Prasong reiterated that
position Wednesday.

The United States is taking about 3,000 refugees a month from Thai camps.
Americans have resettled about half of the 600,000 refugees to enter Thailand
since 1975. The others have gone to Australia, which has an active resettlement
program, and France, Canada and several other nations.

In addition to the refugees at Khao I Dang, 240,000 Cambodians, including
anti-Government rebels, live in camps and other settlements within Cambodia near
the Thai border and cross into Thailand from time to time in search of medical
or other aid. Three major rebel groups in the area are loosely allied as a
coalition that seeks to overthrow the Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom
Penh led by Heng Samrin. Thailand's overt and tacit aid to these rebels is a
source of friction between the Vietnamese and Thais.

50,000 Hmong in Camps


Mr. Prasong said that he would like to clear the Khao I Dang camp of refugees
who could be moved to third countries or intermediate reception centers so that
the camp could become a permanent medical or training center for the Cambodians
on the border. He denied he had decided to close the camp altogether. There have
been reports that the Thai Army would like to do that, forcing the remaining
Cambodians back over the border and reducing the risk of an accidental Thai
confrontation with any of the 180,000 Vietnamese troops in Cambodia.

According to figures supplied by refugee officials, there were also, at the end
of July, more than 50,000 Hmong, from the Laotian highlands, in camps along the
Laotian border, along with about 25,000 lowland Laotians. The Hmong, who
continue to leave Laos for reasons that the Thai Government is trying to
determine by interviewing new arrivals, have had great difficulties in adjusting
to life in the United States and other industrialized countries.

To the west, about 10,000 Burmese Karens crossed into Thailand this year to
escape a Burmese Army drive to put down a secessionist movement. Many of these
people are now returning slowly to Burma, Mr. Prasong said. But there has been
concern voiced in Thailand that if the Burmese Army achieved lasting success in
its counteroffensive in the remote region, the Karen refugee problem could
become a permanent one, too.

In the south, more than 4,000 Vietnamese are awaiting resettlement. Most of
these are so-called boat people who braved piracy in the Gulf of Siam to reach
Thailand.

Most Pirates Are Fishermen


It has been these attacks by pirates, most of whom are acknowledged here to be
Thai fishermen, that has provoked sharp international criticism of Thailand. Mr.
Hartling has himself been among the most outspoken critics, charging in a letter
to the Thai Government and in public statements over the last six months that
the attacks on the Vietnamese, while smaller in number, have become increasingly
brutal.

The issue is a very sensitive one in Thailand, where it is felt that all the
work the country has done on other refugee fronts is forgotten abroad. Thai
officials ask, as Mr. Prasong did again in the interview, why the United Nations
has not done more to involve other countries in the area, including Vietnam, in
finding a way to stop the flow of boat people by offering them alternative and
legal means of exit.

Mr. Prasong, a retired air force squadron leader who has been security chief for
four years, said today that the United Nations had provided the Thais with few
resources. Two new boats recently presented to the Government by the world
organization are too small to patrol the high seas, Mr. Prasong said. ''With
these boats we can't even go as far as our oil rigs,'' he said.

Refugee officials say privately that the task is complicated by traditional Thai
hostility to the Vietnamese and the consequent reluctance of local people to
turn in culprits, and by the more pressing security concerns in southern
Thailand, where last week nine soldiers died fighting a persistent Communist
insurrection.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Paul Hartling

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 632 words


SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 2, 1984 Asylum for Vietnamese prisoners is being considered by
the Reagan Administration and a decision was reported near, Administration
officials said. From 6,000 to 15,000 prisoners are believed to be held by
Vietnam in ''re-education'' camps. The contemplated American action would be in
reponse to earlier Vietnamese offers to release the prisoners if the United
would agree to resettle them. (Page 1, Column 3.)

Konstantin U. Chernenko was quoted as saying that an agreement with the United
States on banning weapons in outer space would facilitate discussions on other
disarmament issues. Responding to questions from Pravda, the Communist Party
newspaper, the Soviet leader repeated the Soviet position that the United States
was scuttling the possibility of space- weapons talks with its insistence on
raising questions about stalled nuclear-weapons negotiations. (1:4.)

Libya has sent troops to Nicaragua to help the Sandinista Government to fight
the United States ''on its own ground'' Col. Muammar el Qaddafi, the Libyan
leader, said. Diplomats in Tripoli said they believed that Colonel Qaddafi's had
acknowledged for the first time that he had sent military personnel to
Nicaragua. (1:5.) National

A solar-power experiment in space

 was carried out by the crew of the space shuttle Discovery in the first test of
electricity generating systems that are to be erected on future space stations.
The crew also successfully released the third and last communications satellite
from Discovery's cargo bay, took the kinks out of a balky drug-processing
machine and had a telephone conversation with President Reagan. (1:6.)

More regulation of day-care centers

 along with higher standards of the care they provide for children are being
called for by some social workers and state officials. Their concern has
increased amid the explosive growth in the demand for day-care centers and
widely publicized reports of sexual abuse of children at some centers. The
social workers and officials believe that the Federal Government should
intervene, setting nationwide uniform standards. (1:1.)

The mixing of politics and religion, a historic controversy that had lain
dormant for many years, has become a prime issue in the Presidential campaign.
Since priests, nuns, ministers and rabbis marched in Selma, Ala., in 1965
supporting a national voting rights act, the change in both religious and
political institutions has been profound. (1:1.) Metropolitan

Drunken pleasure boat operators

 have been more numerous this summer on the waterways of New York, New Jersey
and Connecticut than ever before, according to marina operators, boaters, and
people who live along the waterways. (1:1.)

Reopening of at least 103 schools this week in New Jersey will be delayed
because they have failed to complete the removal of cancer-causing asbestos
insulation during the summer, according to revised figures released by state
education officials. (45:1.)

EDITORS' NOTE


Under this heading, The Times amplifies articles or rectifies what the editors
consider significant lapses of fairness, balance or perspective.



A letter to the editor from Alger Hiss, appearing today in The Times Book
Review, disputes statements that appeared this summer in an article and two book
reviews about how he might have met Whittaker Chambers. To support his position,
Mr. Hiss says that Hilton Kramer, a former art critic of The Times, verified
part of his account. Mr. Kramer denies this. In this case, he should have been
consulted on his role before the letter was published; he was not. An
explanatory article, including comment from Mr. Kramer, appears in this section,
on page 42.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COLLEGE ENROLLMENT LINKED TO VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 652 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 1


Men who came of age in the Vietnam War accumulated more college education than
those maturing either before or since, a Government study has found. The
researcher who prepared the study said the change was probably caused by a
combination of some men's avoiding the draft and others' using the G.I. Bill.

The percentage of young men attending college climbed rapidly from 1966 through
1972 and then began declining, the Census Bureau reported, while attendance by
women continued to climb, although more gradually.

''College attendance to maintain a draft deferment most likely caused an
increase in college enrollment rates among young men in the 1960's, and the
elimination of the draft in the early 1970's probably had some negative impact
on enrollment rates in succeeding years,'' said Rosalind R. Bruno of the Census
Bureau in her report, ''Educational Attainment in the United States.''

The bureau reported that the college enrollment rate for civilian men 18 to 24
years old rose to 36 percent in 1969 from 24 percent in 1960 and then dropped to
27 percent in the mid-1970's, as the draft was dropped. The last draftee was
inducted into the armed forces in June 1973.

Benefits Tied to Attendance


In addition to students seeking draft deferments, the report said, ''Veterans
with G.I. Bill benefits attended college in the mid-1970's, but as these
benefits expired, attendance declined.

''The result appears to have been that men eligible for the draft during the
Vietnam era received more education than they would have under normal
circumstances. On the one hand, some men had additional incentive to remain in
school to maintain their draft deferments, while on the other hand, some
received additional years of education because of the G.I. Bill.''

The report compared rates of college attendance for men 25 to 29 years old to
illustrate the study.

In 1966, of men in that age group, 30.1 percent had completed at least one year
of college. By 1971 some 37.9 percent had finished one year and in 1976 more
than half, 50.1 percent, had at least one year of college behind them.

But by 1981 the share of men in that group with a year or more of college fell
to 45.7 percent.

''The higher rate of college attendance by young men during the late 1960's and
early 1970's led to the higher attainment levels achieved by men born from 1947
to 1951,'' the report said.

While the men born in 1952 and thereafter may eventually catch up, the report
said, it said there was no evidence that they will match the preceding group.

Beginning of Baby Boom


In addition to being affected by Vietnam, the group born from 1947 to 1951
represented the beginning of the post- World War II baby boom.

Their parents were more affluent than the parents of earlier classes of
students, the report said, adding, ''They were part of a group so much larger
than that preceding them and were subject to increased competition, which may
have resulted in higher aspirations.''

A commonly offered explanation for the subsequent decline in college enrollment
rates has been the decline in the economic attractiveness of a college degree
caused by the glut of graduates.

But the decline in male enrollment has not been matched by that of women, whose
college enrollment has been increasing steadily.

Comparing the same 25-to-29 age group, the share of women with one or more years
of college shows a gradual increase through all four years checked.

Women 25 to 29 years old with at least one year of college totaled 22.7 percent
in 1966, 29.4 percent in 1971, 38.4 percent in 1976 and 40.9 percent in 1981.

Overall American education levels have risen significantly over the last three
decades, the report found, and more than 70 percent of Americans over the age of
25 had high school diplomas as of March, 1981. That is up from 56 percent in
1971 and only 34 percent in 1950.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BRAIN ILLNESSES ARE COMMON AT PLANT, AN EXPERT TESTIFIES

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 30, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 838 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTON, W. Va., Aug. 30


The expert witness, a neuropsychologist, pointed to a blackboard bearing a
geometric pattern that he said he used to test patients. He also monitors his
own well-being with it, he said with a faint smile.

The touch of mild levity from an expert witness spread faint smiles among
watchers in the normally somber Federal courtroom here, including Federal
District Judge John T. Copenhaver Jr.

But the light touch was in sharp contrast to what the expert, David G. Garron,
was saying in court and to the grim import of other testimony over the last two
months.

Mr. Garron, a professor at the Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in
Chicago, was the latest witness to testify in a case in which seven retired
workers are suing the Monsanto Company for maladies they contend have resulted
from chemicals they handled at Monsanto's plant in the nearby town of Nitro. The
company contends that it maintained a safe workplace.

Test Case for Other Suits


Each of the seven retired workers is demanding damages of $4.5 million in what
is regarded as a test case representing issues involved in similar suits filed
by about 170 other current and former workers.  Mr. Garron said he had examined
60 of the suing workers and had found that 72 percent suffered some abnormal
brain function. He said a normal incidence would be 5 to 10 percent.

''If I were walking down the street and found 15 percent of the people I met
showed these abnormalities, I would not think I was walking in a very healthy
neighborhood,'' he said.

Although several chemicals are involved in the case, the principal focus of the
complaints is dioxin, described as the most toxic poison ever produced by man.
It is a contaminant often appearing in a herbicide named 2,4,5-T, which Monsanto
produced at its Nitro plant from 1948 to 1969.

Ingredient in Agent Orange


The herbicide was an ingredient in Agent Orange, the defoliant named in a suit
against several chemical companies, including Monsanto, by a group of Vietnam
veterans who charge that it was responsible for a variety of problems, including
birth defects in their children.

The seven plaintiffs here, all longtime employees of Monsanto, have complained
in testimony of a variety of maladies for which they blame exposure to chemicals
at the Nitro plant. The complaints in the suits include claims of suffering from
heart, liver, kidney and bladder problems, nervous disorders, pains in the
joints, numbness in extremities, sexual dysfunction and chloracne, a skin
condition marked by clusters of pustules.

To win their case, they must prove they are suffering from the purported
maladies, that the maladies are a result of exposure to chemicals at the plant,
that Monsanto knew they were hazardous and that it willfully exposed its workers
to them without warning and without providing adequate safeguards.

Monsanto has acknowledged that exposure to dioxins can cause chloracne, but it
contends the condition is temporary. It also contends that it has maintained
adequate safeguards but that workers have often ignored safety guidelines.
Monsanto has taken the position that the health problems cited by the seven
former workers, who range in age from the mid-50's to the late 60's, are a
result of the normal aging process and of habits such as drinking alcoholic
beverages and smoking.

Experts to the Stand


After more than two months, the trial is approaching its midpoint and nearing
the end of a pivotal stage: the testimony of expert witnesses.

Mr. Garron was preceded on the stand by another neuropsychologist, Robert S.
Wilson, who said he had found 75 percent of 58 Nitro litigants suffering from
brain impairment ranging from attention and memory problems to problems of
perception, depression and anxiety.

A neurologist, Christopher Goetz, testified that 40 percent of 45 Nitro workers
examined suffered from tremors when they tried to perform a task.

When the experts gave general testimony applying to others besides the seven
plaintiffs, however, the Federal jury was excused. Judge Copenhaver has said he
will decide later whether the jury should hear it.

Medical Records and Memos


The trial began in June with Stuart Calwell, an attorney for the plaintiffs,
citing medical records including those of one worker who had been in a hospital
120 times. He also reviewed documents including company memorandums that he said
demonstrated the company's knowledge of health risks its workers faced.

He later put the workers on the stand to describe their sufferings and other
witnesses to testify on conditions. A company hygienist contested the workers'
testimony.

In opening remarks for the company, Charles Love, one of its attorneys, told the
jury of four studies that he said supported Monsanto's position.

The plaintiffs are expected to take another month to complete their case, after
which the defense will begin.

Asked how he would conduct that, Mr. Love replied, ''With a lot of experts.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PERUVIAN MILITARY FIGHTS TERRORISTS WITH TERROR

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 892 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru


In its stepped-up campaign to wipe out Peru's leftist guerrillas, the military
has been killing Indian peasants whose ties, if any, to the Maoist Shining Path
movement have not been clearly established. Frequent reports of summary
executions are officially denied, but the fresh graves are becoming harder to
explain in an area where there has been no recent combat. Last week, two mass
graves, one with 50 bodies and another with 15, were discovered near the Indian
town of Huanta.

The battle has also taken a toll in the security forces. Last week, Gen. Adrian
Huaman, the top commander in the main guerrilla zone in southeastern Peru, was
dismissed two days after he blamed the spread of subversion on Government
neglect and corruption. Earlier, Interior Minister Luis Percovich said the
guerrilla war was responsible for what he described as the ''brutalization'' of
the police. He said that 5,218 policemen, about 8 percent of the force, were
being prosecuted on charges that included robbery and murder.

Talk of fighting terrorism with terror has intensified. Showing a videotape of
mangled peasant bodies, a police chief at the Andean town of Ayacucho said:
''The terrorists have the support of 80 percent of the Ayacucho people. What we
need here is the Argentine solution.'' His view, reportedly shared by a number
of senior military officers, was an allusion to the military campaign in
Argentina in which thousands of armed guerrillas, unarmed sympathizers and
peaceful opponents of the Government were killed.

Intelligence sources said dozens of Peruvian officers had gone to Argentina
before the military there relinquished power in December for month- long courses
in interrogation and intelligence. Argentine counterinsurgency specialists also
visited Peru.

Two years ago, when the Shining Path violence started to grow, the civilian
Government decided not to launch an all-out drive against the guerrillas,
instead dispatching police units backed by small detachments of troops.
President Fernando Belaunde Terry, suspicious of the officers who had overthrown
him in 1968, argued that a full- scale campaign would cost civilian lives,
jeopardize support for his elected Government and undermine the military's newly
acquired political neutrality. He has since been widely criticized for his
reluctance. ''We were afraid to create another repression like Argentina,'' said
Senate leader Manuel Ulloa, who was Prime Minister at the time, ''or to have a
Central American situation with the country polarized.''

Echoes of GuatemalaAt first, some military officers also resisted taking
responsibility for a ''dirty war,'' a senior officer said. They remembered
Peru's 1965 guerrilla war, when some officers disapproved of the rebels' methods
but agreed with their complaints of social injustice. As Shining Path violence
overwhelmed the police forces last year, however, the military's more forceful
counterstrategy took shape. Since President Belaunde put the army in control of
13 provincial emergency zones in southeastern Peru in July, 7,000 troops have
been stationed in at least eight new military camps. A counterintelligence
expert said they studied the lessons of Vietnam, Colombia and Central America.
But critics also see similarities with Guatemala. There, as in Peru, leftist
guerrillas recruited desperately poor highland Indians who have kept their own
culture and language and resent white colonizers who have long discriminated
against them.

In both countries, brutality of the security forces has been blamed for helping
to swell guerrilla ranks.

In Peru, as in Guatemala, the Government formed peasant militias. The intention
was to crack through cultural secrecy and break up the solidarity of tightly
knit communities, forcing Indian peasants to choose between the guerrillas and
the Government, a counterinsurgency expert said. As in Guatemala, terror assumed
a central role. The impact of disappearances and dead bodies in the fields, he
added, ''has a strong multiplying effect.''

Tracking the campaign has become increasingly difficult. The Maoist guerrillas
disdain the press and dismiss other Latin American insurgents as ''bourgeois
revisionists.'' The military has controlled information tightly, denying reports
of army killings and barring reporters from some areas. When foreign reporters
visited Ayacucho recently, military officers seized documents from one
correspondent and questioned others for three hours. A Huanta journalist, Jaime
Ayala, has not been seen since he entered the marine camp at Huanta on Aug. 2 to
inquire about a massacre. The marines have denied they are holding him.

''Disinformation'' is part of the military's strategy, intelligence sources
said, but the Peruvian press has begun to do its own digging. Last week, the
magazine Caretas, usually well-disposed toward the Government, said marines, not
guerrillas, killed six members of an evangelist church on Aug. l. Church leaders
in a formal deposition said the marines had pulled the men out of the service
and ordered the rest of the congregation to sing. According to witnesses, the
marines claimed to have found evidence that the church harbored terrorists. The
''evidence,'' witnesses told reporters, was a deposit of wooden rifles and
masks, used by schoolchildren in the Independence Day parade.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Peruvian troops searching a civilian

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JAPAN SMOOTHS OVER ITS IMPERIAL PAST

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 975 words

DATELINE: TOKYO


''We are doing some serious soul- searching,'' Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone
said the other day. Mr. Nakasone, who was speaking to South Korean journalists,
referred to what he described as ''ravages'' inflicted by Japan during its
colonial occupation of Korea from 1910 to 1945. Japanese, he said, ''should
deeply repent our past behavior.''

The words were uncommonly strong, and their timing reflected the importance
attached by Japan to wiping out - or so it hopes - a legacy of guilt. President
Chun Doo Hwan arrives this week for the first official visit by a South Korean
leader to this country. Mr. Chun and Mr. Nakasone no doubt will devote much time
to familar problems - trade imbalances, foreign debts, technology transfers,
tensions on the Korean Peninsula. But few people will be paying strict attention
to these earnest subjects. The real point is that Mr. Chun will be here at all.

For weeks the Japanese Foreign Ministry has been promoting the trip with a flow
of interviews and statements that rival, and perhaps surpass, the buildup for
President Reagan's visit last fall. The Tokyo police have been on full alert. In
both Japan and South Korea, the Chun journey is seen as a historic episode, an
opportunity, at last, to put the colonial era behind.

The countries have had formal relations for 19 years but effects of the brutal
Japanese occupation persist, in terms of lingering suspicions and hard-to-shake
prejudices on both sides of the Sea of Japan (which the Koreans call the East
Sea). Last week, on the 74th anniversary of the start of Japan's occupation of
Korea, students stoned the Japanese Embassy's information center in Seoul and
shouted ''Stop sell-out diplomacy'' in protest against Mr. Chun's trip. The
protest also seemed directed against Mr. Chun. Leaflets demanded that Japan stop
supporting his dictatorship.

Japan has yet to shake fully the postwar guilt feelings that affects its ties
not only with South Korea but also with the rest of the far-flung Greater East
Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere it controlled in the 1930's.

On most bread-and-butter issues these ties could not be better. When Mr.
Nakasone traveled to Peking last March, the Chinese went all out with a 19-gun
salute, the first for any visiting national leader in two decades. In January
1983, shortly after he took office, the Japanese Prime Minister conspicuously
made South Korea his first foreign trip, rather than following the Tokyo custom
of making Washington No. 1. Four months later Mr. Nakasone was off to Southeast
Asia, where for the most part he was received warmly in such former
Japanese-occupied lands as Indonesia and the Philippines.

Diplomacy Replaces ConquestJapan has succeeded through diplomacy in gaining the
stable markets and accessible sources of raw material that it could not hold
militarily. As before, it now taps the natural resources of those countries -
paying handsomely, to be sure, but making its suppliers willing consumers for
its products, a fact apparent from the ubiquitous billboards throughout Asia
advertising Sony, Fuji, Casio, Toyota and others.

But Japan still makes other Asians nervous, and not only because of its economic
power. Their edginess has not been calmed by Mr. Nakasone's calls for a stronger
Japanese military. Periodic controversies - such as the one that arose in 1982
over changes in Japanese textbooks that seemed aimed at casting wartime
brutalities in a less glaring light - demonstrate the Asian sensitivity and
capacity for anxiety.

Hu Yaobang, the Chinese Communist Party leader, said on a visit to Tokyo last
November that he was concerned that Japan might seek to become a ''military
superpower.'' After Mr. Nakasone left the Philippines in May 1983, a columnist
in Manila warned of Japan's ''capability for conquest.'' The mood is not
noticeably improved by the discrimination sometimes directed at other Asians in
Japan, or by the habit of Japanese businessmen to regard Manila, Taiwan and
Seoul as little more than stops on highly popular packaged ''sex tours.'' The
Tokyo Government recognizes these apprehensions and has tried hard to overcome
them. At the same time, Japanese and Western diplomats suspect that other Asian
countries are not above playing on Japan's war-inspired guilt complexes to
extract a little more aid. In a period of fiscal austerity, the Government has
singled out foreign economic aid as the one area other than defense spending
that will escape severe budget cuts. When Mr. Nakasone went to South Korea and
China, he bore considerable gifts in the form of direct assistance and loans. He
also has gone out of his way to try to stifle fears - asserting, for example, in
a speech to students at Peking University that ''I can state without any
hesitation that Japan will never allow the revival of militarism.''

Two important Asian countries remain beyond the range of Japanese diplomacy,
Vietnam and North Korea. Vietnamese hostility is not expected to subside for a
while. North Korea presents a delicate problem because the Japanese Foreign
Ministry wants to move toward formal relations but does not wish to jeopardize
the good will between Tokyo and Seoul.

The big question regarding this week's visit by the South Korean leader is
whether Emperor Hirohito will also express regrets, or whether Mr.  Nakasone
took care of that for him by deploring Japanese ''ravages.'' South Korea prefers
a strong imperial statement, but ardently nationalist Japanese would regard that
as going too far. They are not persuaded that Japan has much to apologize for in
Asia, and besides, they think that after four decades it is time to stop re-
examining old wounds and old guilts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of South Korean-built tires for export to Japan; graph

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
TELLING IT LIKE IT WAS

BYLINE: ByGeorge Vecsey

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1173 words


When the chef leaves a restaurant, the sauce is never quite the same. They might
as well change the sign outside the establishment called Monday Night Football;
Howard Cosell is hanging up his fluffy white cap and taking Monday nights off.

Before him, there was football. After him, there will be football. But while he
was slinging around adverbs and adjectives like a chef peppering the soup (and
salting it, and even vinegaring it with verbs no dictionary ever contained), the
joint throbbed the way no live sports show has ever throbbed.

From the time ABC opened the doors on Sept. 21, 1970, Monday Night Football was
as hot as a fashionable restaurant. People changed their lives so they could
catch the game, at home or in a bar, and celebrities schemed to be glimpsed
visiting the broadcasting booth.

The show continues, with Dallas at the Los Angeles Rams tomorrow night, but for
Howard Cosell it is over. At the age of 64, he is cutting back his schedule, to
devote more time to his family and his pet projects. It is a major step in the
self-retirement of a phenomenon in televised sports, and attention must be paid.



A Brooklyn-born lawyer who switched into broadcasting in his 30's, Cosell had
none of the inhibitions of sports announcers whose minds have been stunted by
small- town station managers and network gnomes. He was obviously not a jock. He
was already an adult, creating his brash public persona on the air like Holly
Golightly inventing herself after fleeing the Ozarks to seek Breakfast at
Tiffany's.

Everyone has a personal The First Time I Heard Howard memory. This set of ears
was first pierced in 1962, after yet another loss, when the Mets' clubhouse
radio was blaring the postgame show, featuring somebody named Cosell haranguing
Ralph (Big No. 13) Branca about the inadequacies, character flaws and dugout
sleeping habits of the manager, Charles Dillon Stengel. These ears thought: How
dare he? Yet he dared. He dared.

His attacks on a giant like Stengel may have been a way of gaining attention; or
maybe he was more right than one gives him credit for. Either way, he really did
have opinions, and he really knew some things, and despite that, he became a
star with a network.

He told the world that Muhammad Ali had been unjustly deprived of his title for
resisting the draft during the Vietnam War. He taught sports journalism at Yale
University and he lectured viewers and members of Congress about the inequity of
franchise shifts and tax-supported stadiums. After 20 years of announcing pro
boxing, he walked away from it two years ago during a flurry of gruesome
matches, prompting some to accuse him of wanting it both ways: huckster and
critic. Yet it is also possible that he had seen the light about an ugly
business.

Overly sensitive to criticism, Cosell was aware enough of issues and far enough
ahead of his industry to trumpet his reputation for ''telling it like it is'' -
even when he was busy selling beer and cars and football and boxing.

''The paradox about Howard is that he's the guy who stands outside the tent at
the carnival, shouting: 'Step right in and look at the naked girls,' '' says
Robert Lipsyte, the former newspaper columnist, now the sports essayist on the
CBS Sunday Morning show.

''But when you get inside, Howard's in there, too,'' Lipsyte continues. ''He's
saying, 'Hey, you should be ashamed to be in here.' If he hadn't been outside
the tent, Howard wouldn't be rich and famous. But his being inside the tent was
very important, too.''



In 1970, Cosell's network matched him with professional football: both
aggressive, both at their peaks. Cosell displayed skills nobody had ever
imagined: he could have private lunches with a defensive coordinator on one
team, a wide receiver on the other team, the mayor of this fair city, the talent
scout for the cheerleaders and several players' agents - all in one afternoon,
it seemed - and live to tell the tale on Monday night.

He could infuriate entire metropolitan regions by suggesting that a halfback was
having an off night; he could sound like the prophet Jeremiah in denouncing a
low- scoring game involving a pair of dreadful teams; he could rage ''there is
no place in organized sport'' for a rough tackle. Yet he somehow managed to
never get himself in long-range trouble with the nabobs of pro football and the
network. This is no small gift.

He was voted the most popular announcer in America and the most unpopular
announcer in America in the same poll. People paid money at bars to throw bricks
through television sets. People insisted they were turning down the sound on the
television and listening to the radio broadcast. The drunks at Monday night
games howled and gestured beneath the booth.

In the booth, his colleagues reeled. Keith Jackson was gone in a year. Frank
Gifford sounded defensive. Don Meredith sang to himself. Fran Tarkenton
scrambled. O. J. Simpson blustered. And Alex Karras was never the same after
Cosell turned to him and said, ''We're missing Rhoda's wedding.''

''Rhoda'' was a show on another network, which Cosell couldn't watch because of
''a perfectly awful Atlanta-Pittsburgh game.'' Valerie Harper, the actress who
portrayed Rhoda, sent him a telegram after that one.

In the last few years the show began to fizzle because Cosell was bored, and so
was the public. Everybody was wise to the fact that the ball is only in play for
something like 12 minutes out of three-plus hours, and if you've seen one
football player saying ''Hi, Mom,'' you've seen 'em all.

During a telephone conversation the other day, Howard Cosell said: ''I am in my
mid-60's. My father died in Charlotte Memorial Hospital in North Carolina, away
from his family. That is not going to happen to me. My beloved wife, Emmy, and I
have decided that whichever of us goes first, we are going to be together. I
want to be with my two daughters and my grandchildren. I am sick of travel. My
wife was not with me at the Olympics. Enough.''

He added: ''The league faces real troubles now - and baseball has come way back
- but it's a great league, with great people in it. As I leave the show, I think
about the great cities like Pittsburgh and Baltimore, models of urban renewal,
something much more important than mere sports. I think about the excellence of
the Steelers in the '70's, the incredible record of the Raiders, 22-2-1 on
'Monday Night Football'. Incredible. I think of the greatest offensive player
during the series, clearly, O. J. Simpson. I think of the greatest defensive
player, who forced fumbles, blocked kicks, the greatest linebacker I ever saw,
of course, Ted Hendricks. Now he's retired.''

Howard Cosell is not yet retired. His value to his network is in his SportsBeat
show and his crisp radio book reviews - and his ability to ask the right
questions under pressure, as he showed once again during the Summer Games. But
he's staying home on Monday nights now. They might as well change the sign where
he used to work.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Howard Cosell

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A PRESIDENT UNSUITED FOR POLITICS

BYLINE: By Robert S. McElvaine; Robert S. McElvaine, a professor of history at
Millsaps College in Jackson, Miss., is the author of ''The Great Depression:
America, 1929-1941.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 4, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1173 words


AN UNCOMMON MAN The Triumph of Herbert Hoover.  By Richard Norton Smith.
Illustrated. 488 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $22.95.

HERBERT HOOVER has long been a paradox.  His efforts in providing relief helped
save millions in Europe from starvation during and after World War I and made
him an international hero. Hooverstrassen and their equivalents in other
languages were dedicated in many nations. Yet little more than a decade later,
many of his own countrymen were calling the Great Engineer a selfish, heartless
brute who would provide Federal aid for banks but not for hungry Americans. By
then the most common derivative of his name was ''Hooverville.''

Before 1929, Hoover's career could have been the script for a Hollywood version
of the American Dream - born into a hardworking Quaker family in Iowa, orphaned
before he was 10, sent west to live with relatives in Oregon, admitted to the
first class of the new Stanford University (mainly because of its need for
students), rising quickly from mine worker to engineer-entrepreneur, journeying
to exotic mining frontiers around the globe, worth $4 million by 40, moving into
humanitarian efforts during the World War, becoming the most dynamic figure in
the 1920's Washington of Harding and Coolidge and elected President at 54.

Then, suddenly, Hoover's reputation crashed almost as completely as the stock
market. By 1932, comedians were telling the story of Hoover's asking the
Treasury Secretary, Andrew Mellon, for a nickel with which to call a friend. In
the punch line, Mellon replies, ''Here, take a dime and call all your friends.''

Nor did Hoover's troubles end with his humiliation at the polls. In the
subsequent half-century, he became the ''bloody shirt'' Democrats quadrennially
waved before voters. Franklin Roosevelt's Interior Secretary, Harold Ickes,
rechristened the dam that was to have carried Hoover's name ''Boulder Dam'' (an
injustice corrected in 1947). Washington's first airfield, named for Hoover,
became National Airport during the New Deal. (Who, after all, would not fear a
crash at an airport named Hoover?) As late as 1982, the Speaker of the House,
Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., castigated President Reagan as ''Hoover with a smile.''

Given the emotion surrounding the man usually blamed for the Great Depression,
it is understandable that objective biographies of him were not forthcoming
during his lifetime. The opening of the Hoover papers in the 1960's allowed more
penetrating studies of the man who referred to himself as a ''political leper.''
Among the fruits have been David Burner's excellent ''Herbert Hoover: A Public
Life'' (1978), Gary Dean Best's ''Herbert Hoover: The Postpresidential Years''
(1983) and the first installment of George H. Nash's multivolume biography,
''The Life of Herbert Hoover: The Engineer, 1874-1914'' (1983). In this crowded
field, Richard Norton Smith (the author of ''Thomas E. Dewey and His Times'')
has sought a niche. His original intention was to concentrate on the years after
Hoover's defeat. To do this, however, he found it necessary to explore Hoover's
earlier years of triumph. The result is a complete biography but one weighted
toward the period of exile following F.D.R.'s inauguration.

Some readers may feel about ''An Uncommon Man'' the way a girl in a story told
by Hoover did about a book on pelicans. She wrote to the author, ''This is
indeed a very interesting thing. It contains more about pelicans than I really
need to know.'' We can learn a great deal from the life of Herbert Hoover, and
Mr. Smith provides an interesting version of it, but he goes into too much
repetitive detail on the proposals Hoover made in his last 20 years. One must
hasten to add that ''An Uncommon Man'' is an uncommonly objective biography. Mr.
Smith obviously feels sympathy for his subject, but he does not pull punches. He
points out the reasons for Hoover's failure and for his transformation into a
rigid, deeply suspicious conservative in his later years. Hoover was, Mr. Smith
neatly says, ''emotive as a slide rule and temperamentally unsuited for
politics.''

Hoover's fundamental flaw was also his greatest virtue - his consistency. He was
a man of principle, but his inflexibility proved his undoing in the face of
economic collapse. The beliefs of Hoover and Roosevelt were not as opposed as is
generally believed. The critical difference was that Hoover was unbending, while
F.D.R. was pragmatic. In a conversation with a friend during the interregnum,
Roosevelt summarized his approach: ''Save the people and the nation and, if we
have to change our minds twice every day to accomplish that end, we should do
it.'' Such an attitude was certain to induce apoplexy in Hoover. ''There are
some principles that cannot be compromised,'' the former President remarked in
1936. ''Either we shall have a society based upon ordered liberty and the
initiative of the individual, or we shall have a planned society that means
dictation no matter what you call it. . . . There is no half-way ground. They
cannot be mixed.''

Hoover was wrong. It is odd that a man who had considered himself a progressive
could not bring himself to accept the possibility of a mixed economy, but he
never did. In his declining years, as he mixed dry martinis and dry humor,
Hoover stuck to his views and worried about ''creeping socialism.'' He stayed
the course.

Mr. Smith brings out many aspects of the much maligned President that will
surprise readers brought up on Democratic stereotypes of Hoover. He was the
first President since Theodore Roosevelt to invite a black dinner guest to the
White House; he said that the use of atomic bombs against Japan ''revolts my
soul''; he played a key role in launching both Unicef and CARE; he opposed
United States involvement in Korea and Vietnam; and despite his staunch
anti-Communism, late in life he refused to endorse the John Birch Society. No
man who proposed to reform baseball rules to allow four strikes can fairly be
called a conservative.

On the negative side, Hoover was quick to buy the argument that Hitler should be
unleashed on Stalin while the West watched. He wanted to pursue appeasement far
beyond Munich. He found it disturbingly easy to get along with such fascists as
Argentina's Juan Peron. He played an important part in launching the political
career of Richard Nixon. A friend accurately pointed out some of Hoover's
shortcomings in 1932: ''The man's will-to-power is almost a mania. . . . He is a
big man but he cannot bear rivalry of any sort.''

''An Uncommon Man'' gives us more insight into the character of Herbert Hoover
than any previous biography has, but it still cannot get far beneath the surface
of a complex, introverted man. The Lou Henry Hoover papers will arrive at the
Hoover Library in West Branch, Iowa, later this year. When they are finally
opened to researchers, perhaps we will get a more revealing look at this very
private President. In the meantime, Richard Norton Smith has found his niche.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE STAR OF EMPIRE RISES

BYLINE: By Stuart Creighton Miller; Stuart Creighton Miller is the author of
''Benevolent Assimilation: The American Conquest of The Philippines,
1899-1903.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1668 words


THE SPANISH WAR An American Epic 1898.  By G. J. A. O'Toole.  447 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton & Company. $19.95.

G.J. A. O'TOOLE is a prolific writer, having produced six books in the last
decade as well as many magazines articles. His interests range from a spy
thriller to attempts to unravel alleged conspiracies surrounding the Lincoln and
Kennedy assassinations. In fact, historical espionage seems to be a major
concern, and his last book in this genre, ''Poor Richard's Game,'' should have
made more of a splash. Using a fictional intelligence man's report, supposedly
published in Philadelphia in 1836, Mr. O'Toole made a case that Benjamin
Franklin was a double agent in Paris working for George III, as well as a member
of a cult that worshiped Satan and engaged in sexual orgies (Franklin was in his
early 70's at the time). He calls it ''an annotated novel,'' although
''fictionalized history'' might be a more appropriate description. He has a
marvelous wit, and any reader with a sense of humor could enjoy this perfectly
outrageous romp at Franklin's expense.

My problem is that I am not always sure that Mr. O'Toole really distinguishes
between fact and fantasy, or if he actually believes that fiction is merely
undocumented reality. Col. Michael Croft, whom Mr. O'Toole identifies as an
''amateur historian, professional detective, and a former Army intelligence
officer,'' states in a foreword to the Franklin caper: ''Much of this is true.
Maybe all of it. . . . The final answer is probably locked up in some dusty but
well guarded room in Whitehall where Her Majesty's government keeps the archives
of the British Secret Service.''



Now, Mr. O'Toole has turned to straight history in this account of the
Spanish-American War by which the United States finally dislodged Spain from our
hemisphere and also acquired the Philippines. My initial skepticism over his
approach to history was not assuaged when I read in his introduction that
''Almost unconsciously, the United States had taken the road to empire, and
there was no turning back, not even had some prophet foreseen that Pearl Harbor,
the Bay of Pigs and Vietnam had been made inevitable.'' Few historians would
subscribe to such historical determinism - at least not, let us hope, in the
20th century. To my pleasant surprise, however, I discovered the book to be a
lively and dramatic account of this country's path to empire, which can be
highly recommended for entertaining, if not enlightening, reading. Even those
sections in which the author seems to throw his note cards at the reader, with
little effort at transitional passages, can be read as exciting intelligence
reports.

Since Mr. O'Toole does not shy away from the term ''amateur historian'' in
describing Colonel Croft, let me make clear that ''The Spanish War'' is amateur
history, and I do not always use that modifier pejoratively. Indeed, I would be
the first to admit that some amateurs write better history than do many, if not
most, professionals. But professionals adhere to a set of values and accepted
techniques that are enforced by a fraternity of scholars who continually judge
each other's work. Free of this restraint, amateurs can employ techniques that
enliven the reader's interest and enhance the dramatic effect of history. For
the reader, this often involves inferring the mood changes, or of reading the
inner thoughts of principal actors, which cannot be documented by professional
standards, and has to be a highly speculative procedure. Thus, Mr. O'Toole sees
in one of Theodore Roosevelt's speeches ''a rebuke to that small, dismaying
voice within himself whispering that the historian 'Brooks Adams may be right'
'' in rejecting the notion that an individual ''can influence the destiny of a
race for good or evil.''

Mr. O'Toole also sees intrigue on the flimsiest of evidence. When Secretary of
the Navy John Long insisted that there was no ulterior motive behind sending the
U.S.S. Maine to Havana and recorded in his diary that ''this happens to be the
truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth,'' Mr. O'Toole observes that
this ''certainly seems excessive reassurance for someone to offer himself
concerning his own veracity,'' and concludes that ''Long may have written this
account without the complete candor one usually expects of diarists.'' Unless
this conclusion was meant to be sarcastic, it sounds dreadfully naive.

From a strictly professional viewpoint, there are a few serious, and many minor,
defects in this work. Too often amateurs operate in scholarly isolation. Mr.
O'Toole's bibliography alone reflects this, unless he was trying to minimize
printing costs. The bibliography is notable for its omissions, listing only two
out of hundreds of pertinent articles in professional journals. Had he read
David Healy, for example, he would have had a better understanding of the
intellectual Zeitgeist behind Brooks Adams as a product of a Victorian penchant
for formulating universal laws that transcend historical and cultural boundaries
a la Darwin, Marx, Freud, Spencer and Pavlov. Indeed, had he read more carefully
historian Ernest May, who is listed in his bibliography, he would not have
stated that ''the prospect of war between Britain and the United States was
real'' in 1895 over the Venezuelan boundary dispute.


PROFESSIONALS are also more prone to question historical sources. Mr. O'Toole
apparently accepts uncritically diaries, memoirs, autobiographies and partisan
biographies without considering the highly selective perceptions and memories
involved. Did Roosevelt really lay out that two- gunned bully in a Western
saloon decades before he reported it in his autobiography? Did Gen. Frederick
Funston exaggerate his heroic exploits with the Cuban rebels 14 years later in
his memoirs, particularly since he was seeking to win popular support for a
continually denied promotion? Such incidents rarely have corroborating
witnesses, and both Roose- velt and Funston had the instincts of Hollywood press
agents when it came to constructing public images of themselves. Sometimes, one
can find corroborative evidence in other primary sources. Thus, Mr. O'Toole
relies on Randolph Churchill's biography of his father to write that Winston in
a New York speech of 1900 ''avoided commenting on the Philippines and confined
himself to the firmer ground of South Africa.'' This may be, but the New York
Herald reported otherwise; alas, Mr.O'Toole ignores newspapers altogether.

Finally, professionals usually exploit a network of colleagues to test their
manuscripts, eliciting comments before publication. Such help would have
eliminated the many petty errors that plague Mr. O'Toole's work. For example,
Sen. George Frisbee Hoar was indeed a most effective voice against the
annexation of the Philippines and the ensuing war of conquest, but he never had
any official ties to the Anti-Imperialist League. Its leaders and Hoar held each
other in mutual contempt. Also, Hoar favored the annexation of Hawaii, and he,
not Henry Cabot Lodge, was the ''senior senator of Massachusetts'' at this time.
The Episcopal Bishop of New York, Henry C. Potter, was not an apologist for
imperialism during the annexation debate. Mr. O'Toole here loses the
chronological dimension so crucial to the writing of history. Bishop Potter
deserted the anti-imperialist cause briefly in late 1900 after an army-sponsored
tour of the Philippines. Within months, however, he returned to the fold after
the revelations of military atrocities in the islands and of missionary looting
in China during the Boxer Rebellion. From the formation of the league, Potter
was one of its vice presidents and remained so even during his apostasy. Mark
Twain was not ''one of the most outspoken and bitterest critics of the
Philippine War.'' He got in act late, when the war was almost two years old.

Maybe Mr. O'Toole is not interested in writing serious history. Possibly he is
writing too much too fast. But, come to think of it, the ''amateurs'' I most
admire - William Manchester, Barbara Tuchman, Walter Lord and the late Cornelius
Ryan - always operated more like ''professionals.''B


Beginning With Intelligence Sometimes a paragraph, even a footnote, in one book
becomes the point of departure for another book. In 1976, Adm. Hyman Rickover
wrote, and the Government Printing Office published, ''How the Battleship Maine
Was Destroyed.'' In his book, Admiral Rickover noted that there was a United
States Secret Service agent in Key West, Fla., who knew a lot about what was
going on in Cuba in 1898. This small detail caused G. J. A.  O'Toole, author of
''The Spanish War: An American Epic 1898,'' to wonder how American intelligence
operated during that ''splendid little war,'' as the diplomat John Hay called
it.  Mr. O'Toole obviously was the right man to wonder: He had worked for the
Central Intelligence Agency from 1966 to 1969 as chief of the problem analysis
branch (mostly computer stuff) before becoming a magazine and book writer. He
discovered that the secret agent in Key West was a Civil War veteran who managed
the Western Union office there and ran his own intelligence network.  When Mr.
O'Toole proposed to Starling Lawrence, his editor, and Donald Lamm, president of
W. W. Norton & Company, that he write a book about the secret history of the
Spanish war, they asked him to expand the subject into a comprehensive history
of the war. Because Mr. O'Toole worked for the C.I.A., he clears his writing
with the agency. He even did so with a 1973 spy novel, ''An Agent on the Other
Side'' (nothing was censored). Did he show ''The Spanish War'' to the C.I.A.
beforehand? ''No, I didn't bother,'' he said. ''I assumed that the agency
wouldn't worry about 1898 intelligence secrets.'' -Herbert Mitgang.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Theodore Roosevelt and his rough riders

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS Sept. 2, 1984Fiction1

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 645 words


AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Warner, $4.50.) The five-year relationship of two
women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  2

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) The struggle for money and
power in Tinseltown.  3

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) Three generations of a San
Francisco family.  4

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) King Arthur, fulfilling
a prophecy of Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  5

THE SEDUCTION OF PETER S., by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) The sudden,
danger-filled success of a long-out-of-work actor.  6

SAVANNAH, by Eugenia Price. (Berkley, $3.95.) The romance and ambitions of a
young man in the Old South.  7

THE MADNESS OF A SEDUCED WOMAN, by Susan Fromberg Schaeffer. (Bantam, $3.95.) A
woman's search for love ends in murder charges and institutionalization.  8

PARTISANS, by Alistair MacLean. (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) A doughty band sets out
to restore King Peter of Yugoslavia to power during World War II.  9

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Pocket, $4.50.) A fantastic yet realistic look
at Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  10

IDAHO!  by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam, $3.95.) The ''Wagons West'' series reaches
a territory teeming with gold seekers.  11

THE BITCH, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.50.) At age 40, a woman sets out to
get what she really wants.  12

NATHANIEL, by John Saul. (Bantam, $3.95.) The long-deceased sinner of a small
prairie town returns to haunt the present generation.  13

THE SUMMER OF KATYA, by Trevanian.  (Ballantine, $3.95.) A love story filled
with dark family secrets, set in France before World War II.  14

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco.  (Warner, $4.95.) Murder in an Italian
monastery.  15

EXOCET, by Jack Higgins. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) A beautiful woman torn between men
on opposite sides of the Falklands war.



 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.  *An
asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the
bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the
book above.



 Nonfiction

General 1

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of an Ivy League
graduate, doctor and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.  2

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (NAL/ Signet, $4.50.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison. 3

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.  4

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.  5

CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) The experiences of a helicopter
pilot in Vietnam. 6

OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $3.95.) The actress's
autobiography.  7

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $3.95.) Predictions about America in the
next decade.  8

BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon.  (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) The back
roads of America.  9

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspirational talks by a California professor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS Sept. 2, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1474 words


Fiction1

15

FIRST AMONG EQUALS, by Jeffrey Archer.  (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
Three young men vie to be chosen Prime Minister of Britain.  2

212

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932.  3

43

THE FOURTH PROTOCOL, by Frederick Forsyth.  (Viking, $17.95.) A London jewel
robbery leads to plots and counterplots behind the Iron Curtain.  4

311

LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency.  5

525

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  6

626

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  7

92

TOUGH GUYS DON'T DANCE, by Norman Mailer.  (Random House, $16.95.) A murder
mystery set in Provincetown, Mass.  8

1215

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.  9

715

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter is altered by changing values over 40 years.  10

1114

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.  11

13

3

SILVER WINGS, SANTIAGO BLUE, by Janet Dailey. (Poseidon/Simon & Schuster,
$15.95.) The adventures and romances of the women pilots of World War II.  12

8

21

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  13

10

2

THE MIKO, by Eric Van Lustbader. (Villard Books, $16.95.) An American
businessman struggles with a vengeful Japanese sorceress in a high-stakes battle
involving oil.  14



1

JOB: A Comedy of Justice, by Robert A. Heinlein.  (Del Rey, $16.95.) A bigoted
yet lovable religious man has his faith tested in a series of tribulations in a
variety of alternate worlds. 15

15

2

THE REVENGE OF THE ROBINS FAMILY, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $10.95.) The publisher offers a prize of $10,001 for the
correct solution to seven murders committed in glittering settings.











































































  Nonfiction1

110

THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and David Horowitz. (Summit,
$20.95.) The dark as well as the glamorous sides of four generations of a
prominent family.  2

1

LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia.  (Slack/Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $13.95.)
Suggestions for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the
fullest.'' 3

2

9

IN GOD'S NAME, by David A. Yallop. (Bantam, $16.95.) A British journalist argues
that Pope John Paul I's death in 1978 was a case of murder.  4

3

12

WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The troubled life of the
late entertainer John Belushi.  5

4

11

GOOD MORNING, MERRY SUNSHINE, by Bob Greene. (Atheneum, $14.95.) The syndicated
columnist's journal of his child's first year.  6

7

26

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard, $10.) The novelist recalls
her childhood in Mississippi.  7

8

16

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  8

5

13

THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent.  9

6

50

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  10

9

7

D.V., by Diana Vreeland. Edited by George Plimpton and Christopher Hemphill.
(Knopf, $15.95.) Memoirs of the one-time ''Empress of Fashion.'' 11

11

25

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  12

10

17

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  13

14

94

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.  (Harper & Row, $13.50.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  14



1

THE REST OF US, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Little, Brown, $19.95.) Success stories
of American Jews from Eastern Europe. 15



1

DIANE ARBUS, by Patricia Bosworth. (Knopf, $17.95.) A biography of the
distinguished photographer.




















































 Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

123

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

288

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  3

52

WEBSTER'S II: NEW RIVERSIDE UNIVERSITY DICTIONARY.  (Houghton Mifflin, $14.95.)
A new dictionary with more than 200,000 definitions and many unusual features.
4

322

WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard work updated in 1983.  54

3 ZIG ZIGLAR'S SECRETS OF CLOSING THE

SALE, by Zig Ziglar. (Revell, $13.95.) How to ''sell'' your ideas, products and
services.  The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from
2,000 bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.  *An asterisk before a
book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling
industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE CHRONICLE OF THE LODZ GHETTO, 1941-1944, edited by

Lucjan Dobroszycki. (Yale University, $35.) A heartbreaking day-

to-day history, written on the scene, of the Nazi extermination of

the Jews of the second largest Polish ghetto.

DIVERSITY AND DEPTH IN FICTION: Selected Critical Writings

of Angus Wilson, edited by Kerry McSweeney. (Viking, $27.50.) A

lively collection of essays by the English novelist, mostly about

English novelists, not excluding Mr. Wilson himself.

THE ENGINEER OF HUMAN SOULS, by Josef Skvorecky. (Knopf,

7.95.) A huge, polemical novel by the Czech emigre writer about

a man who, like the author himself, fled his country to take up a

new life in Canada as a college professor.

THE NEW AMERICAN POVERTY, by Michael Harrington. (Holt,

Rinehart & Winston, $17.95.) A sequel to the author's influential

1963 ''The Other America,'' credited with making the country

aware of its poor, who, Mr. Harrington says now, are still with us.

SELECTED POEMS, by Octavio Paz. Edited by Eliot Weinberger.

(New Directions; cloth, $14.95; paper, $4.95.) A representative

selection of the poetry of the eminent Mexican, translated by such

hands as Elizabeth Bishop, Paul Blackburn and Mark Strand.

WITH A DAUGHTER'S EYE: A Memoir of Margaret Mead and

Gregory Bateson, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Morrow, $15.95.)

MARGARET MEAD, by Jane Howard. (Simon & Schuster,

$19.95.) Two biographies of the famous American anthropologist,

the author of ''Coming of Age in Samoa,'' who died in 1978. The

first, by her daughter, is intimate and personal, and also treats of

Miss Bateson's father, the anthropologist Gregory Bateson; the

second, by Miss Howard, is public and archival. Together they

make an exemplary account of an extraordinary career.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 3, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FORMER U.N. LEADER IS GLOOMY ON FUTURE OF THE ORGANIZATION

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 350 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 2


Former Secretary General Kurt Waldheim, assessing the role of the United
Nations, says the organization has moved into areas in which ''clashing
interests threaten to tear it apart.''

''The United Nations has fallen upon hard days,'' Mr. Waldheim wrote in an
article made public here today. ''It goes through its paces in a workaday
routine that is increasingly ignored or condemned and that threatens to become
increasingly irrelevant in the real world,'' he said. ''It is moving into fields
of operation in which clashing interests threaten to tear it apart.''

At the same time, Mr. Waldheim, who was Secretary General from 1972 to 1982,
said there were signs of shifting alignments and attitudes within the
organization, particularly between the Soviet bloc and the third world. The
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia, he
said, have weakened ''the links between the nonaligned third world grouping and
the Soviet bloc.''

''U.N. human rights agencies, which once carefully avoided any mention of the
practices of Marxist regimes, have now begun to discuss problems like the human
rights situation in Poland,'' he wrote in the article, which is to appear in the
forthcoming issue of the journal Foreign Affairs.

''It can no longer be said that the United Nations condemns authoritarian
practices in right-wing dictatorships while turning a completely blind eye
toward authoritarianism of the left,'' Mr. Waldheim wrote.  He was critical of
moves by the third world and by the Soviet bloc to ostracize South Africa and
Israel, saying ''extreme and unbalanced measures'' such as the 1975 resolution
equating Zionism with racism ''put the future of the world organization at
risk.''

But he said ''the legitimate rights of Palestinian Arabs'' must be recognized
along with Israel's right to exist.

''I do not condone terrorism or resort to war as a means of altering the status
quo,'' he said. ''But neither can I condone creeping Israeli expansionism''
through Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Israel's annexation of all of
Jerusalem.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 3, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Susan Stix Guggenheim Is the Bride Of Frederick Ziegler Lodge in Aspen

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


Susan Stix Guggenheim, the daughter of Thomas Stix Guggenheim of Cincinnati and
Snowmass Village, Colo., and the late Joan Yarter Guggenheim, was married
yesterday to Frederick Ziegler Lodge, a son of Mr. and Mrs. Henry Sears Lodge of
Beverly, Mass. The Rev. Gregg R. Anderson, a Methodist/Lutheran minister,
performed the ecumenical ceremony at the Aspen (Colo.) Chapel of the Prince of
Peace.

The bride, an account executive for M, a monthly magazine of Fairchild
Publications, graduated from the Seven Hills School in Cincinnati and the
University of Colorado. Her father is president of of the Charleston Hosiery
Mills in Cleveland, Tenn.

Mr. Lodge, who has been a summer intern with New York law firm of Milbank,
Tweed, Hadley & McCloy, is a member of the class of '85 at Fordham Law School,
where he is on The Fordham Law Review. He graduated from the Groton School and
the University of Pennsylvania, His father is the special assistant to the
president of Tufts University.

The bridegroom is a grandson of Mr. and Mrs. Henry Cabot Lodge of Beverly and
the late Mr. and Mrs. Frederick J. Ziegler of New York. Mr. Lodge served as a
Republican Senator from Massachusetts, Ambassador to South Vietnam and chief
delegate to the United Nations. Mr. Ziegler was a director of Steinway & Sons,
the piano manufacturer founded by Henry Engelhard Steinway, the bridegroom's
great-great- great-grandfather.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Susan Lodge

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 4, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHELATION: MIRACLE CURE OR FALSE HOPE?

BYLINE: By RICHARD D. LYONS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1575 words


GLADSTONE, MO.

 H UNDREDS of people with a broad range of ailments, including problems they say
were caused by Agent Orange, are coming here for a costly therapy that
proponents view as a miracle cure. Critics contend it can be extremely dangerous
and, in some cases, lethal.

The McDonagh Medical Clinic here offers chelation therapy, in which a mild acid
sometimes used as a food preservative is injected into the patient's
bloodstream. Chelation (kee-LAY-shun) has been used sporadically since the
1940's, but it is enjoying a new surge of popularity amid enthusiastic claims
from patients that it can eliminate the need for coronary bypass surgery and
give relief to Vietnam veterans exposed to dioxin in the form of Agent Orange.

Dr. Edward W. McDonagh, a 53-year-old osteopath who has opened chelation clinics
in several Middle Western states in the past two months, says the therapy has
cured or controlled ailments in thousands of Americans, ranging from heart
disease to arthritis to poor eyesight.

''We're curing people here,'' he said.

But Dr. John H. Renner, a family physician in nearby Kansas City, Mo., said
chelation therapy has no medical value and is dangerous because it causes people
to delay seeking conventional treatments.

''People are being grossly ripped off by this chelation business,'' Dr. Renner
said. As head of the Kansas City Committee Against Nutrition Fraud and Abuse, he
has mobilized dozens of doctors, nurses, pharmacists, dietitians, clergy,
executives and government officials in a campaign to explain the potential
dangers of chelation to the public. Dr. Renner said he believed the biggest
danger of chelation ''is that it builds a false sense of security that people
are going to be helped when they're not.''

''There is going to be more money in chelation than there was in laetrile,'' he
said, referring to the now discredited cancer treatment that brought in tens of
millions of dollars for its promoters.



Treatment Called Worthless

As with laetrile, virtually every major medical group has dismissed chelation as
worthless for the purposes claimed by Dr. McDonagh: the American Medical
Association, the American Heart Association, the American College of Physicians,
the American Academy of Family Physicians and the American Osteopathic
Association.

The Harvard Medical School Health Letter devoted most of a recent issue to
chelation and estimated that it is being used by 1,000 practitioners or clinics
in the United States. After discussing the therapy and the claims of the
proponents, the letter concluded:

''There is no credible evidence that chelation therapy works as claimed; there
is good theoretical reason to think that it does not work, except as an
elaborate placebo; as a placebo, the treatment is very expensive, and far from
being unprofitable, chelation can afford quite a high income to those who
promote it.''

Yet Dr. Elmer M. Cranton of Trout Run, Va., a Harvard Medical School graduate,
is one of the biggest supporters chelation, which he estimates has been used to
treat 300,000 Americans over the last decade.

Dr. Cranton's has written a book, ''Bypassing Bypass: The New Technique of
Chelation Therapy,'' which says that his treatment can head off expensive and
difficult heart bypass surgery that 200,000 Americans now are undergoing each
year.

While the explanations of chelation in the books of Dr. Cranton, Dr. McDonagh
and others vary somewhat, the basic treatment involves the intravenous injection
over several hours of a fluid containing disodium ethylenediamine tetraacetic
acid, usually abbreviated to EDTA.

On one recent day 35 people sat in the ''I.V. Room'' at the McDonagh Clinic
being chelated, while another dozen sat in the waiting room outside, and a third
group of several dozen waited in their cars in the clinic's parking lot.

Nearly all the patients receiving the EDTA were well-dressed, beyond middle age,
and white. Most said they were charged $72 a treatment.

In an interview, Dr. McDonagh insisted that chelation is saving lives ''even
though the Government and the Veterans Administration is trying to sweep it
under the rug.''

The Veterans Administration discourages use of such therapy, the Food and Drug
Administration warns that it may be dangerous, and Medicare has refused to
reimburse patients for its cost, which can run as high as $6,000 for a course of
treatment extending over several months.

Government and professional groups have warned repeatedly that the treatment is
potentially lethal if given without adequate supervision, and note that
chelation was implicated by Federal officials a decade ago in the deaths of 14
people at a clinic in Louisiana run by Dr. Herbert Ray Evers. Dr. Evers has
since relocated his operations to Eleuthera Island in the Bahamas.

EDTA is widely used in the food industry as a preservative. Chance discoveries
among shipyard workers in the 1940's found that EDTA could chelate, or bind,
with heavy metals such as lead, and it was used as a treatment for lead
poisoning from paint.

In the process of chelating, EDTA absorbs lead or other heavy metals and then is
excreted from the body. The F.D.A. in 1953 approved the drug for that use.

But one of the side effects of its use in the treatment of heavy metal poisoning
was the finding that relatively high amounts of calcium were also excreted by
the body, which in turn led to the now-discredited speculation that since
calcium causes hardening of the arteries, flushing calcium out of the system
with EDTA would reverse the process.

Dr. Cranton's book says that the exact method of action is uncertain, but goes
on to state that chelation ''has been reported to improve liver function,
improve blood cholesterol ratios, lower blood fats, reduce blood pressure,
reduce leg cramps, improve vision, relieve angina pains, relieve symptoms of
senility, heal ulcers caused by poor circulation, forestall heart attacks and
strokes, relieve symptoms of arthritis, relieve symptoms of Parkinson's disease
and multiple sclerosis, improve memory, and reduce the incidence of cancer.''



Agent Orange Symptoms Treated

Dr. McDonagh stated in an interview that EDTA ''seems to be very successful'' in
treating the complaints associated with Agent Orange exposure, including the
deposition of the deadly toxin dioxin in the fatty tissues of the body.

''In no case had we failed to get good results,'' he added, speaking of the 31
cases of purported Agent Orange intoxication that have been treated at the
McDonagh Center, all without charge, according to its officials.

Asked specifically what reaction EDTA had with dioxin, Dr. McDonagh said at
first that it forced the excretion of dioxin from the body. When it was
suggested that if this were true the presence of dioxin could be demonstrated in
the body products excreted, Dr. McDonagh said such evidence had not been
produced because he had not found ''any laboratory willing to undertake the
test.''

He then said not all dioxin was excreted, but some of it was ''neutralized
within the body'' while other amounts were ''pushed behind vital organs.''

Dr. McDonagh suggested that further requests for explanations be put to his
scientific adviser, Dr. Bruce W. Halstead, director of the World Life Research
Institute in Colton, Calif. Dr. Halstead, a one-time proponent of laetrile who
earlier this year was indicted in Los Angeles on charges involving the promotion
and marketing of a fraudulent cancer treatment called ADS herbal tea, was not
available for comment.



Veteran Tells of His Recovery

Yet one Vietnam veteran who has complained of physical problems caused by Agent
Orange, Billy Kinkade of Kansas City, said, ''I don't understand all that
scientific stuff, I just know that what Dr. McDonagh did for me worked.'' Mr.
Kinkade, 35 years old, served 16 months in areas of Vietnam where Agent Orange
was widely used as a defoliant.

''I'd be dead today if it weren't for Dr. McDonagh,'' he said recently in
relating how he had wasted away to 98 pounds from a variety of physical and
emotional complaints. Since undergoing therapy with EDTA, Mr. Kinkade said, he
has gained almost 60 pounds and ''feels great.''

''I first went to the Veterans Administration, and they said they couldn't do
anything for me, but Dr. McDonagh did,'' he added.

Mr. Kinkade's comments were challenged by Dr. Michele Flicker, a Veterans
Administration physician who holds doctorates in both physical chemistry and
medicine. ''The emotional fervor associated with EDTA therapy is much like faith
healing and only complicates the problems of Vietnam veterans,'' she said.

''As a physician and a chemist, I know that the claims for EDTA are nonsense,
yet they persist probably because some segment of the population resents the
high incomes of doctors, their lack of communication with their patients,
suspects collusion with drug companies and looks outside medicine for answers to
their health problems,'' Dr. Flicker said.

Chelation therapy has begun to generate major lawsuits. A suit in Detroit
accuses an osteopath there of contributing to the heart attack of a chelation
patient. In Kansas City last year, Joseph Hoskins of Excelsior Springs, Mo.,
whose right leg was amputated after he received treatment from Dr. McDonagh,
charged the osteopath with negligence and malpractice. He is seeking more than
$2 million in damages.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of McDonagh Medical Clinic

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 5, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

USE OF U.S. MERCENARIES IS TERMED LIMITED

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Sept. 4


In the last few years a number of American civilians have taken part in military
activities in Central America, paramilitary experts said today, but the experts
said they knew of no concerted effort to recruit American mercenaries or to use
them extensively in the region.

Robert K. Brown, the editor and publisher of Soldier of Fortune magazine in
Boulder, Colo., said some Americans had gone to Central America as individuals
while others had gone in groups.

He said in a telephone interview he had not been aware of the presence of a
group of Americans with anti- Government forces in Nicaragua until two of them
were reported killed in a helicopter crash over the weekend.

Mr. Brown, a former Special Forces captain in South Vietnam who, as a civilian,
has operated with military forces in several countries, said he believed most of
the American civilians who have served in Central America were volunteers who
received little or no pay.

Mr. Brown said he knew of ''two or three'' men who ''just showed up'' in Central
America and said, ''Can you use us?''

William Guthrie, a senior editor of Soldier of Fortune, said he knew of ''five
or eight people who have been in and out of there in the last five years.'' ''I
have six people right now trying to get me to help them get placed'' with
anti-Government units in Nicaragua, Mr. Guthrie said by telephone.

''We must have 30 to 50 letters a week from people with combat experience who
would like to fight for freedom in Afghanistan, Burma or Central America,'' he
continued. ''We send them a letter in which we extoll them for their patriotic
sentiment, but, no, we aren't a recruiting service, we're a magazine.''

In the last year, Mr. Brown said, his magazine has organized 10 teams of up to
12 volunteers each to go to El Salvador to help train Salvadoran soldiers in
combat tactics and first aid.

The volunteers spend two weeks in the country, he said, and most pay their own
air fare and living expenses.

Mr. Brown said the Salvadoran Army had asked for the volunteers because ''the
Salvadoran Army has increased in size over the last four years and the cretins
in Congress have refused to increase the number of advisers.''

''The Salvadorans are simply not getting the necessary training,'' Mr. Brown
said. ''The fact is we are making a contribution or the Salvadoran Army would
not have us down there.''

Mr. Brown said his volunteers taught ''a wide variety of small unit tactics,''
including marksmanship with small arms and mortars. He said they had also
conducted a medic's course for Salvadoran helicopter door gunners so they could
provide aid to casualties being flown to hospitals.

In addition, Mr. Brown said his magazine, which has a national circulation of
200,000 copies a month, had sent tons of used military gear such as fatigue
uniforms, boots and canteens, as well as medical supplies, to the Salvadoran
Army and the anti-Government forces in Nicaragua.  ''In both cases,'' Mr. Brown
said, ''they're short of equipment and we believe in strongly supporting the
anti- Communist efforts in both countries.''

The November issue of Soldier of Fortune, which is now being shipped to
distributors, carries a first-person account by a 45-year-old former clinical
psychologist from Florida about the nearly five months that he says he spent
with the forces of Eden Pastora Gomez opposing the Nicaraguan Government.

In a telephone interview today, the former psychologist, who identified himself
only as Dr. John, said he had served two years as a United States marine and
later as a paratrooper in South Vietnam. He said that he had led reconnaissance
patrols and staged ambushes for Mr. Pastora and that he had killed 43 Nicaraguan
soldiers ''by personal body count.''

Dr. John said he had left Nicaragua because he felt Mr. Pastora ''was not
aggressive enough.'' He said he and his wife, who is a nurse, were the only
Americans working with Mr. Pastora.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 5, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Tough General Is Head Of Bangkok Garrison

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 112 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 4


The Thai Government announced its annual military shuffle Monday. Prominent in
the announcement was the news that the new commander of the army's Bangkok
region is a supporter of Gen. Arthit Kamlang-ek, Thailand's Supreme Commander,
who has lately been moving to extend and strengthen his political power.

It was Maj. Gen. Pichit Kullavanich, named as the First Army Region commander,
who had publicly supported General Arthit's recent bid to extend his term as
Supreme Commander, even though he is not due to retire until next year. General
Pichit is a West Point graduate who fought in Vietnam and has taken a tough line
against Communist insurgents in Thailand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 5, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

2 NICARAGUANS DEAD IDENTIFIED AS U.S. VETERANS

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 652 words

DATELINE: HUNTSVILLE, Ala., Sept. 4


Two Americans killed when their helicopter was shot down in Nicaragua on
Saturday were identified by associates today as Vietnam veterans and members of
an anti-Communist group formed to assist the Nicaraguan insurgents.

The associates, three former American serviceman, said at a press conference
here tonight that the two men killed on Saturday and four other Americans who
traveled with them to Honduras last week volunteered their help and received no
pay.

The former servicemen, one of whom was in Nicaragua when the helicopter was shot
down, said one of the victims was a Huntsville police detective, Dana H. Parker
Jr., who had taken a leave of absence to assist the rebels.

They said Mr. Parker, a member of the Alabama National Guard, served for many
years in Vietnam with the Army Special Forces, better known as the Green Berets.

The other victim, they said, was James Powell, a flight instructor from Memphis.
Mr. Powell, the former servicemen said, was wounded three times in Vietnam,
where he was an Army helicopter pilot.

The two men and their associates were members of a group called Civilian
Military Assistance that was formed last year by American military veterans to
help the rebels.  The group, the three veterans said, has a total of about 1,000
members in chapters in Huntsville, Memphis, Birmingham and other Southern
cities. The organization, the former servicemen said, has sent 15 to 20
Americans to Nicaragua in the last year to advise the rebels.

The Americans have helped train rebel airplane and helicopter pilots, they said,
but have not taken part in military operations against the Government. The
organization has also provided medical supplies, clothing and other equipment to
help the rebels, they said.

The three identified themselves at the news conference as Thomas V. Posey, a
produce wholesaler from Decatur, Ala., Donald D. Gilmore, a chemical technician
from Memphis, and Cisco Blanton, from Sheffield, Ala., who said he was
unemployed.

''It's not just the Sandinists we're trying to stop, it's Communism,'' Mr.
Blanton said

Mr. Posey declared, ''If we don't stop Communism down there it will be
threatening us at our border.''

The press conference was organized by the main rebel group, the Nicaraguan
Democratic Force. One of its leaders, Mario Calero Portocarrero, introduced the
three veterans.

They said the two men were killed on Saturday when their helicopter flew over
Nicaragua on a rescue mission. Mr. Blanton, who was in Nicaragua, said Mr.
Powell and Mr. Parker were training rebel pilots when they suddenly announced
they had to go on a rescue mission, the nature of which they did not describe.

Nicaragua said the helicopter was shot down after it and four small planes had
attacked a military training school in Santa Clara, near the Honduran border,
killing four children.

Nicaragua has also charged that the men worked for the Central Intelligence
Agency.

The three veterans said they and their associates have no connection with the
Central Intelligence Agency, which has supported the insurgents since 1981.

They said they had no connection, direct or indirect, with the United States
Government while they were assisting the insurgents. The Reagan Administration
has also said that the men, described by White House and intelligence officials
as mercenaries, were not associated with the Government.

Mr. Posey said he had been questioned earlier this year by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation about the group's activities in Nicaragua. The bureau, he said,
did not pursue the matter.

Mr. Posey said the group was invited to help the rebels last December by Gen.
Gustavo Alvarez Martinez, the commander of the Honduran military and a close
ally of the United States who has since been ousted by fellow officers. ''We
wrote him a letter and he said to come talk,'' Mr. Posey said. ''That's the way
it started.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 5, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Army Reactivates Unit Of the Green Berets

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 89 words

DATELINE: FORT LEWIS, Wash., Sept. 4


A 776-man Green Beret unit was reactivated here today, the first to be called
back into service since the Vietnam War, and the Army's Special Operations
commander said the unit was needed now more than ever.

''Once again, this nation finds itself in need of you,'' said the commander,
Maj. Gen. Leroy N. Suddath.

''Soviet expansionism'' through the support of insurgents continues to create a
climate in which unconventional forces such as the Special Forces may be needed
to stop ''wars of liberation,'' General Suddath said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 5, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
'BUT CAN HE HOVER'

BYLINE: By George Vecsey

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words


While he was flying helicopters for the Navy, Phil McConkey was a pro football
fan. He and a former Naval Academy teammate, Kit McCulley, would rave about the
pro players on the television screen, and then they would ask the crucial
question:

''But can he hover?''

Phil McConkey could hover. He could hold an H-46 helicopter nearly motionless
above an aircraft carrier and then land it flawlessly. He had been a star
receiver at the Naval Academy, but he thought football was behind him, until he
suffered motion sickness on the high seas.

''I felt the career I had was second to none,'' McConkey said the other day,
after playing his first regular-season pro game, with the Giants, last Sunday.
''I had no regrets. I was happy with what I had chosen. It was no easy test to
go through the Naval Academy and earn your wings. I didn't second-guess myself
about pro football, because I was only 145 pounds when I entered the Academy and
I never thought I had a chance.''

McConkey now weighs 168, is slightly bow-legged, wears a jet-black mustache and
has impressed the Giant organization with his ''yes, sir'' military politeness
and his toughness in returning punts and playing on the special teams. He has
followed Roger Staubach in serving a five-year hitch before entering pro
football, at the age of 27.

McConkey would never have played pro football except for the motion sickness.
After setting some receiving records and being named Navy's most valuable player
on offense in a Holiday Bowl victory over Brigham Young, he was prepared for a
20-year hitch.


He flew fixed-wing aircraft, then specialized in helicopters, particularly ''the
H-46 Sea Knights with dual tandem rotors that had been used to transport troops
in Vietnam.'' The flying did not cause the motion problem; the ocean did.

''I knew I had a problem with seasickness in my first cruise after my freshman
year, but I thought it would be all right,'' McConkey recalls. ''Any slow,
rolling motion would start it. People think of seasickness in a tiny boat, but
those are big ships, and they take a beating out there.''

He kept having problems on every sea assignment, and they grew worse after he
had landed on the U.S.S. Concord, on maneuvers in the Mediterranean.

''I'd be fine while flying, but then I'd land on a cruiser or destroyer, and as
soon as I'd land they'd chain it down while I waited for passengers,'' McConkey
said. ''I'd feel it then. It was not a very safe thing to try to fly after that.
They won't even prescribe aspirins or nasal spray, because you need all the
assets you have.

''When you get into that environment, with a multimillion-dollar aircraft and
people's lives, you don't like to take chances.''

The Navy doctors couldn't explain his motion problem, and McConkey says: ''Maybe
your inner-ear mechanism works too well, that you're too sensitive to motion. It
may relate to athletic success in some way. I'd be curious to see if pro players
would have a high percentage of motion sickness.''

Even with the problem, McConkey wanted to make the Navy his career, until ''I
was told I wouldn't be competitive with my peers.''

''In the Navy,'' he said, ''you have to go to sea to get promoted. In wartime,
that's where you would be. I didn't see staying in beyond my five-year hitch.
The writing was on the wall.''

In January 1983, with less than a year to go, McConkey applied for an early
discharge and ''began looking for a job at the age of 26.''

''I was putting a resume together,'' he recalls, ''and my family and friends
suggested I give football a shot. At first, I thought they were crazy. I hadn't
played in four years. The only one I knew who had done it was Roger Staubach,
and he's a living legend.''

But Kit McCulley, his former teammate, persuaded him to think about it, and so
did his mother, Gina. His father, Joe, ''thought I should go back to school and
get a master's degree, but after a while I felt football was something I had to
do.''


He called his college coach, George Welsh, who had moved to Virginia. Welsh
encouraged him to get in touch with Tom Bresnahan, a Giant assistant, who had
been the offensive-line coach at Annapolis. The Giants signed him after rookie
camp in the spring of 1983 and gave him a careful trial in exhibition games.

''For that first game, against the Jets, I was so jittery I put on my jersey and
just kept staring at myself in the mirror, as if I was in a dream. But then I
progressed to where I could focus more.''

His good showing, his seasickness and the comparison to Staubach were featured
during a nationally televised game that summer. It was the worst thing that
could have happened to him.

''Somewhere in that huge maze in Washington, my discharge papers were sitting,''
McConkey recalls. ''I had even saved up two months of leave time so I could play
during the summer. But eyebrows were raised by military people. They said, 'If
he can play football, he can serve his last year.' ''

A Naval executive decided that he would finish out his full hitch - on land. The
Giants protected him on the rarely used military-reserve list while he spent his
final months in Pensacola, Fla., teaching enlisted men how to maintain aircraft.


''Kit McCulley had to have an operation to have cartilage taken out of his knee,
but he was out there on one leg throwing the ball to me,'' McConkey says. ''He
even came back after the operation to throw to me. Then we found out that
Richard Todd was living only a few blocks away, and Richard would throw to me
every day for the last month before camp.''

When he returned for this season, the Giants were impressed that McConkey's
weight-lifting figures were higher and that he had dropped his best time in the
40- yard dash from 4.6 to 4.4 seconds. The man who once earned his wings now
earned a National Football League appearance.

Does he have any fears about catching a descending football with a ton of
opponents hurtling at him? Not after landing H-46's on the rolling deck of a
carrier. Phil McConkey can hover.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 6, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE PLEDGES IMMEDIATE EFFORT FOR ARMS FREEZE

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 952 words


Geraldine Ferraro's campaign for Vice President is affecting the image of all
women in politics. Page B12.





PORTLAND, Ore., Sept. 5 - Walter F. Mondale said today that if elected, on his
first day as President he would ask the Soviet leadership to meet him within six
months in Geneva for negotiations to freeze the arms race and cut back
stockpiles of nuclear weapons.

Appearing in Salt Lake City before the 66th annual American Legion convention,
the Democratic Presidential nominee coupled criticism of President Reagan's
military and arms control policies with support for immediate arms talks with
the Soviet Union.

''Every day we fail to open negotiations with the Soviets is another day we slip
toward Armageddon,'' Mr. Mondale told the sporadically applauding legionnaires,
who half-filled the Salt Palace at 9 o'clock this morning.



Rousing Welcome for Reagan


In contrast, Mr. Reagan was welcomed late Tuesday morning to a crowded arena and
received a rousing reception. In his speech, laced with patriotic fervor, he
called for an America that was not only militarily strong but ''morally
powerful.''

Mr. Mondale, saying that ''sensible arms control is not weakness,'' told the
legionnaires, ''The atom bomb has changed all the rules.''

''World War III will be nothing like World War II,'' he said. ''There will be no
winners; we will all lose. There will be no free world, only a poisoned,
lifeless world. And to the veterans of World War II, Korea and Vietnam, I say
this: There will be no veterans of World War III.''



Kennedy Remark Recalled


As an opening move toward arms reduction, Mr. Mondale said, ''I am announcing
now that on my very first day as President, I will call on the Soviet leadership
to meet me within six months in Geneva for fully prepared, substantive
negotiations to freeze the arms race and to begin cutting back the stockpiles of
nuclear weapons.''

Mr. Mondale told the legionnaires, ''President Kennedy best expressed what our
philosophy must be: 'We must never negotiate out of fear, but we must never fear
to negotiate.''

As the audience sat silent, Mr. Mondale reiterated that, as President, he would
''declare a temporary moratorium'' in the testing of all nuclear weapons and in
the testing and deployment of all space weapons.

David Aaron, a key foreign and military affairs adviser to Mr. Mondale, told
reporters the ''pause'' would last six months and would be designed to spur the
Soviet Union to return to the bargaining table.

''The point of this is to buy time, make a breakthrough, end the logjam that's
built up over the last four years,'' said Mr. Aaron, who served as deputy
national security adviser in the White House under President Carter.

Mr. Mondale's appearance before the American Legion was somewhat hastily
arranged, a result of a decision by the candidate to speak to the veterans after
Mr. Reagan did.

And confusion marked the Democrat's overnight stay in Salt Lake City. Initially,
Mr. Mondale decided against meeting the officials of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, in part because he had met the Mormon leaders when he was
Vice President. But this morning, after local Democrats told him it appeared
that he was snubbing the Mormon elders, the candidate met them for about 15
minutes at the church administration building.

'Nuclear War Is Not Funny'


In his remarks to the American Legion, Mr. Mondale said his Republican rival
''is the first President since Hoover not to have met with the Soviets,'' and
continued:

''He is the first President of either party since the bomb went off never to
have negotiated arms controls. He opposed every arms control agreement that
Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford and Carter reached. He has conducted an arms race
on earth, and now he wants to extend it into the heavens. He even makes jokes
about nuclear war. But nuclear war is not funny.''

Mr. Mondale said the Reagan Administration's military program was ''designed by
people whose performance is measured by how much we can buy, not how well we can
fight.''

He attacked the Administration as substantially increasing military spending
that he said ''has been strongly tilted toward nuclear weapons and away from
conventional preparedness,'' as refusing ''to make choices between costly
weapons systems,'' as allowing the Atlantic alliance ''to grow flabby'' and as
failing to press Western European allies to increase their military efforts by 3
percent annually, as they had pledged.

As a member of the American Legion Post 192 in Elmore, Minn., his boyhood home,
Mr. Mondale wore a Legion cap in his appearance at the Legion convention. He
served in the Army from 1950 to 1952 in the United States, and was discharged as
a corporal.

Enthusiastic Crowd in Oregon


After the speech, Mr. Mondale flew to Portland for a rain- drenched meeting with
his running mate, Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro. At a lunch-hour rally,
Mrs. Ferraro picked up the military theme before an enthusiastic crowd of
thousands that huddled under umbrellas and posters.

''This President never saw a weapon he didn't like,'' said Mrs. Ferraro, as the
crowd laughed.

On Thursday, Mr. Mondale is scheduled to make a major speech before B'nai B'rith
in Washington on religion and politics, a subject he raised in today's remarks.

''There is not one party that believes in America's greatness and one that does
not,'' he said. ''There is not one party that is patriotic and one that is not.
There is not one party that believes in God and one that does not. And let's
stop all this nonsense that there is a party of weakness and a party of
strength.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Walter Mondale, Geraldine Ferraro and Barbara Roberts (page
B12)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 6, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN WILL SUBMIT 1948 GENOCIDE PACT FOR SENATE APPROVAL



BYLINE: , Special to the New York Times
By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 5


The Reagan Administration said today that it had decided to back ratification of
a 36- year-old United Nations convention against genocide.

With the Senate in session for only three more weeks, officials acknowledged
that the chances for early approval were slim, making the announcement largely
symbolic.

The officials said that, if President Reagan were re-elected in November, he
would press for approval in the next Congress.

The convention was adopted in 1948 in response to the killing of six million
Jews by the German Nazis.  It defines genocide as the commission of certain acts
''with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnic, racial or
religious group'' and obliges countries that are parties to it to prevent and
punish genocide.

It calls for punishment of people committing genocide, whether they are the
leaders of the country, public officials or private individuals.

The treaty has been opposed by rightist groups and Southern senators who fear
interference with state laws. Today's announcement won prompt praise from human
rights groups.

A Senate aide said: ''This was a shrewd move by the Administration. There is no
time for a floor debate in which the President would have to take on the
conservatives, but there is time for political benefits for the President.''

Senator Charles H. Percy, the Illinois Republican who heads the Foreign
Relations Committee and has been urging the President to approve the convention,
praised the move. He said he planned a hearing before the end of the month and
hoped to send a committee report to the floor, where a two-thirds vote is
necessary for approval.

Mr. Reagan is to address a B'nai B'rith convention on Thursday and an aide said
he might refer to the treaty.

William Korey, director of international policy research for B'nai B'rith,
lauded the President, saying: ''By accession to the treaty we can more
effectively blow the whistle on practitioners of genocide and resume our role as
an advocate of human rights and the rule of law. While it is late in the day,
nonetheless, we greet with enthusiasm this development.''

John Hughes, the State Department spokesman who made the announcement, said:
''The commitment of our country to prevent and punish acts of genocide is
indisputable. Yet our failure to ratify this treaty, which has now been pending
before the Senate for 35 years, and has been supported by Presidents Truman,
Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford and Carter, has opened the United States to
unnecessary criticism in various international fora.''

The convention is one of a series of human rights documents that the United
States has signed but that have not been approved by the Senate.

Known formally as the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide, it was adopted unanimously by the United Nations General Assembly
in Paris on Dec. 9, 1948, and signed by Ernest A. Gross, an Assistant Secretary
of State, for the United States on Dec. 11, 1948. President Truman sent it to
the Senate on June 16, 1949, asking for approval.

From the outset, the convention has aroused strong emotions for and against.
Opponents fear that it would subordinate American laws to international
pressure.

The convention has been reported favorably by the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee in 1970, 1971, 1973, 1974 and 1976. It was either not taken up on the
floor for lack of support or, as in 1974, killed by a filibuster led by Senator
Sam J. Ervin Jr., Democrat of North Carolina.

He and his colleagues argued that such groups as the Black Panthers would try to
bring charges in international courts against the United States Government, and
that American soldiers who had served in Vietnam could be charged by radical
groups for their actions during the war.

The treaty has been ratified by more than 90 countries, including the other
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Communist countries.

A White House official said that an interagency group that had been studying the
convention since early 1982 agreed on Aug. 22 to recommend it for approval. He
said Mr. Reagan gave his consent on Sunday.

The Liberty Lobby, a conservative group, said in a statement today that Mr.
Reagan ''is bowing to the pressures of an election year and feels he must
placate the internationalist lobby by dragging out this old treaty, which none
of his predecessors has been able to persuade the Senate to ratify.''

Asserting that it opposed the convention and that it did not believe that the
Soviet Union took it seriously, the group said Mr. Reagan will ''disaffect his
conservative and populist and nationalist support'' more than he has done so far
as President.

The American Bar Association's president, John C. Shepherd, said, ''As we
commend President Reagan's action with enthusiasm, we also urge with equal
fervor the United States Senate to give its prompt advice and consent to
ratifiction.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 6, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WORLD ACCORD ON GENOCIDE: AN ISSUE SINCE TRUMAN ERA

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 503 words


The Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
drafted 36 years ago as a response to the murder of six million Jews by the
Nazis, makes the mass killing of national, racial, ethnic or religious groups an
international crime.

In 1946, after the Nuremberg trials and other war crimes tribunals, the General
Assembly of the United Nations stated that ''genocide is a crime under
international law which the civilized world condemns, and for the commission of
which principals and accomplices are punishable.''

On Dec. 9, 1948, the General Assembly unanimously approved the convention. After
20 nations had signed it, it went into effect Jan. 12, 1951.

More than 90 countries have approved the convention, which seeks to deter
genocide by forcing nations to punish those who commit the crime, whether they
are heads of state, government officials or private citizens.

Even if committed by a government in its own territory, genocide is not
considered an internal matter, but a crime under international law.

Efforts of Lawyer


The convention was passed in part through the efforts of Raphael Lemkin, a
Polish-born Jewish lawyer who coined the term ''genocide'' and crusaded for
years to win United Nations approval for the convention, which he helped to
draft.

The United States took part in the drafting of the convention, an Assistant
Secretary of State, Ernest A. Gross, signed it, and President Truman sent it to
the Senate in 1949. Since then, every President except Dwight D. Eisenhower has
recommended its approval.

But it was repeatedly blocked by the conservatives and isolationists in the
Senate who feared it would expose Americans to spurious genocide charges before
a foreign court without American constitutional safeguards.

During the Vietnam War, for example, opponents of the convention expressed fears
that American pilots shot down by North Vietnam might be charged there with
genocide.

Since approval by Britain in 1970, the United States has been the only major
Western democracy that has not endorsed the convention. France approved it in
1950; the Soviet Union and West Germany did so in 1954.

Filibuster in 1974


The Senate Foreign Relations Committee has recommended on several occasions that
the Senate approve it. But a conservative filibuster in 1974 prevented a vote
the only time it was taken up on the Senate floor.

Among the groups that opposed it over the years were the Daughters of the
American Revolution, the American Legion, the Liberty Lobby, the John Birch
Society, and until 1976, the American Bar Association.

Sen. William Proxmire, a Wisconsin Democrat who is the leading Senate proponent
of the convention, has given nearly 3,000 speeches on the subject and has
promised to address the issue each day until the document is approved.

Although the United States has been criticized by various signers for its
failure to approve the document, the convention itself has never been invoked.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 6, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

2 AMERICANS ASSERT U.S. ASSISTED PRIVATE EFFORT AGAINST LATIN LEFT

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1178 words

DATELINE: HUNTSVILLE, Ala., Sept. 5


Two Americans involved in aiding Nicaraguan rebels said today that they received
assistance from United States Embassies in Honduras and El Salvador in their
effort to provide military equipment to anti-Communist forces in Central
America.

Although the two maintained that they were not associated with the Government in
any way and had received no money for their work, they said that United States
officials in El Salvador and Honduras helped put them in touch with the Chief of
Staff of the Salvadoran armed forces and with Honduran military officers who
escorted them to Nicaraguan rebel leaders.

(In Washington, the State Department said it had no knowledge of any contact
between the two men and United States Embassy personnel in either El Salvador or
Honduras, but that checks were being made with the embassies in both countries.

(Privately, State Deparment officials acknowledged that it was conceivable that
the two men could have received some assistance in getting in touch with
Salvadoran and Honduran military officials. One official noted, for example,
that American citizens in foreign countries often seek embassy assistance in
making commercial or government contacts and that embassy personnel generally do
their best to be helpful.)

The Reagan Administration has denied any connection with the men since two of
their associates were killed when their helicopter was shot down in Nicaragua on
Saturday.

Conflicting Accounts


Nicaragua said the helicopter was shot down after it and four small planes had
attacked a military training school in Santa Clara, near the Honduran border,
killing four children. Nicaraguan rebel leaders have said that the helicopter
was on a rescue mission and was not involved in the attack.

In interviews today, two military veterans who helped organize the assistance
effort, Thomas V. Posey and Walton Blanton, described themselves as ''freedom
fighters'' against Communism who, acting on their own, provided advice and
military equipment to Nicaraguan rebels and the Salvadoran armed forces and
arranged for more than a dozen Vietnam veterans to work with the rebels inside
Nicaragua in recent months.

They said that their organization, called Civilian Military Assistance, has
about 1,000 members in chapters in Alabama, Tennessee and Mississippi and
expects to open offices soon in Michigan and Florida.

U.S. Aid Has Diminished


United States aid to the rebels has diminished recently because of Congressional
opposition. Nicaragua has charged that the Reagan Administration has turned to
private individuals and organizations to help the rebels.

In meetings that were spontaneous and unplanned, Mr. Posey said, he talked last
October to a United States military officer in El Salvador who arranged a
meeting for him with Colonel Mario Reyes Mena, the Chief of Staff of the
Salvadoran Army, and an official at the United States Embassy in Honduras helped
arrange a meeting in January with the Commander in Chief of the Honduran armed
forces.

Mr. Posey said he could not recall the identity of either the military officer
or the embassy official.

In addition, he said, he and three associates were waved through customs when
they arrived in Honduras in January even though they were carrying combat
weapons and 4,000 rounds of ammunition, because they had a letter from the
commander of the Honduran military inviting him to visit.

The commander at the time was Gen. Gustavo Alvarez Martinez, who was described
by American officials as a strong supporter of increased United States military
involvement in Honduras and an advocate of American aid to the rebels. General
Alvarez was ousted by fellow officers last spring.

Mr. Posey, a former Marine who fought in Vietnam and now runs a produce
distribution business in Decatur, Ala., and Mr. Blanton, a veteran of the of the
Army Special Forces from Sheffield, Ala., said they started Civilian Military
Assistance after deciding last summer that they should get actively involved in
fighting Communist subversion in Central America.


Mr. Posey said that the group first concentrated on assisting the Salvadoran
military.

He said he went on a fact-finding trip to El Salvador in October because
Congress seemed to be blocking military assistance requests made by the Reagan
Administration.

Once in El Salvador, Mr. Posey said, he went to the United States Embassy to
seek help in meeting Salvadoran military leaders.

''As I was standing in the lobby,'' he recalled, ''I saw an American officer and
told him what I wanted to do. He told me to go back to my hotel and wait for a
call.''

Says Appointment Was Arranged


Several hours later, Mr. Posey said, the officer called to tell him an
appointment had been arranged with Colonel Reyes Mena. Mr. Posey said that
United States military officers also translated into Spanish a letter he had
written to Colonel Reyes Mena that described in detail the military equipment
the Americans thought they could provide.

He said his group ended up supplying the Salvadoran military with field
equipment, including packs, belts, canteens and pouches to hold ammunition.

In January, Mr. Posey said, he and several associates flew to Honduras, after
having determined that the Nicaraguan rebels were in greater need of assistance
than the Salvadoran military.

By then, he said, he had an answering letter from General Alvarez, welcoming the
offer to assist the rebels.

He said the Americans went to the United States Embassy to ask for assistance in
contacting the general.

Mr. Posey said a civilian official at the embassy examined the letter and said
he would call the Honduran military. Later that day, Mr. Posey said, he was
called by an aide to General Alvarez. The Americans eventually met with senior
Honduran military officers, not including General Alvarez, and were escorted to
a rebel camp near the Nicaraguan border, Mr. Posey said.

The visit, Mr. Posey and Mr. Blanton said, led to the involvement of Civilian
Military Assistance in rebel activities, including the training of pilots and
the planning of military missions.

C.I.A. Said to Know of Group


WASHINGTON, Sept. 5 (UPI) - Congressional sources said today that C.I.A.
officials had informed some members of the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence that the agency knew a United States paramilitary group was sending
men to join Nicaraguan rebels.

According to Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, and vice
chairman of the Senate Inelligence Committee, the C.I.A. has denied any
connection to the group of volunteers.

Nicaraguans Call Families


MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Sept. 5 (UPI) - Nicaraguan officials telephoned the families
of two Americans killed in Saturday's rebel attack and invited them to Nicaragua
to retrieve the bodies, Foreign Minister Miguel D'Escoto Brockmann said today.

The Foreign Minister said Nicaragua was doing everything possible to comply with
the wishes of the families.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Luis Alberto Monge

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 6, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GREENE CRITICIZES FILM ADAPTATIONS OF HIS BOOKS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 567 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Sept. 4


The writer Graham Greene says many of his books have been turned into ''very bad
films'' - even by great directors.

Mr. Greene made a rare public appearance Monday night at a standing- room-only
assemblage of movie buffs at London's National Film Theater, which was
inaugurating a film retrospective of adapted Greene stories.

Calling it ''an ambiguous festival,'' Mr. Greene wryly told the audience,
''You're celebrating with what I consider eight very bad films,'' among the 23
to be shown. He named only two he liked: ''The Third Man'' and ''The Fallen
Idol,'' both directed by Sir Carol Reed.

Mr. Greene, who will be 80 years old on Oct. 2, came from his home in Antibes in
the south of France to discuss the way his stories have been turned into films.



'They Can't Be That Cinematic'

''Very few good films have been made out of my books, so they can't be that
cinematic,'' Mr. Greene said.

He said that he seldom sees movies anymore, but he stayed on after his talk to
watch the premiere of the most recent adaptation of his work - Michael
Lindsay-Hogg's television film of ''Dr. Fischer of Geneva,'' with Alan Bates
and, in his last television appearance, James Mason.

''I want here to say that any pleasure I have in seeing the film is overcast by
the death of James Mason,'' Mr. Greene said, expressing amazement at ''the
patience, good humor, and thoughtfulness to others shown by him'' during
shooting.

''To me, Dr. Fischer will forever have the face of James Mason,'' Mr. Greene
said.



Cukor and Lang Films Cited

But most of the film versions of his books have disappointed him. He said that
the 1947 adaptation of ''The Man Within,'' directed by Bernard Knowles, was
''shockingly bad,'' and he called George Cukor's 1972 adaptation of ''Travels
With My Aunt'' very bad.

He acknowledged that he had never sat through a complete showing of ''Travels
With My Aunt,'' but had been sufficiently dismayed by a smuggled copy of the
script.

Mr. Greene cited Cukor as one of several great directors who had been
responsible for some of his worst films.

Others included Fritz Lang, who once came up to the author in a Los Angeles bar
to apologize for the 1944 screen version of ''Ministry of Fear.''

Mr. Greene took offense at the 1967 film ''The Comedians,'' starring Richard
Burton and Elizabeth Taylor - calling Miss Taylor ''a disaster.'' He criticized
the director Joseph Mankiewicz for turning the sharply critical ''The Quiet
American'' into a propaganda piece for American policy in Vietnam.



Kind Words for Reed

Kinder words were reserved for the two films directed Sir Carol.

Praising Sir Carol as ''the only director I've really enjoyed working with,''
Mr. Greene said ''The Third Man'' and ''The Fallen Idol'' were based on long
short stories rather than full-length novels.

''A short story makes a much better film than a novel,'' he said. ''A novel is
too long, has too much material, and there have to be too many compromises.''

Among more recent adaptations, Mr. Greene condemned Otto Preminger's 1979 ''The
Human Factor'' as one of the ''outstandingly bad'' films of his books, and said
he had not seen ''Beyond the Limit,'' the 1983 screen version of ''The Honorary
Consul'' that starred Michael Caine and Richard Gere.

When asked why his works were getting shorter and shorter, Mr. Greene replied,
''Because I get older and older.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
A DAMNING SILENCE

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 765 words


The depressing complicity with

Government into which the free

American press has sunk since Vietnam and Watergate has seldom been more visible
than it was at the first anniversary of the Soviet destruction of Korean Air
Lines Flight 007, on Sept. 1, 1983.

American headlines and airwaves, of course, fully reported the Reagan
Administration's statements that the event had boosted, in the year since, U.S.
standing in the world relative to that of the U.S.S.R.

But the press effectively ignored an authoritative article in The Nation (for
Aug. 18-25) establishing to a reasonable certainty that numerous agencies of the
U.S. Government knew or should have known, almost from the moment Flight 007
left Anchorage, Alaska, that the plane was off course and headed for intrusion
into Soviet air space, above some of the most sensitive Soviet military
installations.

Yet no agency, military or civilian, warned the crew of Flight 007 or tried to
guide it out of danger; neither did the Japanese. As late as Aug. 28, in an
anniversary briefing, a State Department spokesman claimed that ''no agency of
the U.S. Government even knew the plane was off course and was in difficulty
until after it was shot down.''

If that's true, the author of The Nation's article - David Pearson, an authority
on the Defense Department's World Wide Military Command and Control System, who
spent a year researching his lengthy article - concludes, ''the elaborate and
complex system of intelligence, warnings and security that the U.S. has built up
over decades suffered an unprecedented and mind-boggling breakdown.''

But Mr. Pearson shows in excruciating detail why it's most unlikely there was
any such ''simultaneous failure of independent intelligence systems operated by
the Navy, Army, Air Force, N.S.A. (National Security Agency), C.I.A. (Central
Intelligence Agency) or the Japanese self-defense agency'' - all of which, he
demonstrates, had the ability to track Flight 007 at various stages of its
journey across the Pacific.

What's the alternative to the staggering idea of such a breakdown? That all
these agencies deliberately chose not to guide the airliner back on a safe
course, because its projected overflight of the Kamchatka Peninsula and Sakhalin
Island would activate Soviet radar and air defenses and thus yield a ''bonanza''
of intelligence information to watching and listening U.S. electronic devices.
Despite all Administration protests to the contrary, the evidence presented by
Mr. Pearson raises this alternative at least to the level of a high probability.
But Mr. Pearson does not assert as a fact that the U.S. or South Korea or both
deliberately planned an intelligence mission for Flight 007; he concedes the
possibility that its pilot simply ''blundered'' into sensitive Soviet

 air space, and that electronic onlookers for the U.S. decided on the spot to
take intelligence advantage of his error - never dreaming that the Russians
would shoot down an unarmed airliner.  But if the disaster happened that way,
Mr. Pearson points out, then two experienced pilots (nearly 20,000 flying hours
between them) not only made an error in setting the automatic pilot but ''sat in
their cockpit for five hours, facing the autopilot selector switch directly in
front of them at eye level, yet failed to see that it was set improperly.'' Nor
in all that time could they have used any of the radar and other systems
available to them to check their course and position.  Mr. Pearson also presents
substantial evidence that Soviet radar detection and communications systems over
Kamchatka and Sakhalin were being jammed that night, which would help account
for their documented difficulty in catching up to Flight 007. He reconstructs
electronic evidence too, to show that the airliner changed course slightly after
passing near a U.S. RC-135 reconnaisance plane; otherwise it would have crossed
Sakhalin far north of the point where a Soviet fighter finally shot it down.
The jamming and the change of course, as detailed by Mr. Pearson, strongly
suggests what he obviously fears: ''that K.A.L. 007's intrusion into Soviet
airspace, far from being accidental, was well orchestrated,'' with the Reagan
Administration, at some level, doing the orchestrating. Even if not, the
deliberate silence - or the shocking failure - of so many U.S. detection systems
argue that President Reagan and the security establishment have greater
responsibility for the fate of Flight 007 than they admit - or that a
complaisant press has been willing to seek. B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Philippine Death Toll Put at 1,363 in Typhoon

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 153 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Sept. 6


The death toll from a typhoon rose to 1,363 today as the Government shipped
relief supplies to victims of the Philippines' worst recorded storm this
century.

The typhoon, which hit the country with winds of 137 miles an hour four days
ago, moved across the South China Sea today toward Vietnam.

Reports from the Philippine Government, the military, the Red Cross and the
state-run press agency showed 1,363 people died in the storm in two days, with
more than 300 others injured and more than 500 missing. An estimated 1.12
million were left homeless by the typhoon and an earlier storm.

Franklin Ebdalin, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, said the Philippines had so far
refused offers of additional foreign assistance. ''The policy has been to rely
on our own resources,'' he said. ''Everything is under control.'' President
Ferdinand E. Marcos authorized the immediate release of $4.4 million in
Government aid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ARMY OFFICERS HELPED PRIVATE GROUP IN SALVADOR

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1238 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 6


A number of United States military officers in El Salvador became actively
involved during the last year in helping a group of private Americans donate
military equipment to the Salvadoran armed forces, according to Defense
Department documents.

The involvement, more extensive than previously reported, included introducing
the leader of the private group to the general staff of the Salvadoran Army,
encouraging the Americans to send equipment, delivering the materiel to the
Salvadoran Army and acting, in general, as a channel between the Americans and
the Salvadorans.

According to the documents and Administration officials, much of the liaison
work was handled by Maj. Charles A. McAnarey, the chief United States logistics
officer in El Salvador.

A spokesman for the United States Embassy in El Salvador, Donald R. Hamilton,
while confirming that American military officers had assisted the private group,
said today that there ''was nothing inappropriate or unethical about their
conduct.''

'A Friendly Act'


He added: ''The private Americans were doing a friendly act for a friendly
government and there's nothing wrong with American officials helping them get in
contact with the Salvadoran Government. We help all kinds of people make all
kinds of contacts.''

Federal law and Defense Department policy prohibit American military officers
from acting in any capacity as an agent for a private organization or
corporation. But Mr. Hamilton said that Major McAnarey's efforts to assist the
American group were not barred by law or policy.

A number of current and former American ambassadors said that United States
military officers stationed in embassies were usually discouraged from helping
private groups sell, donate or transfer military equipment to foreign
governments. The ambassadors said this was to avoid getting the officers, and by
extension the United States, entangled in private arms deals that might be
illegal or be contrary to American interests.

Two members of the private, anti- Communist group involved in El Salvador were
killed last week when their helicopter was shot down in Nicaragua. The group,
known as Civilian Military Assistance, is composed primarily of Vietnam veterans
from Alabama, Tennessee and Mississippi. It has given advice and military
equipment to Nicaraguan rebels as well as the Salvadoran armed forces, according
to its leaders.

C.I.A. Agents, Nicaragua Says


The Reagan Administration has denied that the group's support of the rebels was
in any way connected with the Central Intelligence Agency's aid to the
insurgents. Nicaragua has charged that the two Americans who were killed were
C.I.A. agents and that the Administration has turned to private groups to help
the rebels as official aid has diminished in recent months because of
Congressional opposition.

Democrats in Congress called today for an investigation into the role of
Civilian Military Assistance in Nicaragua. Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the Vermont
Democrat who is a member of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, said he
would ask the panel to look into whether the helicopter that was shot down on
Saturday took off from Honduran airfields built or controlled by the United
States.

Mr. Leahy said that if Americans were being allowed to launch combat operations
into Nicaragua from airfields at Jamastran or Aquacate the action would be
contrary to assurances given to Congress.

The involvement of the United States Military Advisory Group in El Salvador with
Civilian Military Assistance began last October when the leader of the private
organization, Thomas V. Posey of Decatur, Ala., visited El Salvador, according
to the Pentagon documents.

Officers Arranged Meeting


The documents, which include copies of letters sent to Mr. Posey by Major
McAnarey after the October visit, show that American military officers arranged
a meeting for Mr. Posey with the Chief of Staff of the Salvadoran Army, Col.
Mario Reyes Mena, and other Salvadoran officers.

In a letter dated Nov. 11, after Mr. Posey had returned to Alabama, Major
McAnarey said that the offer of military equipment ''was not frivolously
considered'' by the Salvadoran general staff. The letter added that the Military
Advisory Group had prepared a letter for Mr. Posey to submit to the Salvadoran
military listing the items his group was prepared to donate. Mr. Hamilton said
an aide to Major McAnarey had translated the letter, originally drafted by Mr.
Posey, into Spanish.

On Jan. 24, Major McAnarey wrote again to Mr. Posey. The letter notified Mr.
Posey that the military equipment donated by Civilian Military Assistance had
arrived in El Salvador and was ''greatly appreciated by the El Salvador Army.''

Any further contributions, also, would be appreciated,'' the letter continued.

Major McAnarey also wrote that he was prohibited by law and embassy policy from
acting as an agent for Mr. Posey or his group.

Mr. Hamilton said that Civilian Military Assistance had sent about a dozen boxes
of military equipment to Major McAnarey, who turned them over to the Salvadoran
military.

Mr. Hamilton said that in January the embassy notified the State Department
about the activities of Civilian Military Assistance. The message, according to
Mr. Hamilton, said in part: ''The military group has made clear to Posey that
legal restrictions and local military group policy prohibited any direct
cooperation between any private group and the military group. The military group
has, however, facilitated contact between CMA and the general staff of the
Salvadoran armed forces.''



Customs Investigation Sought WASHINGTON, Sept. 6 (UPI) - The State Department
said today that it had asked the Customs Service to determine whether any
American laws were broken by the volunteers.  A State Department spokesman, John
Hughe,s said the Customs Service has been asked to determine if flying weapons
to Central America would be a violation of the Arms Export Control Act.

Nicaragua Protests to U.N.


MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Sept. 6 (UPI) - A top Nicaraguan official said today that
his Government would a protest to the United Nations Security Council over the
involvement of Americans in a rebel air attack against the leftist Government.

''We will present our position on the aggressive policies of the American
Government before the Security Council,'' said Carlos Nunez, a member of the
nine-man ruling Sandinista directorate.

A United Nations spokesman in New York said the Security Council would meet
Friday in response to a request submitted Wednesday by the Nicaraguan charge
d'affaires, Julio Icaza Gallard.



No Libyan Troops, Managua Says

MANAGUA, Sept. 6 (UPI) - The Nicaraguan Defense Ministry today denied that the
Libyan leader, Muammar el-Qaddafi, had sent troops to help the Nicaraguan
military combat United States-backed guerrillas.

''We have said before that our revolution has Libyan aid in all areas -
economic, political and defense - but we deny there are any Libyan soldiers on
our territory,'' a Defense Ministry spokesman, Capt. Rosa Pasos, said.

Colonel Qaddafi said in a speech marking his 15th year in power this week that
''Libyan fighters, arms and backing to the Nicaraguan people have reached them
because they fight with us.''

''They fight America on its own ground,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WAVING THE FLAG: WITH DIFFERENT APPROACHES, BOTH PARTIES ARE HARD AT IT

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1101 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 6


Along with their clash over the proper place of religion in American politics,
President Reagan and Walter F. Mondale have moved quickly into a contest over
the political symbolism of the American flag.  On both issues, it was Mr. Reagan
who moved boldly to seize political advantage from the emotionalism that
surrounds the symbols of church and nation, and Mr. Mondale, stung by the
Republican assault, who has hit back in response.

The Republican and Democratic conventions, each awash with patriotic
celebrations, offered a foreshadowing of their competition. Now the two rivals
stump the country, battling over who is the foremost spokesman for the nation,
each drawing different meanings from a resurgence of American pride that came to
a crest with the American victories in the Olympic Games.

The President, saying the Republicans are ''America's Party,'' has linked his
evocation of Old Glory to an aura of national optimism and a reassertion of
American power and military strength.  At the American Legion convention in Salt
Lake City Tuesday, he kindled a fervently emotional response with his
incantation of patriotic moments like the Olympics, the American hostages in
Iran, the repatriation of American war prisoners and the invasion of Grenada.

Mondale Stresses Opportunity


When Mr. Mondale touches the electorate's nationalistic streak, he is more
inclined to emphasize the need to protect American industry and jobs from
international competition and to insist that the American dream must offer
everyone, especially members of underprivileged minorities, a fair chance at
economic opportunity.

And he has lashed back at Mr. Reagan, as he did Wednesday in Salt Lake City and
again today in Washington, for implying that Republicans have special claim to
patriotic appeal.

''There is not one party that believes in America's greatness and one that does
not,'' Mr. Mondale declared, wearing his American Legion cap to remind the
veterans of his Army service. ''There is not one party that is patriotic and one
that is not. There is not one party that believes in God and one that does not.
And let's stop all this nonsense that there is a party of weakness and a party
of strength.''

Today he declared that he would not allow the President ''to divert the debate
from the real questions facing our future by questioning my faith, my
patriotism, or my family values.''

The very tone of the campaign by both parties signals a change in the American
mood. For the politics of what one senior White House official called ''the New
Patriotism,'' inviting comparison with John F. Kennedy's ''New Frontier,''
presents a vivid contrast to the nation's sullen mood of self- criticism a
decade ago after Vietnam and Watergate.

Flag-Waving Conventions


Many analysts see the fact that Democratic strategists have decided to join
Republicans in emphasizing patriotic themes as a signal that they sense a
powerful and fashionable political trend that they dare not let the President
monopolize.

They staged the climax of the Democratic convention in San Francisco as a
festival of nationalist spirit. Accepting her nomination, Geraldine A. Ferraro
offered a visual tableau of patriotic symbolism, her white suit framed by a
rostrum draped in red and blue. Delegates waved thousands of little American
flags for the television cameras while the San Francisco Girls and Boys Chorus
rang out with ''America,'' ''I'm a Yankee Doodle Dandy,'' and ''This Land is
Your Land.''

At the Republican convention in Dallas, rhythmic chants of ''U-S-A, U-S- A,''
broke out as frequently as calls for ''four more years.'' Republican
comunications media consultants had staged the convention to blend those two
appeals.

The 18-minute movie used to introduce Mr. Reagan was redolent with nationalistic
images: a baby with a flag, Americans saluting, the Statue of Liberty, American
soldiers embracing as they arrive home, and the President in a military jacket
at a religious ceremony with troops in Korea and in a memorial to the Allied
invasion of Normandy.

'We've Got the Flag'


On his arrival in Dallas, the President proclaimed that Republicans would be
''America's party'' and he tied the symbolism of the Olympic torch and the torch
of the Statue of Liberty to his promise of ''a springtime of hope'' for the
nation.

For Reagan strategists, the Stars and Stripes is the centerpiece of a cluster of
traditional values like family, work, neighborhood, church and nation that they
want to help cement his electorial coalition, especially the blue-collar voters
whose support was so crucial in 1980.

Some Republicans smart over the Democratic challenge on this political terrain.
''We've got the flag,'' asserted James H. Lake, the Reagan-Bush campaign
spokesman. ''We've always had the flag, we Reagan Republicans. But even as a
partisan Republican, it made me feel good to see the Democrats waving the
flag.''

Democratic strategists contend that Mr. Reagan's patriotic refrain is a
diversionary tactic designed to gloss over failures on arms control, in Lebanon
and on. foreign affairs generally.

''If you've got a good lead you don't want to engage your opponent, so you run a
chloroform strategy,'' said Robert D. Squier, a longtime consultant to
Democratic candidates. ''You put the voters to sleep. Patriotism is the
chloroform. If you get people thinking about that, they don't think about next
year's taxes.''

Tear-in-the-Eye a Reagan Forte


But he, like other Democrats, warns that ''the downside of patriotism is
chauvinism, and that can be scary, violent and warlike,'' images that Mr. Reagan
can hardly risk raising.

Moreoever, Mr. Mondale has sought to turn American Olympic victories into
ammunition for his charge that Reagan policies have been unfair to many
Americans. The Olympics, he declared in Texas, represent ''America at its best -
no discrimination, we just pick the very best and they win.''

But some Democrats are uneasy at trying to compete with Mr. Reagan on themes of
patriotism. ''When you get past the show-biz part of it and talk about family
values and American values, Mondale doesn't have to take a back seat to
anyone,'' commented Robert S. Struass, the former Democratic Party chairman.

''But he doesn't handle the tear-in- the-eye anywhere near as well,'' Mr.
Strauss said. ''If we get into a contest of that, Mondale's going to run a bum
second. I believe Reagan will out-salute him 3 to 1. It's like everything else,
it depends on how you do it.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUES DEBATED IN RACE TO OPPOSE REP. GREEN

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 843 words


I feel Mrs. Lall is an extremist on these issues,'' Andrew J. Stein said of one
of his three opponents for the Democratic nomination in the 15th Congressional
District in Manhattan.

Betty Lall, who was the Democratic candidate for United States Representative
two years ago in the district and would like to be again, countered that ''if he
thinks my positions are extremist, I would like to suggest that his positions
are reactionary and far from being realistic,''

The third candidate, Robert H. Tembeckjian, who is making his first run for
elective office in next Tuesday's primary, said, ''If you are dissatisfied with
the choice between an extremist and a reactionary, and, like me, you wish a
little bit more of the wealth belonged to you, there is only one candidate in
this race you ought to support and that's me.''

3 Debates in 2 Days


The exchange in the first of three debates in two days in the surprisingly
low-key contest represented a sharpening of the differences among the
candidates.

The fourth candidate in the contest, Arnold Perey, is running as a spokesman for
a group known as Aesthetic Realism, which, among other things, holds that all
the nation's resources belong to everyone.

Mr. Stein, who is the Manhattan Borough President, and Mrs. Lall are viewed as
the leading contenders, with Mr. Tembeckjian seen by some politicians as ''some
place for people who don't like Stein and Lall to go.''

The winner of Tuesday's primary will face the only Republican member of the
House from Manhattan, Representative Bill Green. Mr. Green is seeking his fourth
term in the House from one of the country's most unusual Congressional
districts, one that covers the wealthy upper East Side, the heart of midtown
Manhattan, the middle-class Peter Cooper Village and Stuyvesant Town, low-income
housing projects and some of the city's worst slums on the Lower East Side.

Although the four candidates will spend a total close to $1 million - with Mr.
Stein accounting for half of that - the campaign has been largely a low-
visibility effort within the district and dependent on mailings, some radio
commercials, telephone banks and get- out-the vote operations.

Spending at Issue


Mrs. Lall raised a new issue - Mr. Stein's spending - in a debate last night
sponsored by the Hudson Group, a Democratic organization, at the Williams Club,
at 24 East 39th Street.

She said the latest financial report of Mr. Stein's 1981 borough presidential
campaign committee showed $60,000 disbursed to Penn & Schoen Associates from
mailings this year. She also said the Stein 1981 committee had received
contributions of up to $50,000 from individuals, while the Federal limits on
contributions was $1,000 a person.

Mr. Stein, saying he was ''sick and tired'' of such charges, said such
accusations of using money raised under more liberal state standards than for a
Federal campaign had been disposed of by the Federal Election Commission in
June. It had ruled before the disclosure of the Penn & Schoen expenditures, but
Mr. Stein said the mailings plan had been submitted to the commission for its
approval.

Mrs. Lall, a former aide in the United States Senate and to the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency, cites her national and international experience.

Mr. Tembeckjian, a former deputy administrator of the State Commission on
Judicial Conduct, says he is a ''fresh face'' who knows the neighborhoods.

Mr. Perey stresses the goals of Aesthetic Realism.

Mr. Stein, a former State Assemblyman, met twice last week with Mrs. Lall, but
the other two candidates were not invited by the host groups.

One of the more heated exchanges came Wednesday at a Cablevision debate
sponsored by a group called New Democratic Dimensions. The other debate last
night, sponsored by the League of Women Voters and Marymount Manhattan College,
was held at the college.

Mr. Stein asserted that Mrs. Lall's call for a $50 billion cut in the defense
budget was ''an extremist position.'' He said that he favored the Democratic
national platform position of a 3 percent increase in defense spending above the
inflation factor.

Mr. Stein would not rule out military aid for Central America as Mrs. Lall did.
He said that, unlike Mrs. Lall, he would have voted for a Social Security
compromise bill postponing cost-of-living increases to maintain the system's
fiscal stability. ''I feel Mrs. Lall is an extremist on these issues,'' he said.

Mrs. Lall said her proposed defense budget cuts amounted to ''only 16 percent.''
On Central America, she said, ''we learned from Vietnam that you start giving
military aid and soon you go deeper and deeper.'' She said she wanted to restore
any Social Security reductions.

Mr. Tembeckjian said he, too, disagreed with Mr. Stein on the military budget.
He said he favored ''reasonable'' but unspecified cuts. Mr. Perey said the major
difference among the candidates was that the others had not acknowledged that
''the wealth of America belongs to all the people.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Manhattan

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. OFFICIALS SAY 4 CUBANS DIED IN NICARAGUA AIR RAID LAST WEEK

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1075 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 7


Four senior Cuban military advisers in Nicaragua were killed last Saturday
during a Nicaraguan rebel air raid in which two private American citizens died,
senior Reagan Administration officials said today.

They said the target of the air strike, a military training school in Santa
Clara, near the Honduran border, served as a center for Cuban advisers in
Nicaragua.



Nicaragua Denies Report


At the time of the raid, the officials said, there were more than 200 Cubans and
several Libyans at the site. They said there might have been more Cuban
casualties.

A spokesman for the Nicaraguan Embassy, Miriam Hooker, called the Administration
report ''totally false.'' She said the only people killed in the air attack were
three children and the cook at the training school. All were Nicaraguan, she
said. ''There were no Cubans killed,'' she added. ''There were no Cubans or
Libyans there.''

The Administration officials said their information about the Cuban deaths came
from a highly sensitive intelligence source and should not be taken as an
indication that the United States, which has denied involvement in the raid or
involvement in the participation of the Americans, was somehow linked to the
attack.

New Questions Raised

The report of the Cuban casualties, however, raised new questions about the
involvement of the private Americans and what the Administration knew about
their role.

Members of Congress said today that they had learned that the air attack
originated from an airfield in Hon duras that was extended and improved last
year by the Defense Department and turned over to the Central Intelligence
Agency for use by the Nicaraguan rebels.

They said the C.I.A., which continues to oversee rebel use of the airfield in
Aguacate, was aware that the private Americans were using the installation in
their training of rebel pilots.

Rebel leaders and associates of the two Americans killed when their helicopter
was shot down in Santa Clara Saturday have said the helicopter was not involved
in the air attack. They said earlier this week that the helicopter, which was
given to the rebels by the C.I.A., flew to Santa Clara on an ''emergency rescue
mission.''

The two Americans who were killed were identified by associates as Dana H.
Parker Jr., a police detective from Huntsville, Ala., and James Powell 3d, a
part-time flying instructor from Memphis. Both men were Vietnam veterans and
members of an Alabama- based veterans group called Civilian Military Assistance
that has provided military equipment to pro-American forces in Central America.



Deny Any Link to Government


Members of the group, including its leader, Thomas V. Posey, a former marine who
is a produce wholesaler from Decatur, Ala., said this week that they had
received no payment for their help and were in no way connected to the United
States Government.

The C.I.A., which has supported Nicaraguan rebels since 1981, told Congress this
week that it knew members of the Alabama group were assisting the insurgents but
said it was not involved with the organization or its activities in Honduras and
Nicaragua last week.

The State Department said today that it was investigating whether United States
military officers in El Salvador had violated Federal law or department
regulations when they helped the private group supply military equipment to the
Salvadoran armed forces.

Several officers at the United States Embassy in El Salvador, including Maj.
Charles A. McAnarney, a logistics expert, have actively helped the Civilian
Military Assistance, according to members of the group and Defense Department
documents.

The State Department has also asked the Customs Service to investigate whether
the group violated any laws by sending military equipment to Central America
without an export license.



Reflection of Differences


The various accounts of the air raid last Saturday and the casualties that
resulted have reflected the sharply different pictures of the overall Nicaraguan
conflict presented by the United States and Nicaragua.

The Reagan Administration has contended since 1981 that Nicaragua has become a
base for Soviet and Cuban subversion in Central America and has said there are
more than 3,000 Cuban military advisers in Nicaragua, as well as East Germans,
Bulgarians and Libyans.

The Administration has spent more than $150 million to support Nicaraguan rebel
forces since 1982, and the C.I.A. directed the mining of Nicaraguan harbors
earlier this year. As money for the rebels has diminished in recent months
because of Congressional opposition, the C.I.A. has told lawmakers that its
involvement with the insurgents has virtually ended.

The Sandinista Government of Nicaragua, for its part, has accused the United
States of fighting a secret war to overthrow it and said the war has involved
numerous attacks by rebel forces against civilians.

As official American financing has been reduced, Nicaragua has said the C.I.A.
has turned to private individuals and groups to advise the rebels, raise money
for them and help carry out military operations in Nicaragua.




Nicaraguan Protest at U.N.




UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 7 - Nicaragua formally protested to the Security
Council today against what it called the ''fresh escalation of aggression'' by
the United States. The complaint was prompted by the deaths of two Americans
killed in Nicaragua last week when their helicopter crashed.

The chief Nicaraguan delegate, Javier Chamorro Mora, said, ''This is a situation
which saddens us and at the same time worries us because we do not want
Nicaraguans or North Americans to die as a result of the inflexible policy of
the Reagan Administration whose logical outcome will be the deaths of more
citizens of both countries if this insensible and not- so-secret war is
continued.''

The deputy chief American delegate, Jose S. Sorzano, characterized the
Nicaraguan complaint as an attempt to deflect world attention from its policy of
''denying justice and democracy to its own people at home.''

Acknowledging that relations between the two countries had deteriorated, Mr.
Sorzano said ''the United States is not trying to overthrow the Sandinista
Government.''

The Council last considered a Nicaraguan complaint of aggression in April, when
it failed to adopt a draft resolution that would have condemned the mining of
Nicaraguan ports.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PIKE PLACE MARKET A SEATTLE TREASURE

BYLINE: By MARIAN BURROS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 44, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 954 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE


Bushels of Walla Walla onions for $1 a pound, row upon row of neatly tied and
stacked fresh Dungeness crabs, each as sweet as a Maine lobster but only $3.89 a
pound, bunches of yellow squash blossoms just waiting to be stuffed. What
Easterners consider costly luxuries shoppers at the Pike Place Market in Seattle
take for granted.

But then the Pike Place Market is

DE GUSTIBUSunlike any other farmer's market in the United States. The mixture of
stalls and shops that cover seven acres downtown, overlooking Elliott Bay, is
not a restoration like the South Street Seaport in New York or the Quincy Market
in Boston. It is said to have been in continuous operation longer than any other
market in the country. Opened in 1907, it has fought more than one battle for
survival, but, unlike most other city markets, it has won them.

Pike Place is really not a tourist stop, though tourists with an interest in
food seek it out. Most of the people on the streets are serious shoppers. On a
busy, sunny Saturday there may be as many as 40,000 of them.

To be sure, not all the farmers in the market offer local produce. Those who
sell food from all over the world the year round are distinguished from local
farmers by the height of their stalls: the farmers have ''low stalls,'' the
others ''high stalls.'' The market has its share of boutiques, but the
refurbished buildings also house stolid German Americans selling Bavarian meats
and a grungy oyster bar with tables covered with faded cloths. Also available is
the city's famous ''killer'' cream; raw, certified and 49 percent butterfat, it
is so rich, local cooks say, that it whips when you shake it.

Just as some of the stalls have been passed down from generation to generation,
the habit of shopping at them has too. Seattle residents have always maintained
a special relationship with their farmers. The market was started in response to
anger over high food prices. In an account that sounds as modern as yesterday's
newspaper, farmers in 1907 were accusing middlemen of paying them too little and
consumers were complaining that they were being charged too much. According to
''The Pike Place Market'' by Alice Shorett and Murray Morgan (Pacific Search
Press, $12.95), cherries that cost 6 cents a pound in 1906 were 10 cents a pound
in 1907, while onions went from 10 cents to $1 a pound. ''This rise in food
costs,'' the book says, ''coincided with the boom in Puget Sound lumber prices
following the San Francisco earthquare and fire in April 1906.''

When the market opened in August 77 years ago it was an instant success. Soon
the farmers were followed by fishmongers, butchers, dairymen and restaurateurs,
and, in the 1960's, by artisans. The bustling shopping area was at its heyday
during the Depression, but World War II brought radical changes. By the 40's
many of the farmers, who were Japanese Americans, were interned; other farmers
went to work in defense plants. The end of the war saw a mass exodus to the
suburbs, and for reasons that now seem unfathomable people all over the country
traded freshness for the convenience of one-stop shopping at supermarkets.

The Pike Place Market's decline set the stage for the inevitable plans to
replace it with high-rises and parking lots. By the late 60's, however, people
were having second thoughts about tearing down their past and replacing it with
tall, impersonal buildings. Through a voter initiative in 1971 the market became
a historical district and was refurbished.

To me it is not the little shops that make the area special; it is the arcade
that is called the Public Market, where Pasqualina Verdi, an native of Italy,
has been hawking her fresh vegetables for 29 years. ''When I first start,'' she
said, ''only two people selling basil. Now look.''

Indeed. Fresh basil is as ubiquitous as parsley once was. There is also plenty
of fresh rosemary, sage, thyme and mint, not to mention arugula, which sells for
$1 a bunch, and local blueberries, at $2.25 a quart. What is exceptional is Mrs.
Verdi's special cucumbers, fetching $1 each and as sweet as sugar peas.

Miniature vegetables, for which we pay dearly on the East Coast, are displayed
matter-of-factly here, alongside the wax beans and bell peppers. Baby bok choy,
baby artichokes - the kind that can be eaten choke and all - and baby beets and
carrots are common, so common, indeed, that Shirley Collins, owner of a fine
kitchen-equipment shop in the market area called Sur la Table, was startled to
find that baby beets are a trend-setting item elsewhere in the country.
''They're on the ends of the greens we buy,'' she said, ''We usually cook the
whole thing.''



Latest Wave of Immigrants

At some of the stalls the Japanese and the Italians have been replaced by the
latest wave of immigrants from Vietnam and Cambodia. From among the pints of
tiny yellow tomatoes for 75 cents and raspberries at $2 a pint, they sell their
specialties, such as edible chrysanthemum leaves and what one vendor says is
tiny leaf spinach (whether it is or not the aftertaste is of spinach). Perhaps
like the basil of 29 years ago, the curiosities will be commonplace one day.

The variety of sea creatures is equally appealing. Four kinds of salmon are
available now and City Fish Market has them all. Its second- and
third-generation owners, the son and grandsons of David Levy, who came to
Seattle from Marmara, an island off Turkey, in 1903, sell 20 kinds of fish a day
- Dungeness crab from Puget Sound and Alaska, tiny Olympia oysters in the winter
and goeduck clams, among others. ''You can't buy the kind of fish you can get
here anywhere else,'' Jack Levy says. He may be right.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Pike Place Market

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK;
THOUGHTS OF AN INFIDEL

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 740 words


One of the leading knights in Ronald Reagan's ''religious'' crusade is the Rev.
Wally Amos Criswell, senior pastor of the First Baptist Church of Dallas and a
pillar of the New Right.

Pastor Criswell threw a party for Mr. Reagan in 1980 at the time when he and the
Rev. Jerry Falwell of the Moral Majority and the President-to- be became a
fundamentalist political team. On the Sunday before the Republican Convention in
Dallas last month, Pastor Criswell said: ''I think he's the best President we
ever had.'' He delivered the benediction that closed the convention.

And two nights ago, in an interview on CBS News, the minister said that all the
recent fuss about separation of church and state ''is a figment of some
infidel's imagination.''

Which is supposed to mean, I guess, that all the people who are troubled by the
President's mixing of religion with politics are, by definition, infidels. I
wonder if the White House would care to comment on that.

This volatile and destructive issue is, unfortunately, not going to fade from
this seamy Presidential campaign. It's here to stay, first, because Mr. Reagan
refuses to retreat from his intolerant and divisive marrying of his version of
religion with politics, and second, because his Democratic opponent, Walter
Mondale, senses in the controversy one of his few opportunities to scratch this
Teflon President and stir some passion among Democratic voters.

What we have here is the spectacle of a President suggesting that God is on his
side only, not on the side of his critics. Maybe he's right - but how can we get
confirmation?

Mr. Reagan says that ''politics and morality are inseparable'' and then contends
that since morality is founded on religion, ''religion and politics are
necessarily related.''

He goes on to say that those who don't accept these views, or his positions on
such subjects as prayer in public schools, ''are intolerant of religion.'' They
want, he says, ''freedom against religion.''

There's no other way to read Ronald Reagan than to conclude he is saying that
people who don't share his views are freighted with sin. They are infidels.

This is very dangerous territory. No one elected Ronald Reagan to be the arbiter
of sin. He's President, not Bishop or Chief Rabbi.

And when bishops and rabbis issue dicta in the public arena that anyone who
votes for so-and-so will be in a state of sin, they too have crossed that
necessary line between church and state. For they speak not as a journalist or a
teacher with a considered opinion - but as spiritual leaders wearing the
presumption of either infallibility or moral superiority or both.

So when New York's Roman Catholic Archbishop, John O'Connor, said on television
in June, ''I don't see how a Catholic in good conscience can vote for a
candidate who explicitly supports abortion,'' he was clearly crossing that line.

Those who say that my position would deny church leaders their right of free
speech and expression have, I believe, misunderstood the argument. This is not a
free-speech issue. No one is challenging the right of clerics to express their
opinions in the open marketplace of ideas. They, like all the rest of us, have
this privilege. But when they start endorsing candidates and trying to impose
their doctrines on others and labeling those who disagree with them as people
without conscience or sinners or worse, then they are publicly erasing the line
between church and state.  And when the power that is the Presidency uses a
private definition of religion and morality as a loyalty test for Americans and
says that those who can't pass it are anti-religious and impure, that is an even
more brazen affront to the pluralistic tolerance this Republic depends upon for
its survival. When a President does that, he's coming darn close to calling
dissenters un-American. We had our fill of that divisive poison in the Vietnam
period. Why is this President trying to revive it?  Under Mr. Reagan's
''religious'' formulation, some people are a little more pure, a little more
patriotic, a little more American than others. What will happen to ''the
others'' - the infidels? Will someone in the White House draw up a Heathen Hit
List or will they merely send out operatives to put ''Unbeliever'' stickers on
all the targeted mailboxes and doorposts?  It sounds downright silly, doesn't
it? And it would be, if it weren't so sinful. B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 188 words


U.N. Aide to Discuss Refugees With Hanoi




BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 7 - The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
said today that he would hold discussions with Vietnam about the possible
repatriation of Indochinese refugees now in camps in Thailand.

The High Commissioner, Poul Hartling, flew to Hanoi today after three days of
talks with Thai Government officials, who have expressed concern that a
substantial number of the 125,000 to 130,000 refugees from Laos, Cambodia and
Vietnam now in Thai camps will not be accepted for residence by third countries.
Thailand has repeatedly said it will not resettle the refugees here.

Mr. Hartling, a former Danish Prime Minister who has served as High Commissioner
since 1978, said he had been given firm assurances by Thailand's national
security chief, Prasong Soonsiri, that refugees would not be repatriated against
their will.

There has been concern in Thailand that the authorities will close camps,
particularly the Khao I Dang camp housing Khmer refugees from Cambodia, and will
return the refugees to Cambodian territory.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
Judge Postpones CBS Libel Trial



BYLINE:
By United Press International

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 132 words


A Federal judge has postponed until Oct. 9 the start of the trial of Gen.
William C. Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit against CBS Inc. without
ruling on the network's request that the case be dismissed.

In announcing the postponement Thursday in Manhattan, District Judge Pierre
LeVal did not say when he would decide on CBS's request for summary judgment.
But lawyers for both sides said they had little doubt the case would go to
trial. It had been scheduled to start Sept. 17.

The retired general is suing the network over a 1982 documentary, ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' which said that the general and his
command deliberately underestimated enemy troop strengths to make it appear that
the United States was winning the war.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. CHALLENGES AGENT ORANGE SUPPLIERS' DEFENSE

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 876 words


The Federal Government, after years on the sidelines of the Agent Orange legal
case, has moved to counter a key defense of suppliers of the herbicide used in
the Vietnam War.

The companies have said they were shielded from any damage liability by their
status as Government contractors. But in a brief filed this week, the Justice
Department asserted that the manufacturers were motivated by ''profit, not
compulsion or patriotism'' and were not exempt from liability.

The argument was made in connection with a matter unresolved by the proposed
$180 million settlement with Vietnam veterans and their families who claim
injury or genetic damage attributable to dioxin, a contaminant in the Agent
Orange herbicide.

In the brief, filed in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, the Government also
accused the companies of seeking to keep damaging documentation closed to public
inspection.

Company Questions Evidence


A spokesman for the Dow Chemical Company of Midland, Mich., one of the seven
defendants in the Agent Orange litigation, said that the argument obscured the
''fundamental question'' of whether anyone had been harmed by an impurity in the
herbicide.

''The weight of scientific evidence at this point does not indicate that Agent
Orange did, would, or could cause the health problems claimed,'' said the
spokesman, Gary Hamlin.

The Government brief was submitted to Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein of the
District Court several days ago but drew notice yesterday only through publicity
for a forthcoming article based on the brief by The National Law Journal.

Arvin Maskin, trial attorney in the Torts Branch of the Justice Department's
civil division, said in an interview that his brief could be seen as the
Government's most forceful challenge yet to the companies' main defense as
Government contractors. Mr. Maskin said the Government had not earlier come
forward because it had been made a party to the case only several months ago and
only now had to respond to a specific motion.

The motion by the companies called on Judge Weinstein to dismiss without trial
or further litigation the claims of several thousand Vietnam veterans who have
elected to ''opt out'' of the proposed Agent Orange settlement.

The judge rejected the the summary judgment motion, and he dismissed some of the
other ''opt out'' cases in which attorneys failed to appear in court.

The summary judgment motion was one of the major outstanding issues since the
proposed settlement was reached May 7 after more than five years of litigation.
The settlement, reached on the eve of trial provided for the seven chemical
manufacturers to create a $180 million interest-bearing fund to be divided among
Vietnam veterans and members of their families.

Final certification of the settlement by Judge Weinstein was put off until the
completion last month of fairness hearings in four cities.

U.S. Cites Competitiveness

The Government brief attacked the argument that the companies had been compelled
to produce Agent Orange for the Government. Its brief said, ''the issue of
compulsion never existed.''

''Indeed, not only did the defendants voluntarily contract to produce Agent
Orange,'' it went on, ''but some manufacturers also zealously promoted their
capacity to produce herbicides for the United States and vigorously competed for
the opportunity to do so.''

The Government said the companies had long been producing the same mixture of
the herbicides, 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T, for private commerce so they could not
contend they were forced to make it for the Government. Moreover, the Government
said, the companies frequently changed formulation, including purity and
chemical composition.

''This hardly indicates compulsion,'' the brief said. ''In fact, the evidence
which has long been available to the defendants and to the plaintiffs reveal
that profit, and not compulsion or patriotism, caused defendants to contract to
produce herbicides for use in Vietnam.''



Memorandums from 1960's

In support of this contention, the Government summarized a 1966 Army memorandum
described as follows: ''Dow offers a replacement for Agent Orange and offers the
Army 5000 gallons free for testing in Vietnam or Thailand. The offer was
declined.''

Another Army memorandum of 1966 was described as stating, ''Dow is said to be
'pressuring' the military to accept their new formulation of Agent Orange for
evaluation in Vietnam,'' and a1967 memorandum is described as saying, ''Dow
urges military to acquire Tordon 101, a commercial product, for use in Vietnam.
''

Under an earlier judicial ruling, to properly invoke the ''Government contract
defense'' the defendants , must prove that the Government established the
specifications for Agent Orange, that the product materially met all the
specifications and that the Government knew as much as or more than the
companies about any hazards.


The Government separately petitioned Judge Weinstein to unseal all documents
cited in its brief. The brief also said the companies had sought and obtained a
stay of all discovery to protect themselves ''from the threat of a factual
assault upon their singular version of the defoliation program.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RALLYING WOMEN ON NUCLEAR WAR ISSUES

BYLINE: By JUDY KLEMESRUD

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 74, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words


Joanne Woodward has a new role. On Wednesday in Washington she will be the
leading lady at the first National Women's Conference to Prevent Nuclear War.

Miss Woodward, who is chairman of the one-day event, said she thought it would
be the first time that a group of prominent American women joined together to
discuss ways of averting nuclear war.

''We want to open people's eyes,'' she said the other day in the office she
shares with her husband, the actor Paul Newman, at the Columbia Pictures
building, 711 Fifth Avenue (near 56th Street). ''I think the whole nuclear
problem is like having your leg cut off,'' she said. ''After awhile, as awful as
it is, you become used to it.''

Men will not be allowed to participate in the conference, in the Cannon Caucus
Room of the House of Representatives, Miss Woodward said. ''We're not antimen,''
she said. ''We're prosurvival. We just thought it would be best for women to
hear what women have to say on the subject, because we certainly aren't being
heard in those behind-the-door meetings where the decisions are being made about
war and peace.''



'They Can Register Voters'

The 54-year-old actress, best known for her roles in such films as ''The Three
Faces of Eve,'' ''From the Terrace'' and ''Rachel, Rachel,'' said she hoped the
conference would inspire women across the country to think about ways they could
help to prevent nuclear war.

''They can register voters and they can find out their candidates' stands on
nuclear issues and vote accordingly,'' she said. ''That takes effort, but on the
other hand, better effort than dead.''

The conference, she said, is expected to draw 250 prominent women in the fields
of education, science, politics, entertainment and sports. Financed with
donations from individuals and foundations, the conference is under the auspices
of the Center for Defense Information, a private watchdog group of which Miss
Woodward is a board member.

Among those who are expected to attend are Rosalynn Carter, Sally Field, Dr.
Helen Caldicott, Coretta Scott King, Mary Dent Crisp, Bella Abzug, Lily Tomlin,
Billie Jean King, Jane Alexander, Eleanor Smeal and several college presidents,
including Alice Ilchman of Sarah Lawrence and Nannerl Keohane of Wellesley, and
a number of Congresswomen from both political parties.

Conference participants are to include Dr. Estelle Ramey, president of the
Association for Women in Science; Dr. Carol Nadelson, president of the American
Psychiatric Association, and Alice Tepper Marlin, executive director of the
Council on Economic Priorities.

Miss Woodward said she agreed to serve as chairman ''because I was asked, and
because the conference was somewhat my idea, along with Adm. Gene R. La
Rocque.'' Admiral La Rocque is the director of the Center for Defense
Information. In a brochure describing the conference, he is quoted as saying:
''My generation has failed to stop the arms race. But it's really the men who
have failed. Now it's up to the women, and I believe they can do it.''

The actress laughed when asked if the conference was inspired by ''Lysistrata,''
the Greek comedy in which women withhold sex from their husbands to get them to
stop fighting a war.

''That was one of our early ideas,'' she said, ''but we decided it was
excessive.''

Miss Woodward, who is the mother of three daughters and two stepdaughters, all
of whom have left home, added: ''It's a matter of record that women feel more
strongly about nuclear war. Men tend to intellectualize it; women tend to feel
more viscerally about it. A large part of it has to do with children. We are the
nurturers, the bearers of children, and it's certainly antinurturing not to do
whatever you can to protect them.''

She said her 19-year-old daughter, Clea, plans to attend the conference, as does
her oldest stepdaughter, Susan. ''Unfortunately, the other girls are away at
school,'' she said.

Miss Woodward was interviewed while eating her lunch, a piece of honeydew melon.
She sat behind a desk in a brown leather swivel chair, above which dangled a
hangman's noose. ''That's my husband's sense of humor,'' she said, smiling. Her
comments were punctuated with sweeping arm gestures and a number of dramatic
desk thumps, especially when she was asked why entertainers should speak out on
issues.

''Because we're citizens!'' she said. ''And because we are in a position where
people will at least listen.''

Both Miss Woodward and Mr. Newman have long been identified with liberal causes.
She said she first became involved with the peace movement in the early 1960's
when she joined the group Another Mother for Peace during the Vietnam War.



Supports a Freeze

Miss Woodward, who supports a bilateral freeze on nuclear weapons, said she was
not worried about the Soviet Union's purported advantage in nuclear arms. ''I
don't think it's true and I don't think it matters,'' she said. ''We both have
far more than enough to do the job. So if somebody has 999 and we have 994, who
the hell cares?''

Does she ever fear losing roles because of her activism? ''Unfortunately, there
are not many roles for women my age anyway, so I'm safe,'' she said ruefully.
''I don't do films anymore, I rarely act at all. I teach and I direct, and
that's what I like to do.''

The silver-haired actress said she expected the conference to produce a plan of
action with steps that would help avert nuclear war. Women who do not attend,
she said, have been asked to hold meetings in their communities Wednesday to
discuss the issue, and to wear white ribbons, ''just as we're all going to be
doing.''

''Our next step,'' she said, ''is to try to work with the Soviet women.'' She
said she and her colleagues planned to start working soon on a similar
conference to be held in Europe next year, ''hopefully involving women from the
NATO and Warsaw Pact nations.''

''Women have such power, if we would only use it,'' she said. ''We have 53
percent of the electorate and we could fill Congress if we would just stand up
and say we can do it. And I know we can. I really believe it.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Joanne Woodward

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE INFLUX IN CAMBODIA STIRS CONCERN

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 644 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 8


The head of a United Nations group studying the political situation in Cambodia
said today that Vietnam was continuing to settle its nationals in that country
at a rate that was of serious international concern.

Willibald Pahr, the former Austrian Foreign Minister who is now chairman of the
International Conference on Kampuchea, a term for Cambodia, said at a news
conference here that information he had gathered indicated that at a minimum,
500,000 Vietnamese had been settled in Cambodia, a country of 6 million to 7
million people. ''And I have heard figures much higher,'' Mr. Pahr added.

''This must be of concern,'' he said, ''to all those trying to re-establish the
independence of Cambodia.''

Vietnam, which installed the present Cambodian Government under Heng Samrin in
1979, also maintains about 180,000 troops in the country.

Goal of Agency


The United Nations agency headed by Mr. Pahr is working to find an
internationally acceptable agreement on the question of who governs Cambodia.

Mr. Pahr is visiting several member countries in the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations to discuss several unspecified ''new ideas'' to break the
stalemate that has caused most nations outside the Soviet bloc to withhold
recognition of the Cambodian regime while recognizing instead a loose and not
very effective coalition of rebels fighting the Phnom Penh Government from bases
inside Cambodia. The head of that coalition, which includes elements of the Pol
Pot regime that ruled Cambodia from 1975 through 1978, is Prince Norodom
Sihanouk.

The question of which government represents the Cambodian people will arise
again in a few weeks when delegations are seated at the United Nations General
Assembly.

Both Vietnam and the Cambodian Government have dismissed charges of
''Vietnamization'' as a ''distortion campaign'' waged by ''China, the American
imperialists and the reactionary Thai ruling circles, starting in 1983.'' So
sensitive is the issue in Phnom Penh that the Cambodian Foreign Ministry's press
department issued a booklet last year explaining under what conditions
Vietnamese might settle in Cambodia.

At his news conference Mr. Pahr said that in his visits to Southeast Asian
capitals, he was also raising the subject of the restoration of Cambodia's
Angkor Wat, the collection of temple buildings that stands as a monument to
Khmer culture.

Loss of Site Is Feared


Mr. Pahr said he understood that if an agreement was not reached soon allowing
restoration and conservation work to begin at the site, Angkor Wat would
''disappear.'' He said he was quite frankly linking the fate of Angkor Wat,
which he would like to be made a ''zone of peace,'' to the larger political
issues.

''The idea in doing something for Angkor Wat is to attract world opinion to the
whole matter,'' he said. ''To save the heritage of mankind and at the same time
to save the most important monument for the cultural identification of the Khmer
people, this could be the starting point for national reconciliation. Angkor Wat
is sacred to all Khmers.''

The International Conference on Kampuchea was first convened in July 1981 after
a series of United Nations General Assembly resolutions were passed criticizing
Vietnam's role in Cambodia. These resolutions require, Mr. Pahr said today, that
no settlement can be reached without the ''total withdrawal of Vietnamese
troops, the full restoration of the sovereignty and independence of Cambodia and
the right of free self-determination of the Cambodian people.''

In three years of work by the conference's ad hoc committee, Mr. Pahr said,
''there has been no movement.'' He said it was now time to try fresh approaches,
although he could promise ''no miracles, no recipes, just some realistic ideas
on how we could move again on this very difficult problem.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOLLOW-UP ON THE NEWS;
Temple Burning

BYLINE: By Richard Haitch

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 49, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 186 words


Three days after a suspicious fire destroyed a small Buddhist temple in Hawley,
Mass., three Vietnam veterans surrendered and were charged with setting the
blaze.

An anonymous call to a newspaper had said that angry Vietnam veterans had burned
the temple, the Mahasiddha Nyingmapa Center, last Dec. 31 because benefits were
being given to Vietnamese refugees while many veterans' needs were neglected.
Two of the defendants have pleaded guilty and received suspended sentences, says
Edward Etheredge, first assistant district attorney in Northampton, Mass. The
two, he says, are patients in the Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Unit of the
Veterans Administration hospital in Northampton.

The third defendant has been returned to a Federal prison for a parole violation
and will be charged in the temple burning when he is released, the prosecutor
says.

The temple - which has no Vietnamese members, a spokesman says - is being
rebuilt. The group's treasurer, Richard Weiss, says $13,000 in donations has
been received to help the effort, including $1,000 to $2,000 from Vietnam
veterans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Berkeley City Council Agrees To Say Pledge of Allegiance

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 55, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 192 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif., Sept 8


For the first time in 13 years, the entire City Council in this haven of radical
politics has recited 31 words that are controversial here: the Pledge of
Allegiance. But they do not plan to do it again for another year.

All nine Council members, including Mayor Gus Newport, stood with hand over
heart and faced the American flag Tuesday as they broke a custom established in
1971, at the height of the Vietnam War protests.

Last year, after an American flag was burned in a Berkeley protest against the
United States invasion of Grenada, a campaign was started to reinstate the
pledge.

In the fight to restore the pledge, an effort was made to exclude the city from
a seat on the county board that allocates Federal job training funds. In May,
Federal District Judge Eugene Lynch ruled that county officials could not
legally exclude Berkeley just because the Council did not recite the oath.

A week later, the Council voted unanimously on a compromise to say the pledge
once a year at its first meeting in September.

''None of us are anti-flag or anti- pledge,'' Mayor Newport said then. ''The
problem was the ritualization of it.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Oh So Sure They're Right This is what President Reagan said to a prayer
breakfast in Dallas last month: People who resist the imposition of prayer in
public schools are ''attacking religion'' and frustrating the will ''of the
great majority of Americans.''

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 602 words


This is what he said to a B'nai B'rith convention in Washington last week: The
Constitution ''makes sure that every single American is free to choose and
practice his or her religious beliefs or to choose no religion at all. Their
rights shall not be questioned or violated by the state.''

There's a contradiction here, evident to those who in fact choose no religion at
all, plus many Catholics, Jews, Protestants of varying persuasion and others.
What would Mr. Reagan advise them to do when their children are ridiculed for
not participating in ''voluntary'' school prayers? Does he, truly, think they're
free to go out and resist such religious practice? Or does he think, as he said
in Dallas, that if they do resist, it is they who are guilty of intolerance?


Intolerance: that's the word that's burning beneath all the smoke about religion
and politics, a coupling that offends neither church nor state. There's plenty
of religion in politics - and ought to be. People in a democracy should act on
their social values, whether derived from their religious faith or from secular
sources.

Churches have long preached the social gospel. They have been prominent in the
civil rights movement, in the Vietnam resistance, in antinuclear campaigns, even
in partisan campaigns like the Rev. Jesse Jackson's run for the Democratic
nomination. It's no sacrilege against the Constitution that, in place of the
social gospel, other churches now preach Social Darwinism, inveigh on behalf of
spending Federal billions for new weapons and against spending any Federal
dollars for abortion.

The danger comes from people who are oh so sure they're right, who insist that
they alone represent the one true political faith, who revile the other side as
godless, intolerant obstructionists.

The President has come close to expressing just such certitude. Even though he
seemed to moderate his views Thursday before the B'nai B'rith, just two days
before, to the American Legion, he was still dividing the world into children of
light and children of darkness: ''What some would do is to twist the concept of
freedom of religion to mean 'freedom against religion.' ''

Religionists have every right to lobby for causes, to run for office, to
criticize with vehemence - but not to misrepresent their opponents or ridicule
their motives. Indeed, these rights carry with them a responsibility to respect
other views. In short, tolerance: the vital insulator of democracy, the cushion
that softens the sharp collisions between different views and faiths and enables
all Americans to live together in reasonable harmony.

Mr. A may strongly support capital punishment yet feel passionately that
abortion is murder. Mrs. B may disagree with equal passion on both counts and
demand of Mr. A, ''Death is death. Why can't you see the inconsistency in your
positions?'' There are times when devout practitioners of one creed, though
completely sure they are right, confront equally tenacious believers of the
opposite. In this free society, the practical, not to mention moral, mechanism
is tolerance.

Did it ever occur to the President that opponents of school prayer might have
worthy motives and are not out to frustrate ''the great majority of Americans''?
Did it ever occur to him that they might be right? And even if not, did it ever
occur to him that their views deserve their President's respect?

That would be tolerance. Or, as Learned Hand, the legendary jurist, said during
the dark days of World War II: ''The spirit of liberty is the spirit that's not
too sure it's right.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'VOLUNTEERS' TREAD WHERE THE C.I.A. IS NOT ALLOWED

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 886 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


He was in his mid-40's and he had a good job as a clinical psychologist,
teaching and conducting a private practice. But he was getting antsy.

''I was tired of seeing patients and tired of teaching,'' he said the other day.

So, telling his wife he was going on a vacation with the boys, he flew to
Mexico, he said, and took part in a raid on the home of a drug dealer who had
welshed on a deal. He said he got a commission on a $250,000 debt he collected -
plus a dose of shrapnel from a grenade.

A few months later, he said, he was leading patrols and staging ambushes in
Nicaragua, and early this year he was in the jungles of South America training
young men to overthrow the Government of Suriname.

The man, who goes by the code name ''Dr. John,'' is one of dozens of Americans
who remember their military days so fondly that they try to recreate the
experience. With few exceptions, they are fervent anti-Communists.

These days the easiest way to get back to basic combat is to go to Central
America, where it is not difficult for American veterans to find a place with a
rebel or government force in need of help.

''I made contact with some of the anti-Sandinista groups,'' Dr. John said last
week. ''And I ended up enlisting in the Eden Pastora forces. Everyone signs up
for an indeterminate stay. They can leave when they want to.''

Attention focused on American civilians in military roles in Central America
last week with the news that two men who had gone to Nicaragua to help an
anti-Government organization were killed when their helicopter was shot down by
Government troops. Nicaraguan officials said the men were participating in a
raid on a Government military school.

The men, who had been helicopter pilots in Vietnam, had entered Nicaragua with a
rebel guide and four other members of an organization called Civilian Military
Assistance, which claims to have about 1,000 members, mostly in Middle Western
and Southern states. One was a detective on leave from the Huntsville, Ala.
police department; the other was a man from Memphis who had been living on
disability payments from injuries suffered in Vietnam. Both were 36 years old.

Thomas V. Posey, a produce wholesaler from Decatur, Ala., and a former United
States Marine who is a director of Civilian Military Assistance, said the
organization had sent about 15 members to Nicaragua since January as military
advisers or to take ''nonlethal'' military equipment to the rebels.

Mr. Posey said the organization had been formed by friends who had gotten
together over ''war stories'' and ''gun talk'' and decided to ''provide military
assistance to the freedom fighters'' in Nicaragua. The group reportedly has been
under investigation for possible violations of the Neutrality Act, which forbids
private citizens from launching foreign invasions from the United States.

Mr. Posey denied that his organization or the two dead men had anything to do
with the Central Intelligence Agency, as the Managua Government has charged.
Last week, some in Congress also sought explanations. Representative Ted Weiss
of New York demanded that William J. Casey, the Director of Central
Intelligence, give ''a full account'' of any participation by his agency. The
State Department conceded that officials at the American Embassy in El Salvador
knew of the men's presence and that an American military officer acted as a sort
of unofficial go-between with the Salvadoran army.

Robert K. Brown, the editor and publisher of Soldier of Fortune magazine, said
that since last fall, under a loose agreement with senior army officers in El
Salvador, he has sent 10 teams of up to a dozen volunteers each to teach
Salvadoran Army soldiers combat tactics and first aid. Both Mr. Brown's magazine
and Civilian Military Assistance have sent the Nicaraguan rebels used combat
uniforms, boots, canteens and other battlefield gear, perhaps in violation of
the law.

Dr. John said he earned between $2,000 and $6,000 a month for his work with the
Nicaraguan rebels and the soldiers who hoped to overthrown the Government of
Suriname. But for him, like most of the others, money was not at the heart of
the matter. ''I didn't take as much as they offered,'' he said.

The members of Civilian Miitary Assistance and of Mr. Brown's teams are said to
be unpaid volunteers, with some of them paying their own airfare and room and
board to feel, once again, the chilling sensation of life in the combat zone.

''All of these guys have got jobs,'' Mr. Brown said from his office in Boulder,
Colo. ''Essentially they're taking vacation time.''

In the mid-1970's, some found work in Rhodesia and in Angola, and there may be a
few working in Libya today. But, says Mr. Brown, whose magazine carries
classified ads from would-be mercenaries, there are few paying jobs for
free-lance soldiers these days. He estimates there are no more than a couple of
dozen Americans working as mercenaries all over the world.

''We get a lot of inquiries from people offering their services,'' Mr. Brown
said, ''and we simply have not accepted this. We have insisted the people we
take down to Salvador are people we know personally. We have no way of checking
backgrounds and we have to reject some probably well-intentioned, well-qualified
individuals.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Thomas V. Posey

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE ;
SECRET PLAN

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1221 words


A delicious, sinister phrase has been an early centerpiece of the Democratic
campaign against Ronald Reagan: The President is charged with harboring a

secret plan to raise taxes after the election.

Walter Mondale has already frankly asserted that he would raise taxes to lower
the deficit, while laying the secret-plan bait in two punchy sentences in his
acceptance speech: ''He won't tell you. I just did.''

The President promptly stepped into the trap, by insisting he had ''no plans''
to raise taxes. In Spokesmanspeak, the signal-ridden language of pressrooms, the
phrase no plans is a term of art meaning ''not ready for announcement yet.'' (A
calibration further, no present intention, means ''We will announce it
Monday.'')

The no-plans response enabled the Democrats to blaze away with the charge that
the President had a secret plan to raise taxes. In retreat, Mr. Reagan finally
had to say he could ''never say never'' (and the originator of that great
Presidential axiom remains unknown), but he would raise taxes only as ''a last
resort.''

The secret-plan ploy had worked again. Cartoonist Wayne Stayskal of The Tampa
Tribune showed a pollster at a doorway being told by a housewife: ''I'm a
registered Democrat . . . but I've got a secret plan to vote Republican!''

Mr. Mondale was ready with his secret secret-plan plan, because he had been on
the receiving end of the charge this spring. Senator John Glenn, slamming his
primary opponent's undue caution, said, ''To be so cautious that your platform
consists of secret plans to be revealed after the elections - to be that
cautious is not leadership, it's politics.'' The New York Times headline over
the story zeroed in on the catch phrase: ''Glenn Says Rival Has 'Secret Plans.'
''

These happy hand-me- downs made me smile, because I was writing speeches for
Richard Nixon in the spring of 1968 when the phrase was first used as a
political charge.

In a speech about Vietnam, the candidate for the Republican nomination pledged
to ''end the war and win the peace in the Pacific.'' Supporters of George
Romney, who was the Rockefeller stalking-horse in the New Hampshire primary,
promptly elevated that vague Nixon promise to a ''plan'' and demanded more
details. In the Nixon camp, we knew there was no plan; some specific ideas for
negotiation were scheduled for delivery in a speech on March 31, 1968, but that
speech was scrubbed when President Johnson announced his retirement that night.

Governor Romney kept hammering away, ''Where is your secret plan?'' Within a
week, a false quotation had been manufactured: Nixon was widely quoted as having
said, ''I have a secret plan to end the war.'' Such a statement would have been,
on its face, nonsense for any political figure to say, but many newspapers ran
it as gospel. Nixon never said it.

Years later, in the White House, the Nixon speechwriters would see the false
quotation surface in some column; we took delight in writing the columnist:
''We're trying to find the origin of that remark. Do you happen to have the
clip?'' This straight-faced query led to red-faced embarrassment, which
satisfied some of our mediaphobia.

Today, the secret-plan charge has become part of many artful campaigns. It is a
means of attacking a generality-peddling politician for not being specific
enough; if and when the opposition promiser is suckered into revealing a plan,
the attacker then says, ''See? We smoked him out,'' and blazes away at the
specifics of the newly revealed (and usually newly created) plan.

Credit belongs to George Romney, who was laid low by his use of brainwashed. Who
remembers the firestorm over brainwashed any more? Nobody; yet secret plan,
little remarked at the time, has found its place in the art of invidious
inveighing.


Wiggle Room


 ''The conservatives in Congress,'' wrote Steven V. Roberts in The New York
Times from the Democratic Convention, ''tried to make the 'wiggle room' as small
as possible.''

''White House officials contend,'' wrote Hedrick Smith of The New York Times in
a follow-up story, ''that . . . Mr. Reagan has plenty of 'wiggle room' on the
tax issue.''

Wiggle room has become the Star Chamber in the tax legislators' boardinghouse.
The expression is a favorite of Senator Robert Kasten Jr., Republican of
Wisconsin, who was quoted on April 19, 1983, as saying: ''It's clear we have the
votes. But we're going to try to give the White House some wiggle room.'' Two
years before, Representative James Jones, the Oklahoma Democrat who heads the
House Budget Committee, said for the record that after talking with governors
and business leaders about deficit disputes, he sensed ''some wiggle room.''

The term is evidently new; the first use I have been able to find is in the
Sept. 11, 1978, issue of Business Week: ''Congress has drafted regulatory
legislation in a way that gives agencies . . . as little 'wiggle room' as
possible.'' Neologism-hungry Newsweek followed a week later with ''When it came
to plugging Democratic candidates, Rosalynn Carter was sensitive enough to give
each a little wiggle room - to dodge clear of her husband's political
liabilities.''

From these pioneer uses, the meaning becomes evident: wiggle room, noun, space
in which to turn around; an implicit opportunity for later flexibility; a
political position permitting interpretation leading to modification. Not quite
an escape hatch or a way out.

The usefulness of such a phrase in a campaign year cannot be overstated. The
muddying of clear commitment - the deliberate compromise in favor of vagueness,
designed to prevent future embarrassment - is part and parcel of the process of
comity and amelioration in the midst of political strife. The object is to get
your hook into somebody in such a way as to let him get off the hook later, a
nonpartisan concept encapsulated in wiggle room.

The phrase is too new for the dictionaries, although the Second Barnhart
Dictionary of New English has wiggle seat, defined as ''a lie detector fitted
into a chair to measure physiological changes and movement of the occupant.'' At
Webster's New World, David Guralnik was not able to flog his citators (a better
name than cite-seers) into coming up with anything and tries to get out of this
lapse by suggesting that ''a much more apt term would be wriggle room, since
wiggle is not quite the precise word.''

Wiggle, a verb moving to and fro for seven centuries, means to move from side to
side, usually jerkily, akin to the Old English wegan, ''to move.'' Wriggle means
''to squirm'' or ''to proceed with twisting and turning movements'' and is
related to the Old English wrigian, ''to turn,'' which is also the root of wry
and awry. The meanings of the verbs have merged, but some hint of difference of
emphasis remains: You can wiggle a portion of your anatomy, but you wriggle your
whole body; by metaphoric extension, you can wiggle your way out of a tight
spot, but you really have to wriggle to squeeze out of a trap.

Yes, wriggle room seems more colorful and has the benefit of alliteration, but
the language is the way it is and not the way it should be. The term is wiggle
room, and there is just no way out of it.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS Sept. 9, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 48, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1373 words


Fiction1

16

FIRST AMONG EQUALS, by Jeffrey Archer.  (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
Three young men vie to be chosen Prime Minister of Britain.  2

34

THE FOURTH PROTOCOL, by Frederick Forsyth.  (Viking, $17.95.) A London jewel
robbery leads to plots and counterplots behind the Iron Curtain.  3

213

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932.  4

412

LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency.  5

627

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  6

73

TOUGH GUYS DON'T DANCE, by Norman Mailer.  (Random House, $16.95.) A murder
mystery set in Provincetown, Mass.  7

526

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  8

916

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $16.95.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.  9

142

JOB: A Comedy of Justice, by Robert A. Heinlein.  (Del Rey, $16.95.) A bigoted
yet lovable religious man has his faith tested in a series of tribulations in a
variety of alternate worlds.  10

816

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.  11

133

THE MIKO, by Eric Van Lustbader. (Villard Books, $16.95.) An American
businessman struggles with a vengeful Japanese sorceress in a high-stakes battle
involving oil.  11

114

SILVER WINGS, SANTIAGO BLUE, by Janet Dailey. (Poseidon/Simon & Schuster,
$15.95.) The adventures and romances of the women pilots of World War II.  13

153

THE REVENGE OF THE ROBINS FAMILY, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $10.95.) The publisher offers a prize of $10,001 for the
correct solution to seven murders committed in glittering settings.  14

1222

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  15

1015

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.

  Nonfiction1

22

LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia.  (Slack/Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $13.95.)
Suggestions for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the
fullest.'' 2

111

THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and David Horowitz. (Summit,
$20.95.) The dark as well as the glamorous sides of four generations of a
prominent family.  3

310

IN GOD'S NAME, by David A. Yallop. (Bantam, $16.95.) A British journalist argues
that Pope John Paul I's death in 1978 was a case of murder.  4

413

WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The troubled life of the
late entertainer John Belushi.  5

814

THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent.  6

627

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard, $10.) The novelist recalls
her childhood in Mississippi.  7

512

GOOD MORNING, MERRY SUNSHINE, by Bob Greene. (Atheneum, $14.95.) The syndicated
columnist's journal of his child's first year.  8

951

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  9

108

D.V., by Diana Vreeland. Edited by George Plimpton and Christopher Hemphill.
(Knopf, $15.95.) Memoirs of the one-time ''Empress of Fashion.'' 10

1

THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) The author of
''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' recounts his search for a true love. 11

717

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  12

1218

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  13

3

A VERY PRIVATE EYE, by Barbara Pym.  (Dutton, $19.95.) An autobiography of the
late English novelist, derived from her letters and diaries.  14

4

AT SEVENTY: A Journal, by May Sarton. (Norton, $15.95.) The veteran
poet-novelist grapples with new and old personal problems.  15

1126

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

124

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for sports and fitness
activities.  2

423

WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard work updated in 1983.  3

33

WEBSTER'S II: NEW RIVERSIDE UNIVERSITY DICTIONARY.  (Houghton Mifflin, $14.95.)
A new dictionary with more than 200,000 definitions and many unusual features.
4

289

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  5

54

ZIG ZIGLAR'S SECRETS OF CLOSING THE SALE, by Zig Ziglar. (Revell, $13.95.) How
to ''sell'' your ideas, products and services.

 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.  *An asterisk before a
book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling
industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

AUDEN IN LOVE, by Dorothy J. Farnan. (Simon & Schuster,

$17.95.) The 30-odd-year ''marriage'' of the English poet and

Chester Kallman, the handsome idler whom Auden continued to

love long after their physical relationship ended.

FAMILY DANCING, by David Leavitt. (Knopf, $13.95.) A

remarkably mature collection of stories for a 23-year-old author,

who seems to become the characters he writes about - parents

and children, husbands and wives. A notable debut.

HILAIRE BELLOC, by A. N. Wilson. (Atheneum, $17.95.) A life of

the English author (1870-1953), who was full of prejudice and

comedy, probably wrote too much prose, and now, ironically, is

read mostly by children, for whom he wrote exquisite verse.

IMAGINARY MAGNITUDE, by Stanislaw Lem. (Helen and Kurt

Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $15.95.) The Polish science-

fiction writer's collection of introductions to imaginary books - a

successor to his ''Perfect Vacuum,'' reviews of nonexistent books.

THE NEW AMERICAN POVERTY, by Michael Harrington. (Holt,

Rinehart & Winston, $17.95.) A sequel to the author's influential

1963 ''The Other America,'' credited with making the country

aware of its poor, who, Mr. Harrington says now, are still with us.

WITH A DAUGHTER'S EYE: A Memoir of Margaret Mead and

Gregory Bateson, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Morrow, $15.95.)

MARGARET MEAD, by Jane Howard. (Simon & Schuster,

$19.95.) Two biographies of the famous American anthropologist,

the author of ''Coming of Age in Samoa,'' who died in 1978. The

first, by her daughter, is intimate and personal, and also treats of

Miss Bateson's father, the anthropologist Gregory Bateson; the

second, by Miss Howard, is public and archival. Together they

make an exemplary account of an extraordinary career.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS Sept. 9, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 50, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 773 words


Fiction1

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Warner, $4.50.) The five-year relationship of two
women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  2

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) King Arthur, fulfilling
a prophecy of Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  3

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) The struggle for money and
power in Tinseltown.  4

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) Three generations of a San
Francisco family.  5

SAVANNAH, by Eugenia Price. (Berkley, $3.95.) The romance and ambitions of a
young man in the Old South.  6

THE SEDUCTION OF PETER S., by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) The sudden,
danger-filled success of a long-out-of-work actor.  7

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Berkley, $3.95.) Three generations
of a German Jewish family in New York. 8

IDAHO!  by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam, $3.95.) The ''Wagons West'' series reaches
a territory teeming with gold seekers.  9

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Pocket, $4.50.) A fantastic yet realistic look
at Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  10

PARTISANS, by Alistair MacLean. (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) A doughty band sets out
to restore King Peter of Yugoslavia to power during World War II.  11

THE MADNESS OF A SEDUCED WOMAN, by Susan Fromberg Schaeffer. (Bantam, $3.95.) A
woman's search for love ends in murder charges and institutionalization.  12

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco.  (Warner, $4.95.) Murder in an Italian
monastery.  13

SECRET OF THE SIXTH MAGIC, by Lyndon Hardy. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $2.95.) The
laws of logic are under attack in a fantasy land called Arcadia. 14

ON A PALE HORSE, by Piers Anthony. (Del Rey/ Ballantine, $2.95.) The first
volume in a fantasy about the reincarnation of the deceased.  15

CROSSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) A clandestine trans-Atlantic
romance survives the stresses of World War II.  The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores and from representative
wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail outlets, including newsstands, variety
stores, supermarkets and bookstores. These figures are statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. The number of
titles within the two subdivisions of nonfiction can change from week to week,
reflecting changes in book buying.  *An asterisk before a book's title indicates
that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are
barely distinguishable from those of the book above.  Nonfiction

General 1

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (NAL/ Signet, $4.50.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  2

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of an Ivy League
graduate, doctor and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.  3

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.  (Avon, $3.95.) The plight of men who have
never grown up: a psychologist's analysis.  4

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.  5

CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) The life of a helicopter pilot
in Vietnam.  6

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.  7

OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $3.95.) The actress's
autobiography.  8

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspirational talks by a California professor.  9

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $3.95.) Predictions about America in the
next decade.  10

BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon.  (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) The back
roads of America.

Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous 1

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.  2

RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.  (Rand McNally, $5.95.)
For 1984. 3

IN SEARCH OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson.  (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $4.95.) A
new collection of the syndicated ''Far Side'' cartoons.  4

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson.  (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.  5

SNIGLETS, by Rich Hall and Friends. (Macmillan, $4.95.) Newly minted words that
''deserve to appear in the dictionary.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW & NOTEWORTHY;
New & Noteworthy

ion

SECTION: Section 7; Page 50, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of H. L. Davis



INSTEIN: THE LIFE AND TIMES, by Ronald W. Clark. (Avon, $5.95.) The biographer
Ronald W. Clark believes that Albert Einstein ''can, without exaggeration, be
called one of the great tragic figures of our time.'' Gerald Holton wrote in The
Book Review in 1971 that Mr. Clark thinks this is in large part because
Einstein, a dedicated pacifist, failed to get his ideas implemented in the
political arena. ''Einstein: The Life and Times'' has, Mr. Holton noted, ''a
cast of thousands, kings and commoners who happened to interact with Einstein
and who shared with him the elations and horrors of the first half of this
century.''

HONEY IN THE HORN, by H. L. Davis. (Avon, $4.95.) A typesetter at age 9, a
cowboy, a soldier, a farmer, a poet and a folk singer, H.L.  Davis won the 1935
Harper prize novel contest with ''Honey in the Horn.'' In 1936, it won the
Pulitzer Prize as the year's best novel. Stanley Young wrote in these pages that
the author ''assembled hearsay and legend and firsthand fact to make a gallery
of Americans like none other on earth,'' and his book ''represents a
full-blooded picture of a relatively untracked part of our historic past, of
Oregon during the homesteading period, 1906-08.''

ON THE ROAD WITH JOHN JAMES AUDUBON, by Mary Durant and Michael Harwood. (Dodd,
Mead, $14.95.) The authors camped out for 13 months and traveled 35,000 miles
following the path of Audubon, the wildlife artist who zigzagged about the
nation between 1804 and 1843. Born out of wedlock on a Santo Domingo plantation
to a French merchant and one of his slaves, Audubon came to the United States in
1803. Mary Durant and Michael Harwood published ''On the Road with John James
Audubon'' in 1980; our reviewer, Edward Hoagland, commented that ''Audubon's own
zest and vigor have been well served by these biographers.''

PRIZE STORIES 1984: The O. Henry Awards, edited by William Abrahams. (Doubleday,
$8.95.) This 64th volume of the O. Henry Memorial Award Series contains 20
stories, primarily from ''little'' magazines. Our reviewer, Robert Atwan,
observed that ''The preponderance of characters coping with nostalgia, identity
and self- irony makes one miss writers like William Saroyan and Harvey Swados.
Nevertheless, among the fine stories in this collection are those by Cynthia
Ozick, Gloria Norris, Lee K. Abbott Jr., Bernard Malamud, Willis Johnson and
Helen Norris. These stories are grounded in the vital commonality that keeps
imaginative writing from turning arid and stale.''

CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) This is the memoir of a
helicopter pilot in the Vietnam War. Robert Mason flew more than 1,000 air
assault, medical-evacuation and ammunition-resupply missions. In his review last
year, C. D. B. Bryan said that what makes ''Chickenhawk'' ''so interesting is
the fact that the helicopter pilots and crews operating out of primitive
airstrips, living in tents and shantytown barracks, led a life akin to that of
the daring young men who flew those canvas and wooden biplanes of World War I.''
Discharged in 1968, Mr. Mason is now serving a five-year sentence in a Federal
prison in Florida for a 1981 drug-smuggling conviction.

TEMPLE, by Robert Greenfield. (Dell, $4.95.) This 1983 National Jewish Book
Award winner tells of the return to Brooklyn of Paulie Bindel, a Jewish dropout
from Harvard who has been working in a bookstore in Harvard Square. Alan Cheuse,
reviewing Robert Greenfield's 1982 work, called ''Temple'' ''the most
intelligent, exuberant, deeply felt and entertaining long fiction of its kind to
come my way since the early work of Philip Roth.'' ''

NUN: A Memoir , by Mary Gilligan Wong. (Harper & Row, $8.95.) During what Eugene
Kennedy, our reviewer, called ''the great tide that flooded out of the religious
life in the late 60's,'' Mary Gilligan Wong left her convent after 11 years. In
her 1983 book, Mr. Kennedy says, ''she tells of her life season by season as she
passes from an aspirant of high school age, through various stages of training,
to her brief period of teaching as a nun. She counts herself among the last
group of women to be formed by a system that greatly changed since she left, at
25, to become a wife, mother and psychologist.''

THE ORLANDO TRILOGY, by Isabel Colegate. (Penguin, $7.95.) The British novelist
Isabel Colegate's ''Orlando King'' was published here in 1969. The other two
volumes in ''The Orlando Trilogy'' - ''Orlando at the Brazen Threshold'' and
''Agatha'' - appeared only in Britain, in 1971 and 1973, respectively. For the
first time the three are now available in one volume. Orlando King, the central
figure, arrives in London from an island off Britany during the Depression,
acquires political power and abandons his principles. In the final work, his
daughter, Agatha, redeems the family. Aileen Pippett, in reviewing ''Orlando
King,'' remarked that the book makes ''a direct impact because it is a
succession of clear pictures or striking statements; it has sharply outlined
characters, definite situations, dramatic pauses. Its story line leads through a
tangle of incidents to a climax that has the weight of inevitability.''

ASIAN AMERICAN LITERATURE: An Introduction to

the Writings and Their Social Context, by Elaine H. Kim. (Temple University,
$12.95.) Elaine H. Kim is concerned with literature written in English by
Chinese, Japanese, Philippine and Korean authors about the American experience.
This genre began in 1840 when the Chinese first came to the United States. Miss
Kim tracks major themes, analyzes stereotypes and discusses the search for
social identity, women's roles and responses to America's racism.

BIRDS OF PASSAGE, by Bernice Rubens. (Washington Square, $3.95.) Edith Milton
wrote in her review that the writing of Bernice Rubens - who belongs ''to that
honorable society of English novelists'' - compels from critics ''almost a
reflex response, murmurs about Jane Austen.'' Doubtless, Miss Milton explained,
this is because Bernice Rubens is a woman, has a crisp style, a mocking eye and
a sharp focus on the intimate details of social behavior. ''Birds of Passage''
is about four women - three widows and the daughter of one of them who has been
abandoned by her husband - on a Mediterranean cruise. B

TYPE: reivew

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LETTES TO THE LONG ISLAND EDITOR;
 Games for the Disabled: Additional Views

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 23, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 181 words


My congratulations to Odeda Rosenthal for her remarkable article regarding the
International Games for the Disabled (''Why the Snub? They, Too, Are Winners in
Athletics,'' Opinion Page, Aug. 19).

This article made me, personally, ashamed not only for myself for failing to
attend or take much interest in these games, but for the public in general and
the media in particular for such disregard of these games. Our attitude should
have been one of absolute admiration for the athletes' efforts and
accomplishments.

The overwhelming publicity and acclimation given the Olympic Games in Los
Angeles and their athletes on their return, versus the lack of same for the
handicapped athletes, remind me somewhat of the enthusiasm given the veterans
following World Wars I and II compared with the apathy when the Vietnam veterans
returned following that sad war.

The article was a real ''winner'' and worthy of a gold medal. I hope it will
receive consideration for future Games for the Disabled.

 DOROTHY C. COBB West Sayville

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SERIOUS DRAMA, OLD AND NEW, WILL TAKE CENTER STAGE



BYLINE:
By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2010 words


When previews of the last theater season appeared a year ago, ''Chaplin'' was
touted as one of the big Broadway musicals, ''Sunday in the Park With George''
looked like an Off Broadway project and ''Glengarry Glen Ross'' and
''Hurlyburly'' had not even been sighted on the horizon. The point is that, as
an art form and an industry, theater is spontaneous, serendipitousand difficult
to prognosticate. Big-budget spectacles like ''Chaplin'' never open; unexpected
arrivals like ''Hurlyburly'' set the city afire. It happens every season.

What is apparent this year is that in a departure from several recent seasons,
the key Broadway openings are plays, several with strong political content,
rather than musicals. It is not so much that producers have changed their ideas
about what sells, but rather that many of the big musical houses are already
occupied, with ''La Cage au Folles,'' ''Sunday in the Park,'' and other musicals
still playing - and still paying rent.

''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom'' by August Wilson, a play about race relations told
through the guise of a recording session by the legendary blues singer, will
open at the Cort on Oct. 11. The play earned critical acclaim and brought
audiences to tears during its run at Yale last spring. (Mr. Wilson's next play,
''Fences,'' will open at Yale in early 1985, with James Earl Jones starring.)

''The War at Home,'' a play by Texas playwright James Duff that opened last
season in London's West End, will come to Broadway in December. Alan Schneider
was to have directed the drama about how the Vietnam war affected one family,
but after his death Michael Attenborough stepped in. Frances Sternhagen will
star.

The radical Italian satirist, Dario Fo, will be represented on Broadway by
''Accidental Death of an Anarchist,'' starring Jonathan Pryce. The production,
which enjoyed good notices at the Arena Stage in Washington last year, opens at
the Belasco on Nov. 15. The question is whether Mr. Fo will be there for the
occasion, since the Reagan Admninistration barred him as a political undesirable
when he tried to enter the United States two years ago.

An American comic and social satirist with the unlikely name of Whoopi Goldberg
will bring her one-woman show, ''Whoopi Goldberg Variations'' to the Lyceum in
October. The show came about largely because Mike Nichols saw Miss Goldberg a
few months ago and was so bowled over he helped put together the investment for
her Broadway debut. Miss Goldberg does both serious and comic characters,
ranging from a surfer girl to a junkie, and has been likened to Richard Pryor
and Lilly Tomlin.

The Royal Shakespeare Company will perform Shakespeare's ''Much Ado About
Nothing'' and Edmond Rostand's ''Cyrano de Bergerac'' at the Gershwin, opening
Oct. 14 with a special premiere performance of both plays back to back; ''Much
Ado'' will open at 2 P.M., ''Cyrano'' at 8 that evening. Following the Sunday
premiere, the plays will be presented in alternating repertory during the RSC's
planned 10-week Broadway engagement. Derek Jacobi and Sinead Cusack will star in
both plays.

Two other early-season openings on Broadway are ''Dancing in the End Zone,'' the
new play by Bill C. Davis (''Mass Appeal''), which is due in the fall, and
''Alone Together,'' a comedy by Lawrence Roman co-starring Janis Paige and Kevin
McCarthy. It opens Oct. 21 at the Music Box.



Beyond the known quantities, the coming year also has four highly intriguing
possibilities. Whither ''Starlight Express''? At this point, neither the
Shuberts nor the Nederlanders have arranged to import the Andrew Lloyd Webber
musical, which has actors on skates portraying trains. The show has had mixed
reviews but good business in London. A New York production would answer two
questions: what producer is willing to put up the estimated $10 million it could
take to mount ''Starlight'' and how many spectators would pay the $60 its top
seats might cost?

''Victor/Victoria'' - another candidate to become the big musical of the season
and another chapter in Broadway's apparent fascination with sexual ambiguity -
is in limbo owing to the illness of producer Blake Edwards. If the Henry
Mancini- Leslie Bricusse musical does appear, Julie Andrews is to star, as she
did in the film version.

Two potential major Broadway dramas of the season are being held up by disputes
between their producers and Actors Equity about the use of British actors. One
is the West End production of Eugene O'Neill's ''Strange Interlude,'' most
notable for Glenda Jackson's starring performance. Actors Equity will allow Miss
Jackson, as an international star, to play in New York, but it has rejected
several of her supporting players. Negotiations are underway between the union
and the Nederlander Organization on arranging an exchange that would give
American actors roles in London and allow London's ''Strange Interlude'' cast
here.

Finally, ''The Road to Mecca'' by Athol Fugard, expected to open on Broadway in
the spring, is uncertain now because Actors Equity has refused to admit Yvonne
Bryceland, the actress Mr. Fugard wants to play the leading role. The drama
about an eccentric artist and a dissident young woman in South Africa, which
opened at the Yale Repertory last spring, may play in London instead of here.



Not surprisingly, Off Broadway will continue to mount many of the important new
plays, both American and British. The New York Shakespeare Festival has two of
the most arresting. ''The Ballad of Soapy Smith,'' a 33-actor tale of the
Klondike gold rush by Michael Weller, the author of ''Loose Ends'' and ''Moon
Children,'' will open Oct. 9 at the Public. And in early 1985, David Hare, the
author of ''Plenty,'' will direct his new play, ''A Map of the World.'' It
concerns the stormy encounter between a conservative Indian novelist and a
left-wing journalist.

Another British playwright-director, Simon Gray, will be doing double duty in
New York this season. Mr. Gray, last represented here by ''Quartermaine's
Terms,'' will direct his own ''Dog Days'' at the Hudson Guild in May.

Martin Sherman, the author of ''Bent,'' will have his new play ''Messiah'' open
at the Manhattan Theater Club on Dec. 11. The play - about a small, 17th-century
Polish town where the Jews believe the messiah has arrived - will be directed by
David Leveaux, the 25-year-old British director who made an impressive American
debut last year with ''A Moon for the Misbegotten.''

Playwrights Horizons will open its season on Oct. 30 with ''Romance Language''
by Peter Parnell, whose ''The Rise and Rise of Daniel Rocket'' was done there
several years ago. In the spring, Playwrights Horizons will stage ''Fighting
International Fat,'' the new comedy by Jonathan Reynolds, who wrote
''Geniuses.''

Interestingly, the Shakespeare Festival will be producing plays by two writers
normally asscociated with Playwrights Horizons - Albert Innaurato with ''Coming
of Age in SoHo'' and Christopher Durang with ''The Marriage of Bette and Boo.''
Mr. Durang will co-star in his own play with Sigourney Weaver.

Three other important young playwrights will have new shows this season. The
Second Stage will stage both an as-yet-untitled play by Tina Howe, the author of
''Painting Churches,'' and Wallace Shawn's ''Marie and Bruce.'' John Malkovich
will direct the Shawn play. And the Ensemble Studio Theater will give the
premiere of ''Talking Things Over With Chekhov'' by John Ford Noonan.



Aside from these new plays, there will be a number of notable revivals, both on
and Off Broadway. ''Pacific Overtures,'' the 1976 musical by Stephen Sondheim
and John Weidman about the opening of Japan to the West, will open at the
Promenade , a newly refurbished Off Broadway house, on Oct. 25.  Another
Sondheim show, ''Sweeney Todd,'' is being done at the New York City Opera.

A revival of Tom Stoppard's first play, ''Enter A Free Man'' will open Sept. 30
at the Perry Street in Greenwich Village. The comedy about an inventor of
useless gadgets will star Jerome Kilty, who won accolades as Phil Hogan in ''A
Moon for the Misbegotten'' on Broadway last season.

Frank Langella and Diane Wiest will co-star in a revival of Arthur Miller's
''After the Fall,'' opening Oct. 4 at Playhouse 91. The autobiographical drama
is the latest in a series of Miller revivals - ''A View from the Bridge'' two
seasons ago, ''Death of a Salesman'' last season - that have reaffirmed his
stature.

A 20th-anniversary revival of ''The Blood Knot,'' starring its author, Athol
Fugard, is slated for the Yale Repertory on March 26. Hal Holbrook will star in
the revival of Clifford Odets's ''Country Girl,'' opening Oct. 18 at the Chelsea
Playhouse, a new Off Broadway theater. (Two other new Off Broadway theaters, the
Minetta Lane and the Roundabout, also are also opening this fall.)

Neil Simon's feminized revision of ''The Odd Couple,'' starring Sally Struthers
and Rita Moreno as the mismatched roommates, is due on Broadway in February. It
will precede by two months Mr. Simon's new play, ''Biloxi Blues,'' the successor
to his autobiographical ''Brighton Beach Memoirs.''

Irene Papas and Amanda Plummer will co-star in the revival of Tennessee
Williams's ''Orpheus Descending,'' which opens Nov. 1 at Circle in the Square.
Gina Lollobrigida and Christopher Atkins will co-star in the revival of another
Williams drama, ''The Rose Tattoo,'' which will open on Broadway in April.

Two of the most celebrated actresses in the theater, Jessica Tandy and Kate
Nelligan, will perform at the Shakespeare Festival. Miss Tandy will star as a
feisty octogenarian in ''Salonika'' by the British playwright Louise Page,
opening in January. Miss Nelligan, whose performances in ''Plenty'' and ''A Moon
for the Misbegotten'' have won rave reviews, will portray Virginia Woolf in Edna
O'Brien's ''Virginia,'' opening in early 1985.

Circle Repertory adds another Shakespearean attraction to the season with its
opening effort, ''Love's Labours Lost.'' The production starts previews Oct. 2.



There are not many nominations for the big, glossy, ''La Cage''-style musical in
the coming season - ''The Three Musketeers,'' opening at the Broadway on Nov. 4,
and ''Treasure Island,'' with music by Jule Styne, due this winter or in the
spring of 1985, may be the closest - but there are several innovative ones.

The first Broadway musical of the season will be ''Quilters,'' about American
pioneer women. It opens at the Jack Lawrence on Sept. 25. Harold Prince will
direct ''Diamonds Are Forever,'' a musical about baseball with contributions
from John Lahr, Roy Blount Jr., and John Kander and Fred Ebb, among others. It
opens Off Broadway on Nov. 29. ''Leader of the Pack,'' a musical built around
the classic rock and roll songs of Ellie Greenwich, will open on Broadway in
November or December.

Playwrights Horizons will stage ''America Kicks Up Its Heels,'' a musical about
a Depression soup kitchen by William Finn (''March of the Falsettos'') and
Charles Rubin. It will open in January 1985. Lynn Austin's Musical Theater Group
sometime this season will revive last year's well-received ''Garden of Earthly
Delights,'' a musical inspired by the Bosch painting of the same name. The
W.P.A. Theater, which developed ''Little Shop of Horrors,'' will stage
''Feathertop,'' a musical based on the Nathaniel Hawthorne short story. It opens
Oct. 15.

The season's first one-man show will star the Italian actor Vittorio Gassman,
whose ''Viva Vittorio!'' is scheduled for Sept. 19 through 30 at the Promenade.

Two Yiddish musicals will play on Broadway this season. Mary Soreanu will star
in ''Oy Mama! Am I In Love!'' by Ed Linderman, opening Oct. 24 at Town Hall. The
Jewish Repertory Theater's ''Kuni Leml,'' a musical in English based on a
Yiddish comedy by Avrom Goldfadn, will move to the Audrey Wood in October.

And Joseph Papp, as ever with a new angle on things, will offer an evening of
''Ten-Minute Musicals'' at the Public in the spring of 1985.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of broadway performers; photo of Gina Lollobrigida (pg. 18)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW FOREIGN POLICY WENT OFF THE RAILS

BYLINE: By Kenneth N. Waltz

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1191 words


Kenneth N. Waltz, the Ford Professor of Political Science at the University of
California, Berkeley, is the author of ''Theory of International Politics.'' OUR
OWN WORST ENEMY

The Unmaking of American Foreign Policy.  By I. M. Destler, Leslie H. Gelb and
Anthony Lake.  319 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $17.95.

IN 1979 Leslie H. Gelb and Richard Betts wrote a

book on America's policy toward Vietnam. Its subtitle was ''The System Worked.''
This year a book by

Mr. Gelb, the national security correspondent of The New York Times, I. M.
Destler, a senior fellow of the Institute for International Economics, and
Anthony Lake, a professor of international relations at Amherst College, argues
that over the past 20 years our Government, and our society along with it, has
been breaking down. Vietnam destroyed an already crumbling foreign policy
consensus. The Nixon Presidency shook the confidence of the people in their
political institutions. The Carter Administration, better at making foreign
policy than at presenting or explaining it, failed to restore either consensus
or confidence. Policy has become increasingly infused with politics, until
finally the Reagan Administration has brazenly put ''politics over policy,'' to
use the authors' phrase.

In contrast, Messrs. Destler, Gelb and Lake see the two decades following World
War II as ''golden years'' for American foreign policy. Presidents had effective
control; they courageously sponsored creative policies. Congress behaved as a
responsible critic should, reliably supporting major Presidential measures. The
press for the most part decorously applauded.

What went wrong? Foreign policy first went off the rails with Kennedy's
appointment of McGeorge Bundy as national security assistant. In two arresting
chapters, the authors map the movement of power from secretaries of state to
national security assistants, or from ''barons'' to ''courtiers.'' Presidents
had staffed foreign policy agencies largely with career officers and lawyers,
financiers and businessmen - establishment figures who were relatively
nonpartisan and practiced politics as an avocation and out of civic virtue. The
members of the new elite are full-timers, experts, advocates and ideological
loyalists, and in 1977 they took over almost totally, filling more than 100
critical positions. The Zbigniew Brzezinskis had replaced the Henry Stimsons.

All the while, the twin American illusions of omnipotence and total
responsibility for other nations were raising people's expectations and tempting
would-be Presidents to promise great international accomplishments at little
risk and low cost. Once elected, Presidents found themselves caught in a
''promise-performance trap.'' Prisoners of their own rhetoric, they have been
unable to back away from a doomed expedition against Cuba, or to leave
Indochina, an area of little intrinsic importance, to work out its own destiny.

Partly in reaction to Presidential blunders and abuses, Congress and the news
media have become more inquisitive and aggressive. With the explosive growth of
Congressmen's personal staffs from 2,030 in 1947 to 10,190 in 1976, Congressmen
were equipped as never before to criticize policies and obstruct them. As party
influence waned and the power of committee chairmen declined, individual members
gained in prominence. As foreign policy became more and more political, the
temptation to simplify and exaggerate grew, tendencies swelled by television's
emphasis on political news tersely reported.

The authors give our foreign policy high grades for the first two postwar
decades, low grades for the next two. A virtue of this book is that it tries to
explain the declining quality of foreign policy by criticizing the process by
which it is made. Yet strikingly similar criticisms of both process and policy
were made with equal vigor in the earlier period. From the end of the war into
the 1960's, Congress, we read, was passive, almost ''supine.'' Few, however,
thought so at the time. Looking back at his years at the State Department and
echoing a similar lament by his successor, John Foster Dulles, Dean Acheson
complained that one-sixth of his working days in Washington were spent preparing
for and meeting with Congressional committees or less formal groups of senators
and representatives. And the diplomat George Kennan, among others, doubted we
could ever make and conduct an adequate foreign policy without constitutional
reforms that would enable Presidents and Congress to work in harmony. Policy in
the earlier, as in the later, period emerged from the public clash of offices
and personalities. The process is messy, as commentators over the centuries have
pointed out, often with dismay. But conflict may sharpen issues, define
possibilities, encourage consideration of different views and interests and help
to build consensus. Policy is not necessarily confused, incoherent and erratic
just because it is messily made.

Earlier, as now, many thought the incoherence of policies was rooted in flaws of
the system. The 1950's saw the nation, frustrated over China and Korea, succumb
to McCarthyite furies. It was the decade of the Gaither Report, which expressed
the widening belief that we were insufficiently prepared to deal with the menace
of international Communism. So did an earlier National Security Council paper.
Observing all this from a distance, we are likely to see mainly the gleaming
gold, although a closer look reveals the dross.

United States foreign policy has been both constant and erratic - erratic most
often on details and in political rhetoric, as the authors' examples show.
Still, even while wavering, the country has stayed on course. The authors remark
that foreigners fret over our unpredictable behavior. Yet some foreign observers
have drawn attention to a massive immobility in American policy. As the British
expert on international relations, the late Alastair Buchan, once said, American
policy is ''extremely hard to alter.'' The continuity of policy is surely
impressive. Who would have thought when the war ended in 1945 that 40 years
later we would still be carrying West Germany and much of Western Europe on our
backs at a cost recently estimated by Senator Sam Nunn at $90 billion a year?
Who would have thought we would be proportionately outspending Japan for defense
by about five to one, in considerable part to protect its vital interests?
Seldom have a country's costly commitments abroad been sustained with the
constancy and vigor that America has shown.


THE authors paint an important part of the political picture in bold strokes and
with telling effects. The making of foreign policy has become more political,
and because some of the participants in our confrontational system have changed,
the policies produced are affected in new ways. Yet, one should add, despite all
the political thrashing about, the main features of the President's program
still become the policy of the land if the President works hard enough for them.
And for better or worse, policy continues to point in the same direction. B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 10, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MARYLANDERS THROW A PATRIOTIC PARTY

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 765 words

DATELINE: HEBRON, Md., Sept. 9


When the green parachutes blossomed in the sky, everyone cheered. The endless
game of horseshoes paused, and the players silently watched. When the jumpers
glided to earth and their canopies fluttered down to disappear in the green
fields of soybeans, the cheers rose again.

The 10th annual Hebron Festival for Patriots had begun on Bruce Nichols's farm
here in the Eastern Shore countryside.

Then the serious business of consuming 980 pounds of barbecue from four hogs,
300 pounds of chicken, dozens of deviled eggs, gallons of cole slaw and 55 kegs
of beer resumed.

Sept. 8 is a date with no significance besides that of the homegrown festival,
which its organizers see as part of a national resurgence of patriotism. No
flags were waved, no speeches were heard and no one spoke of politics, but the
spirit of national pride and neighborly good fellowship prevailed.

'They'd Better Not'


In keeping with the day's theme Georgia Yost commented: ''We're pretty patriotic
people around here. You don't see anybody stepping on the American flag - and
they'd better not.''

For nearly a mile, cars, jeeps and pickup trucks lined rural Rewastico Road, and
motorcycles were scattered around Mr. Nichols's 65 acres. The Daily Times of
nearby Salisbury, Md., calls the event ''one of the largest annual outdoor
parties on the Lower Eastern Shore.''

It is far more than that, Mr. Nichols believes. Like many others, Mr. Nichols,
the 33-year-old director of soil conservation for nearby Worcester County, had
seen the evidence of a rebirth of patriotism in the crowds that cheered the
Olympic torch as runners carried it across the United States this year.

But, he contends, it started here. The Hebron Festival grew from a gathering of
friends in August 1975 who worried about a malaise that they saw spreading
through the land, he recalled.

They adopted a charter for an organization to promote an annual celebration. And
they named their group as well as the event the Hebron Festival for Patriots.

'Reversal of National Pride'


''Since the Vietnam era,'' the preamble to the charter said, ''Americans have
witnessed and participated in the greatest reversal of national pride and
patriotism this country has ever experienced.'' The group's aim, it said, was
''to rejuvenate and enhance the American patriotic ethic.''

The Eastern Shore was fertile ground for the plan, Mr. Nichols continued. ''I
think you always find a deeper sense of patriotism in lower-population areas
like this, far from big cities,'' he said.

This year's event began about noon Saturday and continued with dancing in Mr.
Nichols's barn to bands of country and western and rock music until nearly
daylight today. It attracted celebrators from as far away as Minnesota.

Most of the neighbors who gathered, bearing dishes of food, wore T-shirts
carrying a second name for the festival, ''The 10th annual Hebron Hotel Party.''
Hebron Hotel is a name Mr. Nichols's farmhouse has acquired because of the many
friends he has taken in when they needed a place to stay.

Victory Over the Malaise


But awareness of the theme of patriotism was no less pervasive, Mr. Nichols
said. And the festival, he thought, could now be regarded as a celebration of
victory over the old malaise.

''This is a statement we can make and feel good about,'' said one of his friends
and fellow organizers, William Fritz, another soil conservationist.

Many among the celebrators, whose ages seemed to range from the early 20's to
the middle 50's, had been military volunteers in the Vietnam War, Mr. Fritz
noted, adding, ''It's the price we paid for liberty, the price everybody ought
to pay.''

Some, of course, saw a different emphasis, among them Julie Bellamy. ''I came to
enjoy a good party,'' said the young woman, brandishing her glass of beer. ''It
seemed to be the American thing to do.''

Over the years the Maryland National Guard has lent its support, providing both
a helicopter and volunteer parachustists to jump from it. About a dozen of them
parachuted down Saturday to provide the principal spectacle.

The annual merrymaking has become so popular that Mr. Nichols and his fellow
organizers have sought to limit attendance to avoid crowds that could overwhelm
his farm.

Last year there were 2,400 celebrators. This year attendance was to have been
limited to 1,000. But as the night wore on, long after the crowd had passed
1,500, no one was counting.

''You can feel good about it,'' said Stephen Smoot as the party rolled on. ''And
it's a lot of fun.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Maryland; photo of Bruce Nichols; photo of Bruce Nichols farm in
Hebron

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 12, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MORE VIETNAMESE TO GET PERMISSION TO ENTER THE U.S.



BYLINE: , Special to the New York Times
By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 943 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 11


Secretary of State George P. Shultz announced today that the United States was
ready to admit the thousands of Vietnamese children fathered by Americans as
well as 10,000 former and current Vietnamese political prisoners from
''re-education'' camps.

He appealed to Hanoi to live up to a promise to let them go.

Vietnam's Prime Minister, Pham Van Dong, said in May that Hanoi would be willing
to send all the so- called Amerasian children as well as the inmates of the
''re-education'' camps to the United States. He said there were 15,000 such
children. Many of them are ostracized in Vietnamese society because of their
skin color. Vietnamese officials have said there were about 10,000 prisoners in
the ''re-education'' camps.



 'Two New Initiatives'


State Department officials said they believed the total number of children
fathered by Americans before 1975, when South Vietnam was captured by the
Communists, was closer to 8,000. Most of them live with their Vietnamese mothers
and Vietnamese siblings. The State Department says it believes the number of
current prisoners may be anywhere from 6,000 to 15,000.  Mr. Shultz made the
announcement in separate testimony to Senate and House judiciary subcommittees
on refugees. He said he wanted to announce ''two new initiatives'' approved by
President Reagan.

The first, he said, is that ''the United States will accept for admission all
Asian-American children and their qualifying family members now in Vietnam.'' He
said he hoped they could be brought into the United States over a three-year
period.




'Undisputed Ties to Our Country'


''Because of their undisputed ties to our country,'' he said, ''these children
and family members are of particular humanitarian concern to the United
States.''

The second initiative, Mr. Shultz said, is ''for the resettlement of political
prisoners currently and previously confined in the 're-education camp' prisons
in Vietnam and their qualifying family members.'' He said he hoped that 10,000
such prisoners and their families could be resettled in the United States over a
two-year period.

Because many of those prisoners were former South Vietnamese military and
civilian officials with close ties to the United States they ''are of particular
humanitarian concern to the United States,'' he said.

''Success in both of these initiatives will require the good will and
cooperation of the Vietnamese Government,'' Mr. Shultz said. ''We hope the
Vietnamese will now respond to these new appeals.''

A delegation headed by Robert L. Funseth, the senior deputy assistant secretary
for refugees in the State Department, will go to Geneva early next month for a
meeting with Vietnamese officials in connection with an annual executive board
session of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Mr. Shultz said
the matter would be raised with the Vietnamese there.

The Administration had been pressed by many members of Congress and by voluntary
agencies to be more outspoken in support of allowing Amerasian children and
political prisoners into this country. The initial reaction to Mr. Shultz's
presentation today was positive.

Roger P. Winter, director of the United States Committee for Refugees, said,
''We are very pleased that the Administration at the highest levels has made
this commitment.''


Some Concerns Are Raised


He added, however, that it was ''critical'' that there be ''vigorous
discussions'' with the Vietnamese soon, and that bureaucratic obstacles not be
put in the way. The judiciary subcommittees also praised the program.

There was concern, however, voiced by some groups. Albert P. Blaustein, chairman
of the Human Rights Advocates International, which has been arguing that the
Amerasian children are American citizens and should be allowed immediate entry
to the United States, said, ''We do not approve of the position taken by the
State Department because the department position is to treat the children as if
they were refugees and to handle them through refugee procedures.''

He also was critical of Mr. Shultz's plan to bring them into this country over a
three-year period, which he said was too long, and ''would rob them of the
chance to be children.''

Since 1975, 700,000 Vietnamese have been resettled in the United States, about
half of the worldwide total of 1.3 million. Most of those had escaped by boat to
other countries, such as Thailand, and were later admitted to the United States.

In recent years, Vietnam has agreed to a United Nations-sponsored system known
as the Orderly Departure Program, by which some 10,000 Vietnamese a year have
been coming to the United States legally. Of that number, about 3,000 Amerasian
children and their families have been admitted to this country.

Mr. Shultz said the United States hoped to use the departure program for
securing the release of the rest of the children and the political prisoners.

 70,000 Refugees a Year


Over all, he said, the United States would admit 70,000 refugees worldwide in
the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1, of which 50,000 would be from East Asia. This
was approximately the number admitted in the current fiscal year. Of the 50,000
total, 10,000 a year are reserved for those in the Orderly Departure Program,
but Mr. Shultz indicated that number could be increased if the Vietnamese allow
large numbers of children and prisoners to depart.

Some voluntary agency officials expressed concern that Mr. Shultz had not been
more forthcoming in saying there was no limit on admission if the Vietnamese
would open their doors to let the children and prisoners out.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George Shultz with Alan Simpson and W. Taply Bennett (page
A12)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 12, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 12, 1984 International

Thousands of Vietnamese children fathered by Americans and about 10,000 former
and present Vietnamese political prisoners may enter the United States,
Secretary of State George P. Shultz announced. He appealed to Hanoi to live up
to a promise to let them go. (Page A1, Column 6.)

Syria's power struggle grew confused as Defense Minister Mustafa Tlas was quoted
as saying that the brother of President Hafez al-Assad was ''persona non grata
forever.'' Col. Rifaat al-Assad, the brother of the ailing President, had been
viewed as the probable victor in any struggle for succession. (A1:5.)

An Olympics surplus of $150 million from the Games was reported by the
organizers in Los Angeles. They said that most of the money was committed to
aiding amateur sports programs. The surplus was about 10 times what the
officials had estimated it would be before the July 28 opening of the Games, the
first to be privately financed. (D25:1-4.)

The President said he would meet Sept. 28 at the White House with the Soviet
Foreign Minister, Andrei A. Gromyko, in an effort to ease ''suspicion and
hostility.'' (A1:3-4.)

Bolivia is addicted to cocaine trading and the drug is the most important
commodity of foreign exchange. However, with United States prodding and aid, the
Bolivian Army has occupied the Chapare, where one- third of the world's coca
leaf grows, and the soldiers have driven the cocaine traffickers away. (A1:4-6.)
National

The President said the budget deficit would be much lower if Congress had
approved all his proposed reductions. Mr. Reagan, pressed to disclose his
strategy for reducing the record deficits as Walter F. Mondale did on Monday,
said he would propose similar cuts if he was re-elected. (A1:4.)

Walter F. Mondale renewed a call to President Reagan to propose a plan to reduce
the Federal budget deficits that would match Mr. Mondale's package. Quoting Joe
Louis, the Democratic Presidential nominee called to Mr. Reagan, ''You can run
but you can't hide.'' (B8:1-2.)

Walter Mondale will move rightward on foreign policy issues in the final 60 days
of the Presidential campaign to attract moderate and conservative Democrats,
according to his aides.  The feeling in the Mondale camp is that while President
Reagan remains vulnerable on the peace issue, Mr. Mondale is also vulnerable
because of his liberal image. (B9:1-2.)

Vice President Bush reluctantly expressed his position on abortion, saying he
personally would advocate abortion in cases of rape, although he would oppose
the use of public funds to pay for it. (B9:5-6.)

Hurricane Diana raked the North Carolina coast east of Cape Fear, packing winds
of more than 135 miles an hour, pushing storm tides up to 12 feet higher than
normal and pounding the shoreline with torrential rain. But the worst of the
hurricane still remained offshore, with its center about 15 miles to east of the
Carolina coast. By late evening, damage was reported to be limited consisting
mostly of snapped power lines and smashed windows. (A1:1-2.)

Excessive prices are still being paid to contractors by the Pentagon, according
to documents disclosed by Air Force employees. The prices of some components of
large transport planes are about four to five times what they were four years
ago, and the Government is spending $170.98 for a flashlight and $74,165 for an
aluminum ladder. (A20:4-6.)

Whether Texas Instruments violated any criminal statutes when it shipped
improperly tested microchips to manufacturers of weapons systems will probably
be investigated, according to Pentagon officials. (A18:1-2.)

Votes on new MX missiles would be put off until next year under a plan being
discussed by House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. and the Senate majority leader,
Howard H. Baker Jr., according to aides. (A21:1-3.) Metropolitan

Mismanagement in the school system in New York City was reported by the city's
Department of Investigation. In a report, the department said the public school
system was unable to police itself and did not know how many teachers were in
classrooms at any given time. The report also said that getting no-show jobs was
easy for teachers and that ''ignoring, bending or breaking the rules'' had
become accepted practices. (A1:1.)

Fort Drum will gain a light infantry division, the Army announced. Officials
said the new division, which will be the first to be stationed in the Northeast
since World War II, will bring 7,500 troops and 9,700 dependents to Fort Drum,
which is in one of the most economically depressed regions of upstate New York.
(A1:2-3.)

Andrew J. Stein handily defeated three opponents to win the Democratic
nomination for the House in the East Side's 15th Congressional District and set
the stage for a close and expensive campaign between the Manhattan Borough
President and Representative Bill Green, a Republican. In the 6th Congressional
District in south Queens, Representative Joseph P. Addabbo, the 24-year House
veteran, easily defeated Simeon Golar's second attempt to deny him renomination.
(B1:4.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 13, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Says It's Open To Cambodia Mediation

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 181 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Sept. 12


Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam said Tuesday that his country would
welcome attempts by a third party to promote peace in Cambodia, the Kyodo news
agency reported today.

Mr. Thach also said Hanoi would continue searching for American soldiers missing
since the Vietnam War and repeated his nation's willingness to allow political
dissidents to leave the country, Kyodo reported in a dispatch from Hanoi.

The agency said Mr. Thach told its correspondent that Vietnam would
unconditionally negotiate a peace proposal by the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, which has demanded that free elections be held in Cambodia and that
Vietnam withdraw its troops from the country.

''It would be better to form an international supervisory commission by neutral
nations and let it play the role of peacekeeping in Cambodia,'' Mr. Thach was
quoted as having said.

His statement appeared to reverse Vietnam's previous policy rejecting the United
Nations as a mediator and an Indonesian proposal for the creation of an
international supervisory group.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 13, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE;

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 727 words


LENSMAN Irving Penn has had a passion and a talent for the camera that
established him as a photographer as long ago as the 1940's, when his pictures
of new fashions and celebrities began appearing in Vogue magazine - photographs
that approached paintings in their composition.

During the course of 40 years, Mr. Penn has ceaselessly experimented with new
perceptions and techniques that have kept him, perhaps, from being typecast in
the annals of his art. Some idea of the breadth of his artistry is conveyed in a
new exhibition that opens today in the singularly attractive and intimate
photography gallery of the Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street.

The 200 photographs, in color and in black and white, constitute the first
retrospective in more than 20 years of the work of this artist known for his
editorial, advertising and fashion photography. Included are pictures of
portraiture, fashion, advertisements, nudes, ethnographic topics and still life,
along with some of Mr. Penn's early and unpublished work. The show spans four
decades leading to his later interest in expressive photography and platinum
printing.

Open through Nov. 27 daily except Wednesdays from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. (Thursdays
to 9 P.M.). Admission: $4.50; over-65's, $2; under-16's and students, $3.
Information: 708-9500.



DANCE It's not often that the Dance Theater of Harlem, a renowned 15-year- old
company founded by Arthur Mitchell as the frst all-black ballet school and
troupe, does not have a roof over its head. Today, at noon, this will be its
situation, but no cause for complaint.

Dancers of the 39-member company will be performing in Vietnam Veterans Plaza,
the harborside park at Coenties Slip and Water Street, near Manhattan's southern
tip. With the splendid backdrop of high concrete and broad waterway framing
their performance, the dancers will do a four-dance program. ''Adagietto No. 5''
has music by Mahler and choreography by Royston Maldoom. Loyce Houlton's
''Wingborne'' is to the music of Dvorak, while ''Pas de Deux Square Dance'' has
steps by Balanchine to music by Corelli and Vivaldi. ''The Greatest'' has Mr.
Mitchell's choreography to music by Creen/Masser and vocals by George Benson.

The program is presented by the Lower Manhattan Cultural Council and is
sponsored by the American Express Foundation. Admission is free. If it rains,
come back same time tomorrow. Information: 269-0320.



DRAMA The Musical Theater Works starts its second season today, which should be
encouraging news for those who are concerned with the future of musicals. This
is a company that was established to allow new musicals by people as yet not
established themselves to develop their work on a stage, at 133 Second Avenue,
at St. Marks Place (677-0040).

The season opener is ''Cradle Song'' and one of its distinguishing features is
certainly its director, Stephen Schwartz. Mr. Schwartz wrote the score for
''Godspell'' and the music and lyrics for ''Pippin.'' Although he will be
telling the cast how to behave onstage, the creativity here is by May Bracken
Phillips, who wrote the book and is one of the cast of four, and who also, with
Jan Mullaney, wrote the music and lyrics.

The show is about a successful Manhattan couple whose marriage is in trouble and
about triumph over tragedy. Also in the cast are Steve Vinovitch, Baxter Harris
and Carol Prandis.

Through Oct. 2, Thursdays through Tuesdays at 8 P.M. Admission: $8.



UP FROM UNDER There is enough artistry cropping up from the down-under lands of
New Zealand and Australia these days to qualify it as a trend. The new show of
Maori art from New Zealand has just opened at the Metropolitan Museum of Art,
and another art exhibition from Australia will soon be coming to the Guggenheim.

Tonight at 8, two singers will offer a recital featuring Maori Art Songs at
Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street (362-8719). They are Maxwell Jarman, a
baritone who was born in Wellington, New Zealand, and Margery Tede, a
mezzo-soprano from Montana. They will sing ''Songs of the Maori'' and ''Songs of
Sea and Travel.'' The program was organized under the auspices of the New
Zealand Government to celebrate the exhibition at the Met.

Admission: $8.50; students and over-65's, $4.



Entertainment Events is on page C21. Thursday Sports is on page D26.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Reports Shelling

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 58 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 13


The Vietnamese radio said today that China fired 3,300 artillery shells into Ha
Tuyen Province in the first 10 days of September. The broadcast, monitored here,
said there had also been 10 company-size incursions of Chinese troops. There
have been intermittent reports of clashes since a Chinese- Vietnamese border war
in early 1979.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. LAUDS PEACE BID BY HANOI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 342 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 13


The State Department said today that comments by Vietnam's Foreign Minister
seemed to open the door to progress toward a political settlement of the
longstanding Cambodian issue.

Kyodo, a Japanese news agency, said in a dispatch from Hanoi on Wednesday that
in an interview, Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach said Vietnam was ready to
discuss a settlement in Cambodia ''unconditionally,'' based on proposals put
forth both by the non-Communist Association of Southeast Asian Nations and by
the Communist nations of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

The Southeast Asian group has proposed a formula, to be supervised by the United
Nations or some other international group, for the withdrawal of the
approximately 180,000 Vietnamese soldiers in Cambodia, and for holding free
elections. The contending political elements would be the Vietnamese- backed
Government of Heng Samrin now in control of Phnom Penh, and the three-sided
rebel coalition of former Prince Norodom Sihanouk; Son Sann, a former Prime
Minister, and Khieu Samphan, who was head of state in the Pol Pot government
that was unseated by the Vietnamese invasion in 1978.

Mr. Thach said Vietnam might accept international monitoring of compliance with
an accord, Kyodo said.

He also was reported to have affirmed a promise to search for Americans missing
in action during the Vietnam war and to send to the United States political
prisoners from Vietnamese ''re-education'' camps.

On Tuesday, Secretary of State George P. Shultz appealed to Vietnam to keep a
promise to allow the prisoners to leave, and to send children fathered by
Americans to the United States.

A State Department official said officials in Washington had seen only the Kyodo
account, but that it was deemed important enough to issue a laudatory comment.

''The Vietnamese willingness to negotiate a genuine political settlement in
Cambodia, based on the withdrawal of Vietnamese forces and internationally
supervised free elections would be a welcome development,'' a spokesman for the
Department said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE PENTAGON;
THE CONTINUING BATTLE OVER COVERING WARS

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 13


Nearly a year has passed since United States Rangers parachuted on to the island
of Grenada and a Marine contingent helicoptered across its beaches, but a
dispute about whether American journalists should have been there has not been
totally resolved.

In August a joint military-civilian commission, set up as a result of press
complaints that reporters had been kept away from the early Grenada action,
recommended that the Government ''reaffirm the historic principle that American
journalists, print and broadcast, with their professional equipment, should be
present at military operations.''

Because large numbers of staff-employed journalists from big and small news
organizations, in addition to free lancers, now have the financial means to
cover far-flung events, the commission said, a pool group representing print and
broadcast journalists should go in early in future operations to furnish news to
the hundreds of reporters and photographers who would follow. Coverage of
conflicts, the panel added, should be such as not to endanger the lives of
service personnel or the security of their operations.

A number of journalistic associations and news executives initially praised the
spirit and direction taken by the commission, which was headed by a retired Army
major general, Winnant Sidle, who had been chief public relations officer of the
United States military command in Vietnam in the waning years of the Southeast
Asian war. But some journalists have been made to feel uneasy by several
subsequent develoments.

For example, many news organizations did not disagree with a commission
suggestion that the Pentagon should select the organizations that would
participate in the early pool, some saying that leaving selection to news
executives would lead to ''anarchy.'' But then Michael Burch, a former Air Force
lieutenant colonel who is now Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs,
seemed to modify that suggestion when he said at a news conference after release
of the commission's findings that the people to serve in the pool would also be
''more or less'' selected by the Pentagon adding, ''There will be some
consultation, but the final decisions are ours.''

Later in the same news conference, however, Mr. Burch seemed to suggest that the
Defense Department could not exclude any journalist nominated by a news
organization except in the case of a physical disability. Still later, Mr.
Burch's deputy, Col. Robert O'Brien of the Air Force, said in elaboration that
''ideological'' screening of reporters was ''crazy'' and definitely would not
take place.

Negotiations on the composition of a rotating or standing war pool are expected
to begin this month between Mr. Burch and Mr. O'Brien and the Washington bureau
chiefs of major news companies. Ed Fouhy, Washington bureau chief of ABC News,
said the Pentagon would be expected to clarify ambiguities about Mr. Burch's
news conference remarks. He and other news executives said they tended to take
Mr. O'Brien at his word and to continue to view the Sidle report as
''positive.''

Edward R. Cony, vice president for news of The Wall Street Journal, who is
chairman of the Freedom of Information Committee of the American Society of
Newspaper Editors, said that some reporters had been disturbed ''for a while''
but that fears had generally calmed. On the question of whether the Pentagon
remained, in fact, uncommitted to permit early press coverage of conflicts, he
said, ''If the intent is not to let the press in, there will be a big fight.''

Robert Burke, vice president for industry affairs at the American Newspaper
Publishers Association, said the negotiations should clarify ''if we are back
where we were before the Sidle report.'' He added, however, that it might be
unwise to ''prejudge a lack of good faith.''

There was also another disturbing aspect of Mr. Burch's news conference, in the
judgment of some reporters and editors. While the Sidle panel had suggested that
journalists be given the maximum possible access to military operations, Mr.
Burch several times invoked a phrase, ''on a case-by-case basis,'' a formulation
that suggested to some editors and reporters that the Department of Defense
might again bar journalists from covering military operations for as much as 48
hours, as in the Grenada invasion.

One possible rationale for such action could be a desire to cloak the activities
of a new special action military operations organization that embraces all four
branches of armed services and reportedly employs special helicopters and other
equipment. In the Grenada invasion, an element sent in by this organization
included four Navy commandos who drowned at sea. It also reportedly included
personnel who enterted Grenada in civilian clothes to attack the radio station,
the house of the Governor and the prison.

''There is an obsession about security for these special forces,'' an official
said. ''Anywhere they are committed, no reporters will be let in until the
snake-eaters are out.''

In his news conference, Mr. Burch also said that a pool (now envisioned
according to Mr. O'Brien at about 11 people) might be permitted to cover the
''first wave,'' but that no commander would give up a seat needed for a soldier
or space needed for a case of ammunition to accommodate a reporter.

Another argument being made these days against war correspondents by some
Pentagon officials is that there are ''no facilities'' to accommodate them in
the field.

Such problems seldom arose in the coverage of the Vietnam War. There was seldom
a shortage of transportation craft and vehicles, for example, and commanders
routinely offered rides to journalists. Moreover, correspondents routinely
carried their own field gear, and complaints about their being a burden on
combat units were minimal.

Another suggestion by the Sidle panel that worries some journalists concerns the
assigning of ''escort officers'' to accompany reporters. Journalists who have
covered wars in which escorts were used, especially in the Middle East, do not
welcome this idea. While the escorts sometimes have proved helpful, for the most
part the correspondents have found them a hindrance to newsgathering.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY;

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1135 words


A 3-act theater tale that's ending with a curtain going up.


In 1982, James Duff was a 29-year-old-actor

and playwright who was swirling martinis

and gimlets for a living. In the theater, this

kind of temporary employment is as normal as breathing, but Mr. Duff's air was
perfumed with luck. Richard Barr, a producer with whom he had a nodding
acquaintance, walked in one day and was persuaded to take a look at Mr. Duff's
play ''The War at Home,'' which was then a work in progress at a small theater.
Mr. Barr, who had produced the works of such authors as Edward Albee, James
Prideaux and Mart Crowley, loved what he saw, but couldn't work out the
financing. That was Act One of this drama..

The second act took place this summer. The play was produced in London, directed
by Michael Attenborough, who took over when Alan Schneider was struck and killed
by a car.

The third act is eminently guessable. Hello, Broadway. The scheduled date is
Dec. 20, and Carroll O'Connor, who will probably always have Archie Bunker
attached to his name, will star, together with Frances Sternhagen, who was in
the London cast.

The four-character play (Christopher Fields and Linda Cook are the others) is
set in Dallas, and the plot involves the family of a Vietnam veteran who is
struggling to rehabilitate himself in society. Mr. Barr, Charles Woodward and
the Shubert Organization are producing, and although this is obviously no
comedy, it's said to have a lot of laughs.



It's not certain but it is likely that ''Harrigan & Hart,'' the musical about
the late-19th-century entertainers Edward Harrigan and Tony Hart, will be coming
to Broadway this year. The play, by Michael Stewart, whose name has also been on
such shows as ''Hello Dolly,'' and ''42d Street,'' was introduced at the
Goodspeed Opera House in Chester, Conn., this summer and ran five weeks.
According to Michael Price, the executive director, it could have gone on
indefinitely, but the stars zipped off to other commitments. Elliot Martin, one
of the producers of ''Glengarry Glen Ross,'' is among those talking about the
move to the Great White Way.



If it isn't Sam Shepard these days, it's Samuel Beckett. Last season there was
''Rockaby'' and ''The Beckett Plays.'' Currently, at the Cherry Lane Theater,
there is ''Endgame'' (which this month will surpass the 104 performances it
originally played in 1958), and opening Sept. 23 at the Samuel Beckett Theater
on West 42d Street there will be ''All Strange Away.'' The setting for this one,
produced by Jack Garfein and Kilian Ganly, and directed by Gerald Thomas, may
seem odd until we remember it's Beckett. It's a mirrored glass cube with Robert
Langdon-Lloyd sitting inside, playing the last man on earth in his final hours.
What's the last man doing? Probably exactly what we'd all be doing - bargaining
feverishly for a little more time.



The Lambs, at 110 America's oldest theatrical club, is going to make history
next month. Its high- prestige Shepherd award, which has been given to such
notables as John Barrymore, Irving Berlin and Maurice Belasco, will for the
first time go to a woman. The award, made for outstanding performance and
contribution to theater, will be presented to Dorothy Loudon, who is starring in
''Noises Off,'' at a black-tie dinner Oct. 14. The evening's proceeds go to the
Actor's Fund of America.



Bernard Slade's ''Tribute,'' directed by William Hopkins, has been chosen to
open the 42d season of the Equity Library Theater on Sept. 27. The eight- show
season will be dedicated to the late Sam Jaffe, the actor who was also a founder
of the theater.



Christine Lahti, who was on Broadway with George C. Scott in ''Present
Laughter,'' has landed the role of Georgie Elgin in ''The Country Girl,''
opening at the Chelsea Playhouse on Oct. 18. She'll be appearing with Hal
Holbrook and Jeffrey DeMunn.



If Mercedes McCambridge is stuffing herself with vitamins and milk shakes, it's
because she's off next week on a 40-city national tour as the star of Marsha
Norman's Pulitzer-prize winning play, '' 'Night, Mother.''



Keith Michell is a lithe and debonair Australian who isn't exactly a health
faddist but has been eating macrobiotic food for a decade. When he offers
visitors a cup of tea, the liquid is palatable, but it bears no relationship to
what we've grown accustomed to thinking of as tea. Mr. Michell, who last month
took over the role of Georges in ''La Cage aux Folles,'' said he occasionally
falls off the wagon and binges on something like chocolate cake, but basically
he feels better when he sticks to nibbling cereals and vegetables.

In fact, Mr. Michell is now in the process of writing and illustrating a
macrobiotic cookbook.

''A publisher approached me, and I said 'Yes.' I say yes to practically
anything,'' Mr. Michell said in a tone of voice that indicated he really didn't
expect to be believed.

This was just as well because, in the course of conversation, he mentioned he
had been approached to play Georges when ''La Cage'' was originally cast, and he
had said no. The rejection had nothing to do with the role, which he adored, he
said. It was, rather, a matter of timing. He had commited himself to a
television series that, as luck would have it, fizzled out. He apparently took
this disaster with some equanimity, which may be what happens when one doesn't
mess up the system with processed foods.

Mr. Michell leaves the New York cast in February, to tour with the play in his
native Australia. His wife, who was also an actress, accompanies him much of the
time and is usually good about joining him in his diet, he said, but then he
grinned.

''I don't know what she eats when I'm not there,'' he said. ''She sometimes
seems a little relieved to see me leave.''



The list of participants in the last 13 years reads like a who's who in the
theater, but that's because the seminars called ''Working in the Theater'' are
sponsored by the American Theater Wing. The new free series begins at the City
University Graduate Center, 33 West 42d Street, on Oct. 23, and reservations are
being accepted by the Theater Wing at 250 West 57th Street, New York 10107.
Presiding over the panels will be Isabelle Stevenson, president of the Theater
Wing, with the producer-director Jean Dalrymple and Brendan Gill of The New
Yorker as moderators.



David Storey's ''In Celebration,'' a tale of a coal miner, his wife and their
three educated sons on the couple's 40th wedding anniversary, will open the
Manhattan Theater Club's MainStage season at the City Center on Oct. 30. The
play, by the author of ''Home'' and ''The Changing Room,'' was first produced at
London's Royal Court Theater and will be in the hands of the original director,
Lindsay Anderson.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Artist's sketch of Keith Michell

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TV: HOSPITAL AND CRIME SERIES START

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 841 words


With the networks planning byzantine marketing strategies, viewers are likely to
end up being confused as to which new series is playing at what time on which
day. Two of the new series being unveiled tomorrow night - ''E/R'' on CBS at 8
and ''Miami Vice'' on NBC at 9 - will then move to other nights of the week.

''E/R,'' which stands for emergency room, is a situation comedy set in a
hospital. It stars, as Dr. Howard Sheinfeld, Elliott Gould, whose performing
career reached something of a peak in another comedy about doctors, Robert
Altman's original film version of ''M*A*S*H.'' There is a distinct, and
unfortunate, difference between the two vehicles. ''M*A*S*H'' was an
outrageously brash dark comedy, looking at the horrors of war with sarcastic
bitterness. ''E/R'' is a fairly standard sitcom, tumbling over one-line jokes
that don't quite come off when matters of life and death are hovering in the
immediate vicinity.



This special one-hour preview of the show is actually being presented as an
episode of ''The Jeffersons.'' Irascible George (Sherman Helmsley) is seen
leaving for a dry cleaners convention in Chicago, where he has promised to look
up the young daughter of an old friend. She (Lynn Moody) is a nurse in the Clark
Street Hospital Emergency Room. George Jefferson quickly, and shrewdly, steps to
the sidelines and the cast of the new series takes over.

Near the end of a 48-hour tour of duty, Dr. Sheinfeld is in the process of
caring for the average assortment of emergency-room patients and carrying on a
running argument with his second wife about their divorce settlement. ''One
thing more important than love and hate,'' he explains, ''is spite.'' Dr. Eve
Sheridan (Marcia Strassman) is the new supervisor trying to change Dr.
Sheinfeld's unorthodox ways. Head Nurse Thor (Conchata Ferrell) is the
wisecracking housemother. And perky Maria (Shuko Akune) is the unflappable and
slightly goofy receptionist.

The patients passing through, as the staff tries to decide on what kind of pizza
to order, include an alcholic who uses the place as a hotel, a hillbilly mother
with a young daughter supposedly constipated but really pregnant, a heart attack
victim with a hysterical wife and George Jefferson, who finds himself trapped in
a shootout. ''E/R'' might get away with this much but when a young man staggers
in with a stabbing wound and dies on the table, the comedy simply turns sour.
The specter of the dying man, an impossible part somehow carried off with
dignity by Gerard Bochicchio, is not just jarring, but is fatal within the
sitcom form.

''E/R'' is based on a play written by eight people and produced at the Organic
Theater in Chicago. Perhaps the play was closer in tone to Altman's ''M*A*S*H.''
Perhaps the television sitcom can find a more accommodating tone for its daffy
shenanigans. The preview does contain a few good laughs, and Mr. Gould and
company do seem to be enjoying themselves. In any case, ''E/R'' will be given a
''special premiere'' on CBS this Tuesday at 8 P.M. (to be followed,
significantly enough, by a rerun of the final episode of television's
''M*A*S*H'') and after that will move into its regular slot of Tuesdays at 8:30
P.M.

Grappling for a distinctive identity in this season's glut of police/detective
shows, ''Miami Vice'' gets off to a snappily promising start as a two- hour
movie on NBC. The carefully contrasted partners in this one are Ricardo Tubbs
(Philip Michael Thomas), a New York cop prowling around Florida in search of his
brother's killer, and Sonny Crockett (Don Johnson), former football star,
Vietnam veteran and now offbeat undercover Miami policeman. Crockett is white;
Tubbs is black. Both are smooth and swinging and, after some initial static,
fated to work with each other on a television action-adventure.



The setting being Miami, the subject is, and is likely to remain, international
drug trafficking, with a sleazy array of Central and South American thugs
working their deals with North American counterparts. Some of the characters on
this initial outing are inspired. There is, for instance, the delicately elegant
hoodlum who brags that he has learned English from classic television series,
such as ''I Love Lucy'' and ''Father Knows Best.'' Our heroes have to admit he
gives a new meaning to the word alien.

The dialogue is urban sharp and the action has some roots in reality, even when
spiced with the usual television chases, including in this instance one between
a car on land and a boat in a water inlet. The soundtrack is also well stocked
with popular music sequences, anticipating the introduction of FM-stereo
simulcasting in certain markets. The production credits are impressive. Anthony
Yerkovich, who created ''Miami Vice,'' has won three Emmy Awards in connection
with ''Hill Street Blues.'' Mr. Johnson and Mr. Tubbs work well together. The
chemistry is promising. The rest is up to the scriptwriters. As a weekly series,
''Miami Vice'' will be presented Fridays at 10 P.M. on NBC.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'EXTERMINATOR' SEQUEL

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 389 words


In the guise of entertainment, a trashy sequel to the trashy 1980 movie ''The
Exterminator'' opened yesterday at the RKO Warner and other theaters under the
title ''Exterminator 2.''

This is the sort of action movie that begins with the execution of the elderly
owners of a mom and pop liquor store and goes on to traffic in murdering an
armed guard by electrocuting him while a subway train runs over him, in
kidnapping and injecting a terrified young woman with narcotics, in smashing the
legs of a female dancer before killing her, and in incinerating and impaling
villains.



Once again, the purported hero is the Vietnam veteran Johnny Eastland (Robert
Ginty), a listless-looking, muffin-faced vigilante whose principal weapon is a
flamethrower he likes to turn against New York street criminals.

This time, he is pitted against a small army of psychopaths led by X (Mario Van
Peebles), a megalomaniac with a coiffure inspired by some Inca equivalent of
Sassoon, ideas by Hitler and compassion from Attila the Hun. X and his punks
scheme to take control of the city after stealing half a million dollars from an
armored car and using it to buy narcotics from the Mafia.



Goaded to what passes for rage by the murder of his dancer girlfriend, Eastland
and his pal Be Gee, the owner-driver of a large green garbage truck, wreak
vengeance on their foes.

Discriminating audiences will make a point of shunning this movie, and seekers
of kicks will find its bluish hue, slapdash writing, fifth- rate comic-book
characters and unimaginative editing to be indicators of genuine inferiority
even in its own league.


The Cast

EXTERMINATOR 2, directed, written and produced by Mark Buntzman; director of
photography, Bob Baldwin; edited by Thierry J.  Couturier and Danny Retz; music
by David Spear; produced by Menahem Golan and Yoram Globus; released by Cannon
Films. At RKO Warner, Broadway and 47th Street; RKO 86th Street, at Lexington
Avenue, and other theaters. Running time: 88 minutes. This film is rated R.
Johnny EastlandRobert Ginty XMario Van Peebles CarolineDeborah Geffner Be
GeeFrankie Faison EyesScott Randolph SpiderReggie Rock Bythewood Red RatBruce
Smolanoff Head MafiosoDavid Buntzman TonyKenny Marino SquealerDerek Evans
MonsterIrwin Keyes PhiloRobert Louis King


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CHURCH VS. STATE: HISTORICL CONCERN

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1222 words


When Alexis de Tocqueville visited the United States in 1831 the first thing
that struck him was the ''religious atmosphere'' of the place.

Astonished at how the world's most notable democracy actually worked, since in
his native France he had seen ''religion and freedom almost always marching in
opposite directions,'' he questioned every member of the American clergy he met.
They all told him, he later wrote, that ''the main reason for the quiet sway of
religion over their country was the complete separation of church and state.''

Before and since, religion and politics in America have exerted a strong and
sometimes paradoxical influence on each other. Yet organized religion and
Government have remained substantially independent, and most American clergymen,
historians, jurists and political thinkers have viewed the separation as
benefiting both.  Issue Arises Again

The relations of church and state have become an issue in the current
Presidential campaign, and disputants on both sides appeal to history to
buttress their views. Many of Walter F. Mondale's supporters see the Protestant
right and its ministers and growing numbers of Roman Catholic bishops as
stepping too far into politics and thus reviving the specter of state-supported
religious intolerance. President Reagan's backers answer that religious beliefs
have always and properly inspired political opinions and subsequent legislation.

It is true that many laws have been inspired, at least in part, by religion,
including those against slavery, abortion and the sale of alcohol. The
Government, moreover, retains many religious customs, from the phrase ''In God
We Trust'' on its currency to the prayers said in Congress.

But the urge to keep the two realms divided has been at least as strong, and, as
Tocqueville noted in the 1830's, the clergy has customarily favored this
separation. Only a decade or two ago, conservative Protestants were denouncing
the growing prominence of the clergy in secular affairs. Until lately, this
clerical reticence was strongly reinforced by public opinion: political careers
for priests and ministers were simply out of the question.

Divisions Were Feared


The issue is crystallized in the history of the First Amendment to the
Constitution, which says in part, ''Congress shall make no law respecting an
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.''

When it was ratified in 1791, Europe's history of officially established
religions and religious persecution was fresh in Americans' minds. Still fresher
were the troubles that non- Puritans had faced in New England, Baptists in
Anglican Virginia and other religious dissidents in other colonies.

To keep the faithful from one another's throats, to improve the republic's
chances of remaining united, to maintain the independence of Protestant sects
and to avoid the corruption that the Founders thought had infected both religion
and politics in Europe, church and state would inhabit separate worlds.

James Madison wrote the amendment. He tried to extend its guarantees to the
states, but the Senate refused to go along. Established churches therefore
persisted in some states for decades, and the Congregational Church in
Massachusetts was not disestablished until 1833. In the 1920's the Supreme Court
began reading the 14th Amendment as extending the First Amendment's restraints
to the states.

Compared with earlier societies and dozens of modern countries, laws and their
enforcers in the United States have maintained a hands-off attitude toward
religion. The United States has seen no notable official moves in many years to
establish a religion in the usual sense, and the sort of ''partnership'' between
church and state that Pope John Paul II this week praised in the educational
system of Newfoundland, Canada, would probably require changes in the
Constitution if imitated here. (The Pope's argued that governments have a
''responsibility'' to support religious schools; most of Canada's provincial
governments already do.)

Nor has the United States seen more than a few official moves to limit the free
exercise of religion, although laws against polygamy among Mormons and against
snake-handling among charismatic Christians, for example, have been upheld by
the Court.

The influence of religion on politics and government has nonetheless remained
strong. Religion has helped inspire laws against homosexual activity, women's
suffrage and business on Sundays. The Supreme Court itself uses the invocation,
''God save the United States and this Honorable Court.'' Over the years
religious doctrines and sentiments have fueled political causes against
communism, papal influence in politics, the Vietnam War, nuclear weapons and
much else.  Wall of Separation'

In 1947 the Supreme Court agreed unanimously that the First Amendment's language
was meant to build what Thomas Jefferson once called ''a wall of separation
between church and state.''

The Court depended heavily in its decision on Madison's successful argument, in
1785, against a bill that would have established ''a provision for teachers of
the Christian religion'' in Virginia. The same Court decision, as it happened,
also upheld the constitutionality of a New Jersey law that reimbursed parochial
school pupils, among others, for their bus fares, but the judicial elaboration
of the ''wall of separation'' was a more important development, and it greatly
offended the Catholic Church. The Court held also that taxes must not actively
support religious institutions, and it added, ''Neither a state nor the Federal
Government can, openly or secretly, participate in the affairs of any religious
organizations or groups and vice versa.'' Fear of Blurred Line

Some critics of President Reagan and of his ideological allies among the clergy
worry that this last point is becoming dangerously blurred.

Subsequent Supreme Court decisions have barred public schools from requiring
Bible readings, prayers and similar activities. Government aid to parochial
schools and sectarian colleges has also been struck down. The Court has
protected abortion and, in effect, expanded the permissible terrain of sexually
explicit literature and films.

The offended churches now describe themselves as fighting to defend their
values. They have plunged into politics, organized voters, denounced the views
of political opponents from the pulpit and issued statements such as that of 18
Catholic bishops last week in New England who said that the ''enormity of the
evil makes abortion the critical issue of the moment.'' The idea has gained that
divinely defined (indeed, Christian) goodness and evil are at work in the
mundane acts of politicians.

Tocqueville noted optimistically that Americans ''feel the urgent necessity to
instill morality into democracy by means of religion.'' This is plainly true
again. But Tocqueville was not speaking of the clergy. Now many influential
members of the clergy, although they disagree on countless doctrines, as Madison
knew they would, are no longer willing to avoid what Tocqueville called ''the
bitter passions of this world.'' Just as important, the weight of public opinion
no longer excludes the clergy from what may be broadly called political careers.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EXILES TELL OF STARK LIFE IN VIETNAM PRISONS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 15


He is a slight man of 37 now, confined to a refugee center and looking for a new
home.

In 1975, when the North Vietnamese took Saigon, he was a captain in the South
Vietnamese Army and, like tens of thousands of his compatriots, he was sent for
''re-education'' to a prison camp. There, he spent the next six years of his
life. One day, without explanation, he was freed.

On Wednesday, he talked with visitors to the Panat Nikhom refugee transit center
in eastern Thailand, where the police brought him after he had washed up, a boat
person, on a Thai beach.

The man was interviewed the day after Secretary of State George P. Shultz
announced in Washington that the United States was ready to admit 10,000 former
and current Vietnamese political prisoners from the re-education camps, as well
as the thousands of Vietnamese children fathered by Americans.

From the stories of exiles like the former army captain, who wanted to remain
anonymous for fear of causing harm to his family still in Vietnam, refugee
officials have been able to draw a composite picture of life in Vietnamese
political prisons. The former captain said it was characterized chiefly by hard
agricultural labor, little nourishing food and no visits from relatives for
months at a time. He said, however, that he knew of few instances of beatings or
torture, and that he had been forced into what he regarded as a minimal amount
of political indoctrination.

But other former camp inmates, officials in Thailand say, tell of harsher
treatment, particularly for those who were outspoken political dissenters,
indicating regional police authorities were taking different approaches. Some
former prisoners reaching the West have told of being confined to boxes or cages
for long periods of time. Occasional executions have also been reported.  Hanoi
has not responded officially to the American offer to accept the political
prisoners and the children, which Mr. Shultz announced in testimony before
Congress. Diplomats here said they expected that a response might come in Geneva
at the beginning of next month, when Vietnam will meet with officials of
resettlement countries, including the United States, during the annual executive
session of the United Nations High Commission on Refugees.

Most of the re-education camp inmates were imprisoned because of their
participation in the former South Vietnamese Government and its armed forces or
for their ties with Americans in Vietnam.  Refugee officals say no one knows
exactly how many political prisoners Vietnam still holds. Hanoi's Foreign
Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, has suggested there are 10,000.

In addition, there are tens of thousands of former inmates of the camps - which
may have held a total over the last decade of as many as 150,000 men and women -
who might try to obtain exit visas from Vietnam because they had been
imprisoned. Until now, refugee officials say, the Vietnamese Government has not
granted exit permits to its citizens solely because they had been camp inmates.
United States officials say they know of at least 18,000 former prison inmates
among their own records of applicants for asylum.

Problem of Malnutrition


The United States has pledged to take family members as well as camp inmates. In
many instances families number more than a dozen people.

Refugee officials who have examined former camp inmates at transit centers in
Southeast Asia report that they are often suffering from health problems
associated with malnutrition and an unbalanced diet: bad teeth, eye defects,
scurvy, ulcers. For some, meals never consisted of more than rice and salt, with
occasional pieces of fish. The exiled captain said he was often able to prepare
some extra food for himself in the evenings.

Vietnam opened its first re-education centers within days of the fall of Saigon,
former prisoners say. Many relativly unimportant or low-ranking South Vietnamese
with connections to the fallen government were confined for relatively short
periods in April and May 1975.

By June, officials say, higher-ranking officers were beginning to be jailed. At
this point the word ''studies,'' which became ''re-education'' in common
parlance, was dropped from the description of the camps and the Vietnamese word
for ''reconstruction'' - the same term North Vietnam had earlier employed to
describe its prisons - was substituted. As many as 100 of the camps, many of
them in the Saigon region, were apparently in operation during this period.

Lower Officers Released

By 1978, according to former prisoners' accounts, which officials caution are
always fragmentary because they had no access to records, lower officers began
to be released. Military men from the rank of colonel upward were moved farther
north.

In 1980 there appears to have been a new series of arrests. Some officials
speculate that this may have been because a number of infuential Vietnamese
refugees in the United States had begun to speak openly of resistance. But after
six months, as applications for emigration and certificates of release examined
by refugee officers indicate, many prisoners were again being released. The
releases have more or less continued to the present time, and Hanoi may be
looking for a way to close most of the centers. Refugee officials say they think
there may be 8, possibly 10 camps left.

Refugees reaching Thailand and other Asian countries from Vietnam have reported
that those who are rleased from camps often buy their way out by bribing
authorities with gold: 12 to 20 ounces seems to be the prevailing rate. After
release, former prisoners are put on probation, usually for a year, and often
assigned to work in one of Vietnam's New Economic Zones.

Most former prisoners then attempt to use family connections to get themselves
back on a civil registry or census so that they can obtain identity cards
without which they cannot apply for exit permits. Vietnam has been granting
these since 1979 under a United Nations Orderly Departure Program. Nearly 70,000
Vietnamese have left under this program. Hundreds of thousands have fled
illegally.

Offer Made Three Years Ago

Refugee officials say there is little concern that Vietnam will use the
opportunity of the American offer - which diplomats point out was first made
three years ago by Under Secretary of State Walter Stoessel after Hanoi first
suggested that the United States take the inmates - as President Castro of Cuba
seized the opportunity of the Mariel boatlift to empty Cuban prisons and mental
institutions.

Some officials in international organizations who have worked with the
Vietnamese over the years of the Orderly Departure Program, under which the camp
inmates would be processed, say that Hanoi has never been prone to whimsical
decisions in refugee affairs.

Others suggest that Hanoi, facing severe economic problems, has been looking for
ways to improve its relations with both the United States and the neighboring
countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, ties that have been
frozen over the issue of Hanoi's military presence in Cambodia and Laos.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Elizabeth M. Christiansen Is Married To Fernando Gentil, a Fellow Banker

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 77, Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 228 words


Elizabeth Marie Christiansen, a vice president of the American Express
International Banking Corporation, and Fernando Bunker Gentil, a vice president
of the Bankers Trust Company, were married yesterday at St. Bartholomew's
Episcopal Church. The Rev. Andrew Mullins performed the ceremony.

The bride, who will keep her name professionally, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mogens Erik Christiansen of Old Greenwich, Conn., and Golden Beach, Fla. She
graduated from Georgetown University. Her father retired as a group executive in
New York for P. R. Mallory & Company, the battery manufacturer. She is a
granddaughter of the late Titus B. Schmid, founder of the Crescent Electric
Supply Company in Iowa.

Mr. Gentil, who graduated from the University of Southern California, where he
also earned an M.B.A. degree, is a son of Dr. Fernando de Campello Gentil of Sao
Paulo, Brazil, and Ellen Mudge Bunker of New York and Brattleboro, Vt. Mr.
Gentil, whose first marriage ended in divorce, was a member of the Brazilian
Davis Cup tennis team from 1974 to 1977. His father is a surgeon in Sao Paulo.
The bridegroom is a grandson of Ellsworth Bunker, the retired diplomat who was
United States Ambassador to Argentina, India, Italy, Nepal and South Vietnam.

Ellen Ann Christiansen was maid of honor for her sister. Eduardo Bunker Gentil
was best man for his brother.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Elizabeth Gentil

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 688 words


SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 1984 Western nations are divided over a confidential World
Bank proposal for an emergency aid fund for the poorest African nations, Western
diplomats said. The diplomats said the confidential World Bank report gives the
gloomiest possible picture of black Africa's current prospects, saying that
unlike most other regions of the developing world its economic problems have
been growing worse rather than better. (Page 1, Column 2.)

Cuban advisers have been seen by almost everyone in the Nicaraguan town of Santa
Clara. But the commander of a military training base there, Lieut. Carlos
Gonzales, said no Cubans were in the area and insisted in an interview that he
had not seen a single foreign military adviser in his five years of service
along the Honduran border. The United States has reported that four Cuban
instructors were killed in a rebel air attack on the Santa Clara base this
month. (1:1.)

An idea of what it is to be an inmate in Vietnamese prison camps where Hanoi
sent thousands of South Vietnamese for ''re-education'' has been drawn from the
stories of recently released inmates. A former captain in the South Vietnamese
Army, who was recently freed after six years of imprisonment, said political
prisoners had to do hard agricultural labor, had little nourishing food and had
no visits from relatives for months at a time. Other former camp inmates tell of
harsher treatment. (1:2.)

South Africa included nonwhites in the Cabinet for the first time in the
country's history. Its new President, P. W. Botha, announced a Cabinet that
includes the leader of the Labor Party, which represents some people of mixed
race, and the leader of the National Peoples Party, whose members are drawn from
the Indian community. The Cabinet offered no representations to the blacks who
make up 73 percent of the population. (3:1.)

A second son was born to the Princess of Wales. The Prince of Wales attended the
delivery at a London hospital. The child is in third place in succession to the
British crown after his father and his 2-year-old brother, Prince William.
(8:1.) National

General Motors workers struck at 13 selected plants in nine states shortly
before midnight Friday as the deadline for a national strike approached and
negotiations remained stalled. Instead of a national strike that would have
affected 350,000 employees, the United Auto Workers Union chose the partial
strike tactic, which is to idle 62,700 workers starting Monday morning. Contract
negotiations continued with no reports of whether progress was made. (1:6.)

Security is being tightened under a sweeping new Government program to improve
the protection of Federal facilities where nuclear warheads are designed and
made. (1:5.)

Top Democrats are pessimistic about Walter F. Mondale's campaign. The deep
pessimism grew in the two weeks since he kicked off his general election drive.
His campaign officials believe Mr. Mondale has an opportunity for a dramatic
turnaround in the two televised debates with President Reagan in October, but
doubts persist among Democrats at the local, state and national level about his
personal appeal and the management of his campaign. (1:3.)

A proposal to ban antibiotics in animal feed is expected to be revived again by
the Food and Drug Administration, according to its officials who say an array of
new evidence has linked human illness to drug-resistant strains of bacteria in
meat. (1:5.)

A fight for the Senate seat being vacated by Senator Paul Tsongas of
Massachusetts because of illness is one of a series of battles that will be
settled in the Massachusetts primary election Tuesday. (26:1.) Metropolitan

Two reports on foster care in New York City agree that essential improvements
have been made over the last five years. The reports, issued by unrelated
groups, say the number of children in foster care has declined, the average
waiting time for adoption is shorter, and children now stay an average of four
years in foster care, a year less than five years ago. (43:1.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ANOTHER UNIT OF SPECIAL FORCES GOES ON DUTY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 35, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 658 words

DATELINE: FORT LEWIS, Wash., Sept. 15


In a circle on a parade ground here, pairs of soldiers, from enthusiastic
20-year-olds to baldish Vietnam veterans, practice breaking choke holds on one
another with a move that can shatter an opponent's elbow.

''Lookin' good,'' their instructor shouts.

Lieut. Col. Richard Todd concurs. He said the men he commanded were little
changed from the elite fighters of the Army Special Forces seen by President
Kennedy and United States officials in the 1960's as a means of ending guerrilla
conflicts. Colonel Todd said he had more volunteers than jobs.

The First Special Forces Group, including Colonel Todd's Third Battalion, went
back on active status last week, the first Special Forces group reactivated
since the Vietnam War.

Colonel Todd said the reason for reactivation was simple: too much work for
existing units. Army Special Forces based at Fort Bragg, N.C., have been
training soldiers from Central America, and a group at Fort Devens, Mass., has a
battalion in Europe. A new group was needed on the West Coast ''to give full
attention to the Pacific area,'' he said.

The First Group, which has been reorganizing since last winter, already has one
of its three battalions stationed on the island of Okinawa. The other two are
being trained at Fort Lewis, and the 776-man group should be at full strength
sometime next month, according to a base spokesman.

Group Created in 1942

The First Group was created on July 5, 1942, as the Devil's Brigade, and was
deactivated in France in 1945. It was reactivated as the First Special Forces
Group in 1957 at Okinawa and was deactivated June 28, 1974.

In the early 1960's, the Special Forces found a patron in President Kennedy, who
built their numbers, sent the experts in unconventional warfare to Vietnam and
authorized their distinctive headgear, a green beret, which the Army had banned.
After Mr. Kennedy's assassination in 1963, the gold shield worn by members of
the First Group as a beret insignia was rimmed in black. The black band remains
today.

The Special Forces were brought home from Vietnam in 1971. Their numbers have
dropped from a wartime high of 13,000 to the present level of about 4,000.

Colonel Todd, an 18-year Army veteran from Mendham, N.J., disputes those who say
Vietnam tarnished the troops' image.

''We in Special Forces feel we did a very good job in Vietnam,'' he said.

He acknowledged that Vietnam was an unpopular war and that the role of the
Special Forces was a difficult one. ''I don't say people liked it, but we are
proud of what they did,'' he said.

The troops' mission remains unchanged from that in Vietnam, according to Colonel
Todd, explaining that members of the Special Forces are teachers who train
troops in foreign countries to fight for themselves.

''Anything we do is directed toward reducing the likelihood of sending U.S.
troops into combat,'' he said.

The curriculum runs from high-altitude parachute jumping to handling high
explosives, from intelligence gathering to sabotage, from battlefield surgery to
crippling a tank.

Training in 12-Man Teams

The Special Forces train in 12-man operations teams, with the curriculum ranging
from hand-to-hand combat to Warsaw Pact weapons. Posters on the walls in their
classrooms here show Eastern Bloc uniforms and vehicles. Other rooms have models
of Soviet tanks and personnel carriers.

The training for the 20 or so teams within each battalion runs 12 hours a day,
and at times, seven days a week. In addition to classwork work, there is
rappelling from helicopters, desert training in eastern Washington and cold
weather training in the Cascade Mountains.

One purpose of the Fort Lewis training is to mix team members from the Vietnam
War period with the members who were children when the war ended.

Of the young ones, Colonel Todd says, ''They're here for the adventure, because
we do a lot of things people pay money to do.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

North Carolina Institute Gets Study of a Vietnam Disorder

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 58, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 198 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 15


The Veterans Administration has awarded a $3.6 million contract for the first
full- scale study of a psychiatric problem believed to have affected thousands
of Vietnam combat veterans.

The contract for the three-and-a-half- year study of post-traumatic stress
disorder, ordered by Congress last year, was awarded Friday to the Research
Triangle Institute of North Carolina.

The affliction, which has been recognized as a valid mental disorder and
psychiatric syndrome by the American Psychiatric Association, is characterized
by flashbacks of combat, anger, alienation, reduced involvement with the outside
world, memory disturbances, anxiety and depression.

''The study findings should help us determine how many Vietnam era veterans have
these problems and evaluate the effectiveness of our programs for providing
assistance to them,'' said Harry N. Walters, Administrator of the veterans'
agency.

The study is to focus on male and female veterans who are having or have had
problems adjusting to civilian life, as well as those who made the transition
without difficulty. About 2,900 people will be interviewed. Congress is to
receive an interim report by Oct. 1, 1986.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RESETTLEMENT OF 455,000 IN U.S. VIEWED AS SUCCESS

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1468 words

DATELINE: SANTA ANA, Calif., Sept. 14


Smiling Vietnamese teen-agers pour out of Valley High School in this prosperous
commercial center among the suburbs near Disneyland. In the adjacent town of
Westminster, dozens of Vietnamese businesses form a bustling, colorful Little
Saigon.

The early experiences of Vietnamese refugees in American resettlement camps,
just after the Communists gained control of the country in 1975, led to concern
over the future of the humanitarian venture. Nearly a decade later, that concern
has largely given way to a sense that the refugees are well on the road to
self-sufficiency.

Most ethnic groups established themselves in the United States through a small
vanguard before the major waves of immigration. Not so the Vietnamese, and this
cultural upheaval was regarded by many social service officials as singular in
the American experience.

About 455,000 refugees have come from Vietnam in the past decade. More are
arriving - 23,000 alone in the year ended Sept. 30, 1983, according to the
publication Refugee Reports.

The United States Government, at the urging of the American religious
establishment and others, has admitted the mixed-race children of American
servicemen and Vietnamese women. The State Department announced an agreement
last week to accept the immigration of thousands of additional Amerasian
children and political prisoners from Vietnam.

Most Are in California

California has by far the largest concentration of Southeast Asian refugees in
the nation, 256,000, according to statistics kept by the Federal Government.
Many of them migrated here after first being settled elsewhere in the United
States, drawn by the state's reputation for a mild climate and liberal welfare
benefits. One of the few reservations expressed by Federal officials and some
social service specialists, in fact, concerns the high rate of welfare
dependency among the refugees in California, the causes of which are still in
dispute.

Texas, with 56,800 Southeast Asian refugees, has the next largest population,
followed by Washington and Illinois. New York is ranked with Pennsylvania at
fifth place, with 24,200 each.

For refugees such as Van Xuan Phan, a former United States Embassy employee in
Saigon who recently left an accounting job at Rockwell International in Santa
Ana, establishing themselves in America has been aided by hard work but also by
the advantages of skills, status and the mutual aid of their social peers. Many
came from families of education and position in Vietnam, an urban elite that
transferred its advantages to a new land.

Waiting for Citizenship

Mr. Van, one of whose first jobs was operating a forklift in the California
farming belt, recounted in an interview how his superior there soon came to him
and said, ''You have a good background; I'll try to get you something better.''
Mr. Van said he believed that ''a good background'' could not be ignored and
that it had worked that way for him. At the age of 44, he is awaiting approval
of his American citizenship.

But for another class of Vietnamese refugee from the poor country villages, the
fishermen and farmers, the resettlement has been rockier. Attempting to resume
old ways in a new land, the rural people have come into conflict with Americans
in California, Texas, Florida and the Northeast over fishing rights, over the
killing of wildlife, and over adjustment to an urbanized society. Despite these
problems, the experience of the majority of Vietnamese across the country has
been one of relative economic success, considering the short time of their
assimilation.

A study conducted last fall by the Office of Refugee Resettlement, in the
Federal Department of Health and Human Services, indicated that Vietnamese
unemployment, while high immediately after arrival, drops dramatically with
longer residency. The study of 1,239 households included all Southeast Asian
refugees, including Cambodians and Laotians. But Federal officials estimated
that Vietnamese make up nearly two-thirds of that group.

Last September, when the national unemployment rate stood at 8 percent, the rate
for all Southeast Asian adults in was 18 percent, according to the study. Among
refugees who arrived in 1983, the rate was 55 percent. But among those who
arrived in 1975, it was only 12 percent.

Fewer Have White-Collar Jobs

With their immigration to the United States, the refugees experienced a
significant shift of employment from sales and clerical white-collar jobs into
skilled blue-collar work.

The Office of Refugee Resettlement found in its employment study that 56.5
percent held white-collar jobs and 21.4 percent blue-collar while in Vietnam.
Comparable figures for those working in the United States were 27.1 percent
white-collar and 49.1 percent blue-collar. Only 1.8 percent found work as
farmers and fishermen here, as against 15.9 percent at home.

The reasons given for this success are varied. Among the social service agencies
leading the task of bringing or resettling the refugees here, some attribute the
comparatively rapid transition primarily to the Vietnamese's own hard work.
Others maintain that the Vietnamese have a skill, surpassing that of other
Southeast Asians, at using the available fruits of the American system.

''There's a particular approach to getting along, to doing business, it doesn't
matter what economic system they're operating in,'' said Richard Walden,
director of Operation California, an organization involved in arranging the
departure of the refugees and particularly the Amerasian children.

''Word gets out,'' he said. ''When people first come here, they'll tend to stick
them all over the country. But they will tend to move to the warmer climates and
states with more public benefits. The mail to Saigon says, 'For Christ's sake,
if you're gonna leave, don't head for Montana.' It'll say, 'Tell a kid, if he's
18, say he's 17; doctor the birth certificate.'

''That game is played really well by Vietnamese,'' Mr. Walden said. ''They 're
much more savvy at it than Cambodians or Laotians.''

Reputation for Hard Work

In New York, Lelieu Browne, director of the New York City Refugee Empolyment
Project, said Vietnamese were the refugees easiest to place in jobs and
attributed it to their reputation for hard work.

''They are willing to work at entry- level jobs, willing to accept low-paying
jobs, and they usually remain at the same job longer than other people do,'' she
said. ''Employers pay special attention to Vietnamese job applicants because of
this trust in them.''

Others, however, while agreeing there is a willingness among Vietnamese to work
hard, say that Vietnamese refugees, because of their culture, are reluctant to
start at the bottom. Some say that that contributes to a high rate of dependency
on welfare in states like California, where such benefits are high.

''In Vietnam and other Southeast Asian countries, once you take a job, that's it
for life,'' said Alicia Cooper, director of the International Rescue Committee
in Santa Ana. ''Although we tell them, in America you start at the bottom and
work up, they don't believe it.'' For that reason, she said, Vietnamese refugees
often attend school as long as possible, while supporting themselves on the
available income benefits.

High Rate of Dependency

Federal officials say they consider California a particular problem.

According to Debra Pontisso, executive assistant to the director of the Federal
Office of Refugee Resettlement, the rate of dependency of Southeast Asian
refugees in California on general welfare benefits during the first three years
of resettlement is 89 percent. The average for all other states is 34 percent,
she said.

Miss Pontisso said that California's welfare benefit payments average 60 percent
higher than other states'.

Tony Smith, head of California's Office of Refugee Services, defended the
program in view of the higher cost of living in this state. He said also that
the dependency rate was misleading on the ground that Federal officials, in
their accounting, failed to record the large number of refugees migrating here
from other states.

In New York State, where more than 24,000 Vietnamese have been resettled, social
service officials praise their rapid assimilation. Housing is sometimes a
problem, they acknowledge, because the refugees tend to have large families. But
even then, acording to Lang Ngan, a case worker for the International Rescue
Committee in Manhattan, housing oficials sometimes make an extra effort to place
Vietnamese in apartments because the refugees are known to pay their rent on
time, she said.

''They are an excellent group, they 're working hard,'' Miss Ngan said. ''They
realize that they are lucky to be here.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Van Xuan Phan and his family

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MASSACHUSETTS' PRIMARY IS TUESDAY

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1153 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 15


A series of political battles touched off by United States Senator Paul
Tsongas's decision not to run again will be settled in Massachusetts' primary
elections on Tuesday.

In addition to close races for the senatorial nomination in both parties, a
number of fights opened up for seats in the House of Representatives as
politicians here jockeyed for position after Mr. Tsongas, a Democrat, announced
last winter that he would not seek re-election because of cancer.

The outcome of Tuesday's primary may also help to determine whether insurgent
Democrats are able to overthrow the entrenched and autocratic leadership of the
State House of Representatives.

Richardson Trails in Polls

In a race with national implications for the Republican party, Elliot L.
Richardson, a moderate who resigned as Attorney General in protest in the
Watergate scandals, has been overtaken in public opinion polls of Republican and
independent voters by a conservative millionaire businessman, Raymond Shamie.
Mr. Shamie has attacked Mr. Richardson as favoring increased taxes and not
supporting President Reagan strongly enough, and he appears to be attracting
many independent conservative voters into the Republican ranks. Independents may
vote in the primary.

''Shamie is doing to Elliot what Reagan is doing to Mondale,'' said a frustrated
advisor to Mr. Richardson. ''He smiles a lot, he says he is against abortion and
taxes, and his solutions sound so simple you can't counter him,'' the aide
remarked.

A victory for Mr. Shamie, who was given little chance only a few months ago,
would signal a turn to the right for the small Massachusetts Republican Party,
which has long produced moderate leaders like Henry Cabot Lodge and former
Senator Edward Brooke. Mr. Richardson, a 63-year-old member of an old Yankee
family and a graduate of Harvard Law School, also served as Secretary of
Defense, Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare, Secretary of Commerce and
Ambassador to Britain. He was previously elected Attorney General and Lieutenant
Governor in Massachusetts.

On the Democratic side, the two leading contenders for the Senate nomination,
Lieut. Gov. John F. Kerry and Representative James M. Shannon, both liberals,
are locked in a very close race. A poll released earlier this week by The Boston
Globe put Mr. Kerry ahead, but another by WNEV-TV, the CBS affiliate here,
placed Mr. Shannon in the lead.

Discrepancies Reflect Indecision

John Marttila, a political consultant who is working for Mr. Kerry, said he
believed the discrepancies in the polls reflected swings by independent voters
who have not made up their minds.

Mr. Kerry, who is 39 years old, has had better recognition statewide because of
his job as Lieutenant Governor and his record as a Vietnam War hero and founder
of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War. Mr. Kerry has depicted himself as an
''outsider'' who can bring change to Washington.

By contrast, the 32-year-old Mr. Shannon has played up his reputation during
three terms in Congress as an effective, influential insider, good at behind the
scenes committee work which pays off for his constituents. A protege of House
Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Mr. Shannon has been endorsed by a broad range of
Democratic interest groups including the A.F.L.- C.I.O, teachers unions and
organizations of the elderly.

The two other candidates in the Democratic senate race, with records less
liberal than those of the two leaders, trail badly. They are David M. Bartley, a
former Speaker of the Massachusetts House, and Michael John Connolly, the
Secretary of State. Mr. Bartley has stressed his opposition to new taxes, Mr.
Connolly his stance against abortion.

Must Have Broad Appeal

Because the Republican Party in Massachusetts is small and its candidates must
appeal to Democrats and independents, Mr. Richardson, the moderate, is thought
by some to have a better chance than Mr. Shamie in the November election against
the Democratic victor, a point he underscored in a press conference Wednesday.
Criticizing Mr. Shamie as a conservative ''demagogue,'' Mr. Richardson said:
''Some people are more concerned with nailing the ideological flag to the mast
than with going down with the ship.''

In the Congressional races, Representative Edward J. Markey, a four- term member
of the House and a national leader of the nuclear freeze movement, has lost some
support because of his decision to run for Mr. Tsongas's Senate seat but then to
drop out just in time to file for the contest for his old post. His flip-flop
left a number of other aspiring politicians stranded, and he has faced
unexpectedly tough opposition from Samuel Rotondi, a former State Senator.

Nuclear Power Issue

Mr. Markey, who has received strong backing from antinuclear groups, has accused
Mr. Rotondi of accepting over $20,000 in campaign funds from leaders of the
nuclear power industry, including Stephen D. Bechtel Jr., the chairman of the
Bechtel Corporation, the largest builder of nuclear power plants.

In the Democratic primary to succeed Mr. Shannon in his district, which covers
the industrial cities of Lowell and Lawrence as well as some affluent suburbs of
Boston, there is a bitter fight between Chester G. Atkins, a liberal, and Philip
L. Shea, a conservative.

Mr. Atkins was regarded as the favorite at the start, given his posts as
chairman of the powerful state Senate Ways and Means Committee and chairman of
the state Democratic Party.

But Mr. Atkins, 36, has been put on the defensive by Mr. Shea's charges of
inconsistency.

Another gritty fight has taken place in the Congressional district that covers
the shore south of Boston and includes Cape Cod and New Bedford. The incumbent
is Representative Gerry E. Studds, a 46-year- old Democrat who was censured by
the House last year for his 1973 homosexual affair with a 17-year-old
Congressional page.

His chief Democratic challenger, Peter Y. Flynn, the sheriff of Plymouth County,
has tried to capitalize on the affair, accusing Mr. Studds of ''child
molestation.'' Until the incident Mr. Studds had been a very popular and
effective legislator, and when Mr. Flynn has brought up the subject at public
debates he has been booed.

Mr. Studds may face a more formidable challenge in the November election from
the likely Republican nominee, Lewis Crampton, a moderate and former official of
the Environmental Protection Agency under President Reagan. Mr. Crampton has
been described by local Republican leaders as ''a heterosexual Gerry Studds.''

A fight over leadership in the state House of Representatives is a major issue
in many of the local legislative primaries on Tuesday. A group of reformers and
dissident representatives, headed by George Keverian, have been trying to wrest
control from Speaker Thomas W. McGee, who is regarded as a rigid autocrat.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Elliot Richardson; photo of Raymond Shamie; photo of James
Shannon; photo of John Kerry

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN FOES SAY THEIR RIGHTS WERE VIOLATED

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 319 words

DATELINE: SAN JOSE, Calif., Sept. 15


Protesters against President Reagan said Friday that their civil rights were
violated when sheriff's deputies put them into a roped-off parking lot at a
Labor Day rally for the President.

Daniel Mayfield, a lawyer who wrote a letter to the Sheriff's Department
complaining about its policy that day, said he believed the deputies' actions
were politically motivated.

''Obviously, it's to the Republicans' advantage to have a rally that is run
without opposing points of view,'' Mr. Mayfield said.

Sheriff Bob Winter of Santa Clara County and Capt. Robert Lees, the sheriff's
operational commander at the rally, said Secret Service agents had told them
that, at the request of the Reagan campaign, demonstrators opposing the
President at the rally at De Anza College in Cupertino, Calif., were to be
confined to the parking lot.

'To Protect the Public'

''Our priority is to protect the public, and if in doing so we can guarantee
that constitutional rights not be violated, we will,'' said Mr. Winter, a
Republican.

But Jaime Cagigas, the chief advance agent for the Secret Service at the rally,
said limiting signs ''is purely a political question, not a security question,''
and added, ''Carrying an anti- Reagan sign is not threatening.''

There was heckling by some sign carriers who joined the rally, said Richard
McDrew, agent in charge of the Secret Service in San Francisco. He challenged
assertions that protesters had been prevented from entering the rally as a
matter of policy.

He said they were allowed to enter individually after removing the sticks from
their signs.

Franklin Wood, a protester who carried a sign saying ''No Vietnam in El
Salvador,'' said, ''I was resting in the shade of a tree and a deputy said to
me, 'You have to take that sign over there' '' referring to the parking lot.

''I said, 'It's my right to have this,' but I left,'' Mr. Wood added.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN LIFE AS ON SCREEN, STRUGGLE DEFINES TWO ACTRESSES

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1652 words


LOS ANGELES

 The houses in which movie stars live often lack comfort. The public display
that is part of being a star seems to taint the private in a curious way. It is
as though the Midas touch of fame and money turns ordinary life into just
another movie set. Whether filled with marble or chintz, the houses seem too
self-consciously aware of the value of their occupants.

Sally Field's house is an exception. It nestles against the ''wrong,'' less
desirable side of the mountains that divide Beverly Hills and Bel Air from the
San Fernando Valley. The front doorbell plays ''The William Tell Overture,'' and
the wooden coat rack in the entry hall holds umbrellas that haven't been needed
for the last six months. As a matter of fact, the temperature outside is 108 and
the 14- year-old boy shooting baskets in front of the garage wears a gray
T-shirt soaked with sweat. The outdoor lights are still under the eaves from
last Christmas. It seems too late now to bother to take them down.

''I've been a celebrity for all my adult life,'' Sally Field says. ''Sometimes
hot and sometimes not. Sometimes with dignity and sometimes with less than
dignity. I've learned to live with the handicap. I don't let it change my
lifestyle.'' Miss Field grew up in this same section of the Valley with a
stepfather who played leading roles in low- budget westerns and a mother who was
once under contract to a movie studio but who, afterwards, dutifully stayed home
to mind the kids.

Miss Field, in her own life, took a much less orthodox road and has propelled
herself much more by fighting than by giving in. ''The part of Edna that was
hardest for me to understand is that her growth came not from anger but from
love,'' she says, speaking of the character she plays in her latest movie,
''Places in the Heart,'' opening in New York on Friday at the Coronet. ''That
threw me. It's so easy to be propelled through fury like the woman I played in
'Sybil' or 'Norma Rae.' I take a sharp poker and stick all the places in my
heart I think are good for the character. To go through a knothole for love, I
had to devastate myself about the people I love.''



A $10.5 million Tri-Star movie, ''Places in the Heart'' also stars Lindsay
Crouse, Ed Harris and John Malkovich. The character of Edna Spalding, who is
widowed by a sudden bullet on a Sunday morning in the middle of the Depression,
is based on the great-grandmother of Robert Benton, the writer-director of
''Places in the Heart,'' who is probably best-known for ''Kramer vs. Kramer.''
His great- grandfather was killed three Sundays before Christmas in 1882 and his
great-grandmother raised her four children by working a farm. Edna's stoicism
and her relationship to her children come from Mr. Benton's own mother and his
Texas childhood in the decade before the Second World War.

From the moment Sally Field first stepped on the stage of a junior high school
auditorium, acting has provided her with ''an almost out of body experience,
giving me a feeling of warmth that nothing has touched except my children and
those high times when you're really in love.''

Success came early. At 17, she was picked off a street corner to star in the
television series, ''Gidget.'' She has won an Emmy for her performance as the
terrified ''Sybil'' whose mousy exterior covered multiple personalities and an
Oscar as the angry Southern mill worker ''Norma Rae.''

Sitting barefoot in her living room - wearing blue jeans without a designer
label and eating chunks of tart green apple - 37-year-old Sally Field searches
hopelessly for any similarities between herself and the subdued, ladylike Edna
Spalding who learns to fight in unladylike ways to keep her children from
adoption.

''Edna was so contained,'' she says. ''I'm so emotional that my children wish I
were contained. Edna felt it was important to live within a code as a person and
a parent. Fifteen years ago women rejected that sweetness, that nurturing, that
asexuality. I wanted to say, 'Hey, this isn't me.' I had fought so hard for my
own sexuality, it was hard for me to veil it again. It was hardest for me to
play her frailty. My grandmother Joy came from Alabama. My mother was born in
Texas. My family is full of Southern women who were alone in the prime of their
lives, who acted frail, trembling and scared.

''I was Sally Margaret Field, such a bouncy name. And because I was short, I had
to be girly all the time. All the guys could show off how strong they were by
picking me up, like I was a walking barbell.My stepfather was a great macho man.
His code was that men were only after one thing.  The victimization of women
made you feel so comfortable. It was so righteous, so safe, to be a victim. If
you're a victim, you don't risk anything.''

''Sally scorns prissiness. She almost scorns softness sometimes,'' says Maggie
O'Mahoney, her mother. Maggie - who has long been divorced from Sally Field's
stepfather, Jock Mahoney, who once played Tarzan - has stopped by the deli to
bring roast beef and tuna salad for lunch and has stayed to hem her daughter's
pants. Mother and daughter share the car pools, but it is Sally who acts as a
short-order cook, freezing enough banana pancakes and pesto sauce for the long
working days. Tomorrow she is leaving for the Texas premiere of ''Places in the
Heart;'' today she is tidying the house - her defense against ''the chaos in my
head'' over leaving her 12- and 14-year-old sons once again. She is, she says,
''fanatically, obsessively neat,'' as though cleaning her closets, as she does
before each new role, will straighten the snarled string of being a single
parent and a working mother.

It is her own mother to whom Sally Field credits her career. ''On parent night,
in the eighth grade, I did three scenes from 'Romeo and Juliet.' I must have
been absolutely vile. But she said, 'Sal, you have magic' and I was fool enough
to believe it.''

''Oh, she was amateurish,'' says Mrs. O'Mahoney, ''but she had a certain quality
I had never had. Most of us cover up. Sally allowed an actress. Robert Benton
describes her as ''simple'' and ''direct'' and calls her ''one of the two or
three least neurotic people I have ever met.''

''The one thing she asks of you is that you don't lie to her,'' says Mr. Benton.
Martin Ritt, who directed her in ''Norma Rae'' and ''Back Roads,'' has said,
''You can tell Sally Field to step off a cliff and she won't ask why. She'll
just say, 'I hope we can get it in one take.' ''

As she always does on location, during the 14 weeks she spent in Waxahachie,
Tex., making ''Places in the Heart,'' she tried to simulate ordinary life -
shopping and cooking for herself and riding a bicycle everywhere. ''I am
horrifically disciplined when I work,'' she says, ''but that's not as noble as I
pretend. It's a way of making it seem important to be so far away from my
children.''

At 21, she married her high school sweetheart. Two babies later, they were
divorced. That was followed by a highly publicized love affair with Burt
Reynolds.It was at the end of the affair that she stopped defining herself in
terms of men. ''I didn't want anybody around me who I could hide behind,'' she
says.

She has always loved best the chameleon quality of being an actress. Robert
Benton says of her that she is one of the few actresses who never comments on
her role, but who, like Robert Duvall, ''disappears into a part.'' But almost
simultaneously with her Academy Award for ''Norma Rae'' and the breakup of her
romance with Burt Reynolds, her advisers pushed her into creating her own
production company.

Even now, with her first movie, ''Murphy's Romance,'' going into production at
Columbia next January, she seems uncomfortable with the idea. ''All I've ever
wanted to do was act. I thought when you got good enough as an actress, you
would get to sit back and say, 'Well, I won't do this but I'll do that.' It
doesn't work that way. You have to push yourself.''

It is possible, she adds, shaking her pony tail, that ''not being conjoined at
the hip and dependent on some man'' enables her to take the step of producing
her own movies. ''I grew up thinking I must need someone. When there was no
husband or big strong man around, I found myself pulled forward in ways I
couldn't, in my imagination, have wanted.''



Being most comfortable as a chameleon has also meant that she has often
''defined myself in terms of my own movies.'' Norma Rae's anger propelled her
for four years. ''I didn't want to need anyone. To me, needing people was ugly
and undignified. But Edna Spalding felt a certain dignity in needing people.
'Places in the Heart' made me aware of a certain defiance in myself. I was
saying, 'I don't need anybody!' But who was I talking to? Being Edna, I really
wasn't so angry anymore. I welcomed my own need to be loved.''

She had met Alan Greisman, the producer of ''Heartbeat'' and ''Modern Romance,''
during what she calls her defiant mood. She met him again after the softening of
''Places in the Heart.'' They are now living together, in her first relationship
since she broke up with Burt Reynolds in 1981.

Her production company is also preparing ''Home Before Morning,'' the odyssey of
a young woman who was a nurse in Vietnam; ''Second Heaven,'' the second novel by
Judith Guest, the author of ''Ordinary People;'' and, for NBC, a television
movie about the antinuclear activist, Dr. Helen Caldicott.

''Helen Caldicott is a hero to me,'' says Miss Field. ''The movie is about what
propelled Helen Caldicott to do what she's now doing, what she's had to give up,
the trade-offs.''

Sally Field's own trade-offs are apparent. ''In an emergency I would drop
everything to come to the children. Otherwise, I try not to give up anything on
either side. But I'm obsessed with neatness because I'm always sure I'm letting
somebody down.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sally Field

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenhiem, Katherine Roberts, and Henry Giniger

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 264 words


Help for Those

 Left Behind

Although the Vietnam War ended a decade ago, many Vietnamese are still paying
for their political and personal association with the United States. Thousands
of children who were fathered by Americans endure discrimination and thousands
of Vietnamese with close ties to the United States during the war were
imprisoned in ''re-education'' camps, where many remain.

Last week, the United States officially accepted responsibility for these
people. Secretary of State George P. Shultz told a Senate subcommittee that
Washington was ready to call on Hanoi to make good its promise to allow the
Amerasians, political prisoners and ''qualifying family members'' to come to
this country.

Hanoi says there are 15,000 Amerasian children; the State Department puts the
number closer to 8,000. Vietnam says there are 10,000 political prisoners;
Washington says 6,000 to 15,000. The prisoners, many of whom were officials in
the South Vietnamese Government, ''are of particular humanitarian concern to the
United States,'' Mr. Shultz said.

Despite two years of efforts to arrange for the release of the political
prisoners, only about 100 have been allowed to emigrate, according to the Reagan
Administration. About 3,000 Amerasian children and their families have already
been admitted to the United States.

The plan outlined by Mr. Shultz is part of the Administration's effort to set a
ceiling of 70,000 refugees to be admitted from around the world for the fiscal
year that begins Oct. 1. Of that number, 50,000 could be from East Asia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 748 words

     Fiction
 1   AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Warner, $4.50.) The five-year relationship of
     two women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.

 2   THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) King Arthur,
     fulfilling a prophecy of Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.

 3   HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) The struggle for
     money and power in Tinseltown.

 4   THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) Three generations of a
     San Francisco family.

 5   SAVANNAH, by Eugenia Price. (Berkley, $3.95.) The romance and ambitions of
     a young man in the Old South.

 6   THE SEDUCTION OF PETER S., by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) The
     sudden, danger-filled success of a long-out-of-work actor.

 7   THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Berkley, $3.95.) Three
     generations of a German Jewish family in New York.

 8   IDAHO!  by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam, $3.95.) The ''Wagons West'' series
     reaches a territory teeming with gold seekers.

 9   WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Pocket, $4.50.) A fantastic yet realistic
     look at Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.

10   PARTISANS, by Alistair MacLean. (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) A doughty band
     sets out to restore King Peter of Yugoslavia to power during World War II.

11   THE MADNESS OF A SEDUCED WOMAN, by Susan Fromberg Schaeffer. (Bantam,
     $3.95.) A woman's search for love ends in murder charges and
     institutionalization.

12   THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco.  (Warner, $4.95.) Murder in an
     Italian monastery.

13   SECRET OF THE SIXTH MAGIC, by Lyndon Hardy. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $2.95.)
     The laws of logic are under attack in a fantasy land called Arcadia.

14   ON A PALE HORSE, by Piers Anthony. (Del Rey/ Ballantine, $2.95.) The first
     volume in a fantasy about the reincarnation of the deceased.

15   CROSSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) A clandestine trans-Atlantic
     romance survives the stresses of World War II.

     Nonfiction

     General

 1   ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (NAL/ Signet, $4.50.) The rescue of
     two Americans from an Iranian prison.

 2   FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of an Ivy
     League graduate, doctor and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.

 3   THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.  (Avon, $3.95.) The plight of men
     who have never grown up: a psychologist's analysis.

 4   IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
     (Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.

 5   CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) The life of a helicopter
     pilot in Vietnam.

 6   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
     Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 7   OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $3.95.) The actress's
     autobiography.

 8   LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
     Inspirational talks by a California professor.

 9   MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $3.95.) Predictions about America
     in the next decade.

10   BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon.  (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) The
     back roads of America.

     Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1   THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson.
     (Berkley, $6.95.) How to increase your productivity.

 2   RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.  (Rand McNally,
     $5.95.) For 1984.

 3   IN SEARCH OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson.  (Andrews, McMeel & Parker,
     $4.95.) A new collection of the syndicated ''Far Side'' cartoons.

 4   COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson.  (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips
     for women.

 5   SNIGLETS, by Rich Hall and Friends. (Macmillan, $4.95.) Newly minted words
     that ''deserve to appear in the dictionary.''

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GRUMMAN'S TEST PILOT SET FOR X-29 FLIGHT

BYLINE: By CONRAD WESSELHOEFT

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 31, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 423 words


AT first glance, the X-29 looks like a fumbled model airplane - the kind
youngsters make when they lose the instructions. Even the aircraft's chief
designer, Glenn Spacht, has compared the X-29 concept to that of an arrow hurled
feathers-first that tends to tumble end-over-end through the air.

Despite the appearance of instability, the X-29 is being geared up for its first
test flight in late November and Chuck Sewell, the pilot, can't wait.

''This is the best job in the world,'' Mr. Sewell said. ''Each day I wake up I
think, 'Oh, boy! I get to go to work again.''

Mr. Sewell, who is 54, is the chief test pilot for the Grumman Corporation. As
pilot of the X-29, he is at the helm of an aircraft that, he said, makes the
military jets he flew during the Korean and Vietnam wars seem simple in
comparison. For starters, the X-29 is controlled by three digital computers that
make changes to the aircraft at the rate of 40 corrections per second. In
flight, it is given substantial backup assistance by a ground crew of engineers
and technicians.

Grumman is banking on the fact that the X-29's unconventional design - small,
non-metallic wings swept forward rather than back, among other innovations -
will set a standard in the design of future tactical aircraft. The design will
enable the X-29 to fly at higher speeds and experience greater agility and
aerodynamic control than the current generation of supersonic jets.

Over the weekend the X-29 was scheduled for a paint job - white, with red and
blue stripes. And during the week, Mr. Sewell will test, among other things, the
aircraft's high-speed taxiing capabilities.

Honored to be the first to fly the X-29, Mr. Sewell is also mildly bewildered.

''If someone had told me two or three years ago that I'd be flying a plane with
the wings on backward - and be able to make it look good - I'd have told them
they'd been smoking the wrong stuff.''

The first of several test flights is scheduled for Nov. 23 at Edwards Air Force
Base in California. Schedules aside, Mr. Sewell maintains that the X-29 will fly
only when he and the engineering staff feel that it's ''good enough for our sons
to fly. That's when we let it go over the fence; that's when we go with it.''

After eight years and $133 million to plan and build the X-29, could Mr. Sewell
get the jitters as he taxis down the runway in November?

''Like all in the trade,'' he said, ''you feel that you're the best in the world
and any pilot that doesn't think this way is not really good.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of test pilot for the Gruman Corporation, Jack Sewell, with the
x-29 plane

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 17, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Balloonist Nears France In Solo Atlantic Flight

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 229 words


Joe Kittinger, hoping to make the first solo balloon flight across the Atlantic,
was sailing smoothly in a fast- moving weather system toward the French coast
early today, a flight spokesman reported.

The spokesman, Jim E. Mitchell, said in a telephone interview from the flight's
weather and operations center in Bedford, Mass., that if current weather
conditions continued, he expected Mr. Kittinger to cross the coastline about 3
A.M. Eastern time after a flight of about 3,000 miles.

He added that at about 12:30 A.M.  Eastern time today, the balloon was 125 miles
southwest of Brest, France, and traveling about 75 miles an hour at an altitude
of 12,000 feet.

Mr. Kittinger, 56 years old, is a retired Air Force colonel and Vietnam pilot
from Orlando, Fla. He left Caribou, Me., Friday aboard the helium balloon, the
Rosie O'Grady Balloon of Peace.

The spokesman said Mr. Kittinger ''could fly a good part of the day if he wants
to'' after crossing the French coastline.

Two men died in previous attempts to fly the Atlantic solo in a balloon. The
longest previous solo flight was 2,475 miles made in 1976 by Ed Yost, who built
Mr. Kittinger's balloon; attempting to cross the Atlantic he landed 600 miles
short of Portugal. In August 1978 three Americans, Maxie Anderson, Ben Abruzzo
and Larry Newman, made the only Atlantic crossing by balloon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 17, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 872 words


MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 17, 1984 International

Israel devalued the shekel by 9 percent and announced a plan to cut this year's
$20 billion national budget by $1 billion. These were the first steps taken by
the new coalition Government to deal with the country's severe economic
problems. (Page A1, Column 3.)

Israelis accused of terrorizing Arabs in the West Bank went on trial in
Jerusalem. It promises to be among Israel's most politically sensitive trials.
The sentiment of the spectators and some of the police guarding the courtroom
was clearly for the 20 defendants, despite the prosecution's warning that it was
a criminal, not a political trial. (A12:4.)

A foe of Indira Gandhi was reinstated

 as the Chief Minister of the state of Andhra Pradesh in southern India. The
removal of the Chief Minister, N. T. Rama Rao, a highly popular opponent of
Prime Minister Gandhi, stirred nationwide protests last month. His reinstatement
came as forces loyal to Mrs. Gandhi conceded defeat. (A1:1.)

Missiles struck two oil tankers in the Persian Gulf. The planes that fired the
missiles were not positively identified, but an officer on one of the ships was
said to have spotted Iranian markings on the aircraft. Six crewmen were reported
hurt. (A3:4.) National

Walter Mondale and Andrei Gromyko

 will meet in New York Sept. 27, a day before President Reagan and Mr. Gromyko,
the Soviet Foreign Minister, meet at the White House. Mr. Mondale made the
announcement in a radio speech, saying he would press Mr. Gromyko to seek
negotiations with Mr. Reagan to control nuclear weapons. Mr. Mondale's aides
said he had initially been approached last week by the Russians about meeting
with Mr. Gromyko. (A1:6.)

The President's appeal among men is one of the Democrats' biggest worries. Even
Republicans say they have been surprised by their polls showing a surge of
support of Mr. Reagan among younger men. For three years, the fact women that
women like Mr. Reagan less than men do had chilled Republicans and warmed
Democrats. (A1:5.)

General Motors and union officials

 resumed bargaining as about 62,000 union members prepared to block production
at 13 General Motors plants today. The union struck the plants late Friday, but
most had no weekend work scheduled. A General Motors official expressed optimism
that a quick settlement would be reached, but union leaders were less certain.
(A1:4.)

Americans are drinking less than they have in years, bringing about changes in
the liquor industry from distillers and distributors to retailers and bars.
Drinking has declined as concern about health, drunken driving and moderation in
many social habits has grown. Leading liquor companies are responding with new
products that rely on fruit juices, and they are seeking to lower the alcohol
content of their whisky. Breweries are introducing low-alcohol and even
no-alcohol beer. (A1:2.)

Laotians have been forced out of a West Philadelphia neighborhood because of
hostility among their neighbors that made them fear for their lives. Six
families of Hmong refugees from Laos have left Philadelphia in a recent
eight-day period to escape muggings and other violence. The Hmong were American
allies in the Vietnam War. More than 55,000 of them have been resettled in the
United States. (A16:2.)

Development of a plant-killer that enlists sunlight to cause weeds to destroy
themselves has been announced by officials of the University of Illinois, whose
scientists developed it, and the National Science Foundation. The herbicide is
activated by sunlight. It is believed to be not dangerous to humans or other
animals and is said to be highly selective, avoiding food crops while destroying
many common weeds. (B9:3.) Metropolitan

Life-saving aid could be withheld

 from some terminally ill or mortally injured people under legislation being
drafted by the Cuomo administration. Physicians have followed guidelines set two
years ago by the Medical Society of the State of New York outlining the clinical
circumstances under which they may withhold potentially life-prolonging
treatment. The society and the state's hospitals are urging the state to adopt
the guidelines as law. (A1:1.)

The Episcopal Bishop of New York

 joined a debate that has become a focus of the Presidential campaign. The
Bishop, Paul Moore, said officeholders of various faiths had a ''primary duty''
to uphold the Constitution and the nation's laws, even if they are contrary to
their religious beliefs. Bishop Moore said that he was not in favor of abortion,
but, he said, he regarded it as ''decision of conscience'' to be made by women
and that it ''should not be something which the state should take over as its
decision.'' (B12:1.) John V. Lindsay has been appointed chairman of the Vivian
Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center. He was offered the position Sept. 5 and
accepted it two days later. The appointment of the former Mayor of New York City
is a major step in the reconciliation between the Beaumont theater and the
Lincoln Center board, which has disagreed about the leadership and aims of the
theater. (C10:3.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 17, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIOLENCE FORCES HMONG TO LEAVE PHILADELPHIA

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Sept. 16


Among his troubled people, the actions of Lu Vang were not unusual. But it was a
sad day for him, the young man said Wednesday, as he packed a van to take his
family out of harm's way, far from the grim streets of Powelton Village in West
Philadelphia.

It was the end of a chapter that opened with high hopes when the Vang family,
refugee Hmong from the mountains of Laos, were resettled here four years ago
after a sojourn in Wisconsin and that closed last week amid hatred after attacks
by black youths against them and others of their people.

''Maybe they just don't like us, maybe something wrong with us,'' said the
21-year-old refugee, struggling with a limited command of English to explain why
he felt he had to leave Philadelphia's dwindling community of Hmong (pronounced
MUNG) to go to Minneapolis.

''I'm not angry,'' Mr. Vang said. ''But if we keep staying here I don't know
when someone die.''

Mr. Vang's extended family of 16, including his wife and two children, are among
six Hmong family groups to leave Philadelphia in a recent eight- day period.
They were fleeing a wave of violence that left them afraid, they said, to walk
the city's streets or even stay in their homes.

Few Escape Violence

Mr. Vang was one of seven Hmong interviewed on Powelton Avenue over the last few
days, only one of whom, a Hmong leader named Bee Xiong, had escaped the muggings
or other violence that had marked the past two months here. Some were beaten and
robbed, apartment windows were hit by rifle bullets and homes and cars were
stoned.

The attackers were apparently few in number, but they have stirred revulsion
here far beyond that caused by random violence long suffered by many others in
the community.

In response to the violence, United States Attorney Edward S. G. Dennis has
started a Justice Department investigation and asked the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to determine whether the Hmong's civil rights was violated. In
addition, the city's Commission on Human Relations has taken a hand in trying to
ease the conflicts.

But a call for a City Council investigation by Joan Specter, a Republican
member, was rejected by the Democratic majority on the ground that city agencies
were handling a problem that could be exacerbated by intervention.

Car of Priest Stoned

One of the cars stoned was that of the Rev. Edward V. Avery, a Roman Catholic
who has helped the Hmong. Ruth Adams, a leader in the black community who has
supported the Hmong, was threatened. She has helped organize a neighborhood
meeting and a petition drive on behalf of the Hmong and a march on a local
police station seeking increased protection for the community.

The Hmong, who fought as allies of American troops in the Vietnam War, have
encountered problems, sometimes including hostility, wherever they have gone in
the United States, but apparently the brutality here was the worst they have
faced.

More than 55,000 Hmong have been resettled in the United States since the end of
the Vietnam war. Few of them could read and write even in their own language,
and that has made it difficult for them to learn to communicate in a new
language. In the low-income communities where they live, they compete with the
least skilled for low-paying jobs and public aid.

From 5,000 to 650

As many as 5,000 Hmong moved to Philadelphia by the end of the last decade,
according to Mr. Xiong, the president of the local community organization. He
said the local Hmong population has fallen to 650.

''Most,'' Mr. Xiong said, ''had never put pen to paper before.'' And most left,
he said, because of economic problems.

With a Federal grant of $100,000, Mr. Xiong has opened an employment assistance
office to stabilize the remaining Hmong population. But that aid has also
contributed to the Hmong's problems, according to Father Avery and Mrs. Adams.

Black youths, who suffer high rates of unemployment, have asked why immigrants
received the aid instead of native Americans, Father Avery said.

''They hear the talk among their elders at night, and they act out their
feelings on the street,'' said Father Avery.

Mrs. Adams has been among the most outspoken critics of the violence. ''It's
shameful,'' she said, ''that my people could feel so much hatred, that they
could do the same things to the Asians that have been done to us.''

But, she said, ''It isn't just the Asians,'' and cited several recent incidences
of robbery and other violence with black victims. ''We need more police
protection,'' she said. ''And we need more love in our hearts.''

Lu Vang has more reason than most for his fears. His brother Seng Vang, visiting
from Quebec, was beaten last month with a steel rod and rocks on a street corner
and left with a brain injury and both legs broken. Later a rifle shot was fired
into an apartment of the building where Lu Vang lives, breaking a window near
where his mother stood washing dishes.

When Father Avery drove a witness through the neighborhood to try to identify
the attackers, a small group smashed his van's windows with stones.

''It's not as if they didn't know who I was,'' Father Avery said. ''I was
wearing my collar at the time.''

Shattered Window a Sign


Later, he visited the apartment of Yia Vang, a cousin of Lu Vang's, who spoke
little English but pointed mutely at another window shattered by a bullet.

On the street outside, two young Hmong men told of beatings and muggings to
which they had been subjected. Another said his car window was smashed when he
visited the neighborhood.

''He say 'don't come down this street no more,' '' said one of them, Ger Vang,
another of Lu Vang's relatives, referring to an attacker who had thrown him to
the ground and battered his face. ''I must walk this street,'' Ger Vang said.
''I live here.''

Father Avery, an assistant pastor of the nearby St. Ignatius of Loyola Church,
returned to the neighborhood the next day and encountered Chiroon Siriraphasuk,
a Hmong who was driving a van loaded with vegetables grown on land that the
priest had obtained permission for him to cultivate.

Mr. Siriraphasuk and his wife, Pang Xiong, invited Father Avery and two other
visitors to their home, where, Mr. Siriraphasuk said, he had given refuge to two
Hmong men who were being chased down the street. His house was then stoned, he
said, and a gang was battering his door with a piece of timber when the approach
of a police car drove them away.

But, said Mr. Siriraphasuk, a 50- year-old former parachutist, he was ''not
scared.''

''I stay,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Xizkao Xiang; photo of Yia Vang and her children

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ISOLATE NICARAGUA IF IT WON'T BEND, MONDALE SUGGESTS

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1232 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 17


Walter F. Mondale says that if Nicaragua rejected a good-faith compromise and
continued to export revolution in Central America, he would respond with a
''quarantine.''

In an interview, the Democratic Presidential candidate did not specify what
''quarantine'' meant, beyond ''interdiction'' by Central American forces
assisted by American intelligence information. He stressed that any such action
would have to be preceded by a dedicated effort at negotiations.

In a campaign speech in Washington today, Mr. Mondale asserted that the Reagan
Administration's policies in Central America would lead American troops into
combat there and would bring the world closer to nuclear war. (Page B7.)



Reaction to Gromyko Meeting

Also today, President Reagan said he had ''no problem'' with Mr. Mondale's plans
to see the Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei A. Gromyko, the day before the
President is to meet him. And in Moscow, there was speculation that Mr. Gromyko
was trying to appear even-handed in the American Presidential contest. (Article
and news analysis, page A4.)

In an interview on foreign issues Sunday, Mr. Mondale said for the first time
that he would have used force in Grenada ''to go in there and protect American
lives.''

Last October, when President Reagan dispatched a military task force with the
goals of protecting Americans in Grenada and overthrowing its left- wing
Government, Mr. Mondale questioned whether the Americans were actually at risk
and whether the attack would undermine American principles.



Broader Appeal Sought

With his statements on Nicaragua and other foreign issues, Mr. Mondale appeared
to be sharpening and toughening his positions on what his aides call ''strength
issues'' to broaden his appeal to moderates and conservatives.

The burden of what he said, as he sat puffing on a cigar in the living room of
his home here, was that a second Reagan term would be dangerous because the
President was neither sincere nor realistic in negotiating with the Soviet
Union, Nicaragua or the states of the Middle East.

''When this election is over, what will we see?'' he asked. ''Will we see the
blandishments of the last two months of a President who's seeking re-election,
or will there be the real Reagan who reappears?'' To him, this would mean a
Reagan Administration ''carrying on the arms race rather than trying to get arms
agreements,'' and efforts ''to win by force'' in Central America rather than
seeking peace through negotiation.

Issues of War and Peace

Mr. Mondale underlined this point today in his speech in Washington and also
signaled a push to make ''war and peace a major issue in this campaign.''

Sunday, tired as he seemed from the years of campaigning, there were flashes of
the Mondale humor.

''You've got a classic here,'' he said of his performance in the interview.
''When's Reagan going to do one of these interviews?'' he quipped at another
point.

The interview was vintage Walter Mondale, at once an experienced figure who can
display a command of foreign policy matters and a leading post-Vietnam
Democratic liberal jostling with crosscutting political pressures.

In responding to almost all questions, he was the portrait of a man trying to
appreciate world complexities, looking for a way to discern the limits of
American power and the occasions to use it, and always seeming to try to balance
the need for military strength with the need for negotiations.

Confusion vs. Realism

Mondale aides acknowledge that this looks to some like confusion and to others
like realism.

The Minnesotan made these other points in the interview:


- If the Russians and Cubans set up a base in Nicaragua, he would view that as
''totally intolerable,'' and take ''such steps'' as necessary to get them out.


- He intends to make the deaths of more than 200 marines in Lebanon a major
campaign issue.


- On the Middle East generally, he would go back to the Camp David process
between Israel and Egypt begun by President Carter, become personally involved
and not put pressure on Israel.


- On negotations with Moscow regarding medium-range missiles, he would be
prepared to forgo deployments of Pershing 2 medium-range missiles if the
Russians accepted equal numbers of Soviet SS-20's and American cruise missiles.


- On Central America, he would not insist that Nicaragua make internal changes
as a requirement for a peace settlement, as Mr. Reagan has.


- Human rights issues would be a major feature of a Mondale Administration, but
he would change the tone and emphasis of the Carter human rights policy to take
greater account of national security concerns.

The Reagan Administration has moved to make Grenada a symbol of the reassertion
of American power. Administration officials have pointed to Mr. Mondale's
reluctance to take a stand as evidence that he did not appreciate that.

With respect to Grenada, Mr. Mondale noted that at the time of the invasion ''we
had no way of evaluating'' the situation because of the ''total blackout'' on
information. At the time, ''I said that if Americans were at risk, I would have
used power to protect them.''

Subsequently, Mr. Mondale said, he learned from Americans who had traveled to
Grenada that Americans there ''were in trouble.''

Contrast With Platform


Nonetheless, his new statement stands in contrast to the Democratic Party
platform, which said the Grenada invasion had ''divided us from our European
allies and alienated our friends throughout the Western Hemisphere.'' That view
was reflected last month, for instance, by his running mate, Geraldine A.
Ferraro. On the ABC News program ''This Week,'' she said she ''would not have
jumped into that situation militarily, as did President Reagan.''

Tonight Francis O'Brien, Mrs. Ferraro's press secretary, said that she had not
changed her position on the Grenada issue since her televised remarks.

The emphasis of Mr. Mondale's remarks on Central America, however, was that the
Administration was relying on force rather than diplomacy. Like the
Administration, he said he would support President Jose Napoleon Duarte of El
Salvador and keep American military advisers in El Salvador and Honduras. But he
would stop support for the ''contras'' in their war against Nicaragua.

He argued that the Administration was not making a serious effort to back other
Central American nations in working out a settlement.

Mr. Mondale also emphasized that to set Soviet-American relations on a better
track ''the total spectrum'' of ties had to be improved.

He said that Mr. Reagan's ''language has changed as we near the elections,'' but
that the incumbent had opposed ''every arms control agreement'' in the past, had
''overburdened the relationship with harsh rhetoric,'' had been forced into
nuclear arms talks after a year by European allies, had presented proposals to
the Russians that ''most responsible experts thought were unnegotiable'' and had
assembled ''a team that he's placed in charge of arms control, many of whom
spent their lives fighting every known arms control agreement.''

He called the American position and policy in the Middle East ''a disaster from
almost every standpoint.'' He cited increased Soviet and Syrian influence and
the new Libyan-Moroccan union as evidence, along with Lebanon.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A U.S. BALLONIST CROSSES ATLANTIC

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: BIARRITZ, France, Sept. 17


An American completed the first solo balloon crossing of the Atlantic tonight,
according to officials and a reporter at the Biarritz airport control tower.

The balloonist, Joe W. Kittinger, was quoted by the officials as calling the
feat ''magnificent.''

They said his 10-story-tall helium- filled balloon crossed the French coast
above the town of Capbreton, 12 miles north of Biarritz, at 10:29 P.M. (4:29
P.M., New York time).

Mr. Kittinger and his balloon, named the Rosie O'Grady, left from Caribou, Me.,
on Friday night.

A French reporter who spoke briefly with Mr. Kittinger from the Biarritz control
tower said the ballonist had described the achievement as ''magnificent.''

''Now I just have to land safe and sound,'' Mr. Kittinger said.

Flight Continues Inland


The control tower said Mr. Kittinger was continuing the flight inland at a speed
of about 30 miles per hour. A control officer said he thought he understood Mr.
Kittinger to say he might not land until daylight Tuesday.

The officer said that at 11 P.M. (5 P.M., New York time) the balloon was 36
miles northeast of Biarritz, which is near the French-Spanish border. The
altitude was not given, but the officer said Mr. Kittinger did not appear to
have any height problems.

Mr. Kittinger, 56 years old, of Orlando, Fla., succeeded in the solo crossing
after six other men had failed, two dying in the attempt.

The first balloon crossing of the Atlantic was accomplished by the American team
of Maxie Anderson, Ben Abruzzo and Larry Newman of New Mexico in the Double
Eagle II in 1978. They flew from Presque Isle in Maine and landed in Miserey,
France, west of Paris.

Pushed Toward Bordeaux


Erratic breezes pushed Mr. Kittinger's balloon toward the French wine country
during the afternoon.

The regional air-traffic control center in Bordeaux said at 9 P.M. (3 P.M., New
York time) that an aircraft had reported spotting Mr. Kittinger about 55 miles
northwest of Biarritz.

Radio officers at Ballygirreen, Ireland, said in a morning report that Mr.
Kittinger had told them that his position was 180 miles west of Cognac and that
he was ''in very good form.''

''He hit wind and was a bit farther south than he thought,'' the Irish officers
said.

Mr. Kittinger, a former military pilot who was decorated for his actions in the
Vietnam War, had been in contact with the Irish Department of Communications
Center at Ballygirreen near Shannon Airport since Sunday night, a spokesman
said.

The Bordeaux control center had placed the balloon's altitude at 500 to 600 feet
and its speed at more than 25 m.p.h. as it approached the coast.

Difficult to Track


Jim Serna of the backup team's headquarters at Weather Services Corp. in
Bedford, Mass., had said the balloon's position was difficult to track because
navigational equipment aboard had not been working properly.

The backup team said Mr. Kittinger might continue on after he reaches the coast.

''There's no sense in landing if you've got a nice pattern to fly in and good
weather,'' Mr. Serna said.

Jim Mitchell, another backup team member, said: ''This is not your ordinary
balloonist. He's got a mind of his own.''

If the weather is good and the terrain suitable, Mr. Mitchell said, ''he might
want to head on down to the Mediterranean.''

Almost 1,000 people turned out Friday to cheer Mr. Kittinger when he climbed
into his balloon and lifted off from a field in Maine. The crowd joined crew
members in singing ''God Bless America.''

Just before takeoff, Mr. Kittinger said: ''It's going to be a great adventure.
The next glass of Champagne will be in Europe, wherever that may be.''

Mr. Kittinger set the world record for distance in a 1,000-cubic foot helium
balloon in July 1982, with a flight from St. Louis to Quebec, covering 1,348
miles in 48 hours.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Atlantic Ocean

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM INTERVIEW WITH MONDALE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4095 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 17


Following are excerpts from an interview Sunday with Walter F. Mondale, the
Democratic Presidential nominee, by The New York Times:

Central America


Q. On Central America you say that you would put much more emphasis on the
negotiations than President Reagan. What does this mean? And secondly, if you
formulated compromises, and the Nicaraguans and the Salvadoran guerrillas
rejected them, what would you do then?

A. I think the evidence is pretty clear that while the Administration talks
about negotiations, in fact their heart has never been it. I think the main
thrust of the Administration's policy in Central America is to win by force.

I believe we should be supporting Duarte, including military assistance. I would
support the continuing traditional role in Honduras for interdiction and not
this major buildup thing. I see the security dimensions that are involved here.
But I believe there is hope that one could negotiate through the Contadora
process the possible end of Nicaraguan intervention in El Salvador and that you
could negotiate if you ended the contra effort in Nicaragua, the broader
agreements anticipated leading to the withdrawal of all outside forces from the
isthmus.



Differences in Approach

Q. But specifically how would your negotiating approach differ from the
Administration's? What would you offer by way of compromises that the
Administration has not?

A. Take for example the Nicaraguan situation. My understanding is that we will
now agree that the contra effort will cease but we're pressing the Nicaraguans
to make concessions to remove outside forces that I would like to see out of
there. Secondly, it is not at all clear what our objective is in Nicaragua. Is
it to establish a government that we can find as acceptable to us, or is to get
an agreement that they'll stay out of the business of their neighbors? I've been
very condemnatory of the Sandinista Government. I think it is an increasingly
totalitarian state, but it's hard to bring about a diplomatic resolution when
matters this fundamental are not resolved. So what I would say to the
Sandinistas is that I would like you, if you will agree to the outlines of the
Contadora, what was it, 21 points? The key to it is the nonintervention
principle of the Rio Treaty, a draw- down in outside forces - the Cubans and
other forces that are there - that we would precipitate an agreement that you
would not any longer infiltrate or bring supplies into El Salvador or across
Honduras or even other countries. I believe there's absolutely no reason why we
shouldn't pursue those objectives. I would make it clear that I would want them
to honor human rights in Nicaragua, and I would continue to press them to do so,
but I do not believe that it's realistic to pursue the present course as I
understand it.

Internal Affairs

Q. You would not make their internal governmental structures, or their internal
affairs, a subject for negotiations, but you would insist on two things: one, no
export of revolution to El Salvador, and two, no Cuban- Soviet military bases?

A. I would press them on human rights reforms in Nicaragua, because I think
they're violating plenty of them.

Q. But not as a condition.

A. That's right.

Q. But what would you do if your effort at negotiations failed? If they continue
the things that are being done now?

A. Well, I would terminate the covert action because I think it is
counterproductive. I would continue to interdict, because I think that the
Nicaraguans have no right to do what they're doing. I would certainly use the
pressure I could build up from Contadora countries. I think all of our European
friends that have leverage should be brought to bear on this process, and we
should try to quarantine Nicaragua if it uses any force outside of its borders.

Military Bases

Q. What if the Soviets and Cubans were to set up something we recognize as a
military base in the area?

A. Many times I've said that is an entirely different situation. When you have
an American presence and you have a foreign presence - it depends on how you
define it. But if it is as significant as the question describes, that is a very
serious threat to this nation's security, and then it has to be dealt with at
that much higher level of threat.

Q. What does that mean?

A. Well, you can't define it because I don't know what you mean. In other words,
I find the situation intolerable; I find that totally intolerable; it's got to
come out.

Q. But President Reagan has told them in effect that if they were to bring the
MIG's, or a squadron of new MIG's in, that in effect we would take them out, if
they didn't take them out.

A. If the Soviets did that, it would be intolerable. I made it clear that
anything of that kind, permanent Soviet bases, introduction of Soviet aircraft,
that sort of thing - that moves the whole matter up to top level of national
security risks, and it has to be seen as such.

Q. What does that mean?

A. Well it could mean that could mean any number of things. What it means that
the Soviets have to get out of there and it means we have to take such steps as
to bring about that result. They can be under no illusions as to the seriousness
of it.



Missile Talks


Q. On the medium-range missile talks, you said that we should re-offer the
walk-in-the-woods formula for an equal number of missile launchers on each side
but no American deployment of Pershing 2 missiles. The Soviets say they've
rejected this offer.

A. I know they have.

Q. What do you gain by making it again?

A. First of all, there's some peculiar history surrounding this. It never,
never, never made any sense to me.

The first reaction of our Government was not negative to this proposal of Paul
Nitze's, the American negotiator. And then later the forces in the Government
that were against it built up heat, and we returned a no.

And after that the Soviets said no. It is murky. But we were the first to turn
it down, which I found astounding. The 1979 plan worked out with our European
allies was a two-track plan. It envisaged a correction of the imbalance of the
intermediate forces, but the other track was a negotiation track to see if there
was an alternative. And the one was as important as the other.

It was almost perfect from our standpoint, because it brought down the number of
SS-20's to an equivalent amount of cruise missiles, cruises being deployed; it
prevented the deployment of Pershings; it would reduce tensions, although there
would be some divisions, as you know, in NATO over that. But it was clearly what
the German Government wanted, and so on.

So what I said was that instead of quibbling about whether the Russians would or
would not accept it, offer it again. And if the Soviets showed interest and
would begin seriously negotiating the outlines of that plan, then give it a
decent interval before we deployed any more Pershings.

Zero-Zero Option Plan

Q. But didn't the Administration in effect offer it again when they came off the
zero-zero option and said there could be 300 medium-range missile warheads on
each side?

A. Well, the key point there was the Pershings. In other words, if I understand
the Nitze agreement, it was cruise missiles only that were going to be deployed.
The new offer by the Administration was a blend of the missiles, the cruise and
the Pershings.

My proposal would be to go back to the original agreement that so manifestly
serves our national interest.

Q. Are you now in favor of forgoing the deployment of Pershings in order to
reach this kind of settlement?

A. In the absence of reproposing it and an honest and serious response by the
Soviets that gave it hope, I would go forward with the agreement to deploy. I am
offended by what I think has been gross negligence by this Administration over
the last four years. And I think if I had been President we wouldn't be in this
mess today. But I also think that we had to do something to rectify the abuse of
the Soviets in building the SS-20's at the frantic pace that they've been doing,
and also the Backfires.

So I would not agree to any kind of unilateral freeze.

We do know that it takes about three or four years to deploy these Pershings in
any event. So that if the Soviets got serious, we could give them a small
interval in there to test their sincerity in reaching an agreement without
adversely affecting our security interests.

History of Negotiations

Q. You've criticized Mr. Reagan for his approach to arms control.

A. Very strongly. I think that's going to be his biggest failure.

Q. But the Soviets say they walked out on the nuclear arms talks because we
deployed medium-range missiles - they didn't say because we deployed Pershings.
They said because we deployed medium-range missiles. But you yourself have
always been in favor of such deployments. Why wouldn't the Soviets have walked
out on you?

A. The history is that this is the first President that's managed, with some
Soviet help together, to have a collapse of U.S.-Soviet arms negotiations. I've
got some proposals to try to cut through this suspicion and hostility - my idea
of a temporary moratorium on ASAT and star wars, very dangerous initiatives.

I believe that there's no way of successfully answering your question either
way. Because it involves the environment, it involves the total spectrum of the
U.S.-Soviet relations.

Q. If you're saying environment is so important, wasn't it the Carter
Administration in the wake of Afghanistan that began to tear down the structure
of detente with the Soviet Union and not Ronald Reagan?

A. For a period after the invasion of Afghanistan, President Carter, who very
much wanted SALT 2 ratified, was certain - as I was - that if he tried to pass
that SALT treaty in the aftermath of the Afghan invasion, there was no chance
that it would be ratified and little chance it could get debated on the issues.
And so he deferred ratification. If Carter had been re-elected, he would at the
right time have asked them to call the treaty up again.

Breakdown of Negotiations

Q. But not only the SALT 2 treaty was involved. The implementation of almost
every agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union was affected at
the end of the Carter Administration.

A. Well, I think there was a period there when the Soviets deserved that. But
there was also a time to get on with those essential agreements. I believe that
Reagan's a radical on arms control. I think his language has changed as we near
the election.

And he dumped SALT 2. Before he became President he opposed every arms control
agreement of every President in American history. He overburdened the
relationship with harsh rhetoric. He was only forced into intermediate nuclear
forces talks by NATO revolt. He presented Start proposals that most responsible
experts thought were unnegotiable. When Mr. Nitze, a tough professional, came
back with the walk-in-the- woods agreement, he was rebuked. There was talk about
winning limited nuclear wars, about firing warning shots. He lifted all the
restrictions off nuclear proliferation - practically all them. He issued over
100 licenses for high tech and the rest to countries that we knew were probably
interested in developing nuclear capability. He has a team that he's placed in
charge of arms control, many of whom spent their lives fighting every known arms
control agreement. It is clear that he's heading toward largely a repeal of the
ABM treaty - star wars, which he muffed - and enter in this highly dangerous new
escalation of the arms race.

And it is a historic fact that for all the difficulties and troubles that the
Soviets possess - and they are great and I don't wish to pass by those easily at
all: They're not easy to work with; they are contentious; they are always
seeking their own advantage. That's a reality. And I have never said this is all
Reagan's fault. But the fact of it is that his policy has resulted in a total
breakdown of arms control negotiations and most everything else that counts. And
it is there for all to see. And when this election is over, what will we see?
Will we see the blandishments of the last two months of a President who's
seeking re-election, or will there be the real Reagan who reappears?

And at the very top of the list is the star wars stuff, because I think history
tells the time to start stopping these arms races is before they start. This is
particularly true with so- called star wars technology because once it starts
it's more difficult to verify, and now's the time to stop it, before tests.
We're talking about the possibility of a half a trillion dollars, enormous
distortion of America's resources. We can have a temporary moratorium, say, for
six months now. We've already tested the ASAT weapon. Ours is more sophisticated
than theirs.

Compare that theoretical way-out stuff and all the costs and the destabilizing
consequences of that, to the real contribution to our security from what now may
be doable, and that is an agreement to stop testing on both sides. That's what I
think we should be doing.



Peace for Israel


Q. What combination of pressures and inducements would you put together to try
to bring about another settlement between the Arabs and the Israelis? How would
you do it differently from Mr. Reagan?

A. First of all, I believe the Reagan plan as it was defined was essentially a
program that was closely akin to the old plan by which the United States in
effect played all of Israel's negotiating cards in the hopes that they could
encourage King Hussein of Jordan to sit down and reach an agreement that in
effect had been, I wouldn't say imposed, but at least a pressure on the Israelis
to agree. I don't think that works.

I believe in the Camp David accords. I would encourage Hussein to sit down, and
that's all you can do. You can't force him to do it. I would not seek to
pressure Israel to prenegotiate to try to encourage Hussein to sit down. We'd be
a partner in the negotiations, but I'd tell all parties that I didn't intend to
impose any agreement.

One thing that I would do is be an active President in that region. So I would
be a President personally involved in trying to invigorate the Camp David peace
process and to try to breathe life and warmth back into the Egyptian-Israeli
peace treaty. That cold treaty is becoming frigid. I would try through a
strategic cooperation relationship to strengthen Israeli confidence, so that
they didn't have to worry about U.S. support and thus could negotiate without
the anxieties that undermine the confidence with which they can make
concessions.

Human Rights Policy


Q. How would your human rights policy be different from the Carter
Administration's human rights policy?

A. I think the human rights policies of the Carter Administration may be one of
its most enduring contributions, but I think there are problems. No. 1, I think
in the articulation of that policy we did not emphasize enough the times when
there was tension between other security interests and human rights. And also
sometimes we sounded a little preachy when in fact human rights emphasis, I
think, is a solid article or realistic expression of American values that makes
our policy more sustainable and more credible and in a large number of cases
actually strengthens our security and works harmoniously with our security
objectives.

Q. But specifically, what did the Carter Administration do on human rights that
you disagree with.?

A. It was more emphasis and tone.

Lebanon


Q. Why hasn't Lebanon become a major campaign issue?

A. You know this campaign isn't over yet, either. I think that, you know, we've
got to bring it up, and the whole Middle East. I think that the Reagan policy in
the Middle East has been a disaster from almost every standpoint. The Soviets
have more influence again. They're starting to build up influence in the Middle
East, in Syria, they've resumed negotiations, or diplomatic relations with
Egypt. That astounding Morocco- Libyan confederation. The collapse of any
alternative force in Lebanon. Our presence, the way the troops were put there.
Failure to protect them, to locate them in the proper position, even over, as I
recall, the objections of the Joint Chiefs. The clumsy way in which we tried to
get Hussein to sit down. The so-called Reagan Initiative.

Q. How are you going to turn it into an issue?

A. I think it's in the context of what was the assertion of an American
objective which, as you recall, Reagan defined in the most grandiose way. You
know, if anybody would lose Lebanon, anyone who'd let our adversaries get
influence here would destroy the security interests of the United States and the
free world. And three weeks later he pulled the plug. He had, as someone said,
not enough troops to get the job done and too many troops exposed to death. He
had exaggerated objectives and a modest force held hostage to do so. If we're
not careful the same thing's going to happen in Central America.

The Use of Power


Q. What about what we hear called reassertion of American strength in the world?
World leaders have been praising Mr. Reagan for doing this, especially in the
wake of what was perceived as a weak Carter Administration. Doesn't he get
credit for this?

A. I think it's a mixed scorecard. And I think the buildup in conventional
weaponry, the essential buildup, which was started before he came in office, was
necessary in the light of the Soviet buildup and irresponsible assertion of
power in Cambodia, Afghanistan and so on. However, in the first two and a half
years or three years he was in power he talked about the use of power, about
margin of superiority, the nuclear arms race. I think for a good portion of that
period in NATO we ended up weaker and not stronger. I think in the Middle East
we're clearly weaker and not stronger. We're better off in the Asia and Pacific
region, but only because we changed the policy toward the People's Republic of
China. I think in Latin America, well, to start out with Central America, I
believe it is clear there are, what, three or four more times the guerrillas
than there were three years ago. Many more Cubans and Soviets and so on. And I
think there was a lack of nuance, a lack of balance, coherence, strategy and of
Presidential leadership that has maybe got them a few grades in brandishing
American power, in talking about American power, but, which also has the effect
of shaking our allies and our friends and the world's confidence in the wisdom
and the maturity with which he will actually use power. Even though many of the
leaders do not say it publicly the way I just have, I have reason to believe
that many of them in fact believe as I've just described them.

We haven't talked about the foreign policy dimensions of economics. But the
impact of Reaganomics, the high deficits, the distorted Dow or the higher real
interest rates, the recession not only here but in Western Europe and elsewhere,
the severe pressure upon the newly developing industrial countries, the credit
problems - all this places strains, not of a military nature or of a traditional
foreign policy nature, but of an economic nature that's been pretty rough.

Intervention in Grenada


Q. In Grenada, if you were President of the United States, would you have
introduced military force as President Reagan did?

A. I would've used it to go in there and protect American lives. I would've
moved as quickly as I could to get a Commonwealth force in place. And moved
toward the selection of their own Government.

You know, for about a week people like myself, let alone the American citizens,
were put in an unprecedented position where all we had to go on were the
handouts of the Government that had decided to invade, in this case, Grenada.
Total blackout. We didn't know, and I was getting reports from, oh, I got a
report from somebody who claimed he knew all about that the students were happy.
There were no problems.

But we had no way of evaluating. We knew what the Government said and so on. So
I asked questions. And I said that during that week that we had, that this was
intolerable. To prevent the press from covering a war.

I said this is not similar to Afghanistan at all. But unless our reasons are
strong, you can bet that the Soviet Union is going to argue that because we do
it in our pea patch they can do it in their pea patch.

And I said that if Americans were at risk, I would have used power to protect
them. Now Mike Barnes and some of the others whom I really trust went down
there, and they said they were convinced that a reasonable estimate at that time
would've been that were in trouble. And that being true, I would've used
American power to protect them.

Lessons of Vietnam


Q. What lessons do you draw from the Vietnam War?

A. First of all, we've got to know what we're doing. We've got to understand the
history book, the propulsions, of the society with which we're dealing. That was
not true in Vietnam. And I think it's been not that true of this Administration
in Central America, particularly in the early years. I think that we've learned
the hard way in some areas.

Secondly, the limits of traditional Western power to influence matters to deal
with what are as yet a blend of civil war and a xenophobic society that had been
repeatedly colonized and was inherently hostile to any outside help or
interference, because it would all be seen as in the tradition of more
intervention. The course of nationalism, once it's attached to a cause opposite
yours, is still the strongest force in the world.

What some people argue is that Vietnam stands for the proposition that there's
no role for American power anywhere on earth. I don't believe that's the case at
all. I think we're the strongest force for democracy and for stability on earth,
and we must have a strong capacity to perform that role. Force must be a last,
and not a first, resort. And increasingly our security interests demand that our
allies that are now as wealthy as we are have got to bear a fair share of the
burden. But we do live in a less than perfect world - the Soviets and the rest
stirring around. And we have to be able to deal not only at the diplomatic
level, but they have to know we have the capacity to deal at the other level as
well.

Party Unity on Policy


Q. Jeane Kirkpatrick calls herself a Henry Jackson Democrat, and Andrew Young
also calls himself a Democrat. How would you manage the fact that Democrats
don't seem to agree very much on foreign affairs?

A. I don't agree with your question. I think one of the least noted elements of
our Democratic convention was after the most thorough nominating fight that
you've ever seen, we have a platform that came out overwhelmingly for real
increases in defense spending, for a moderate but internationalist foreign
policy, for strength but arms control, against the immediate abandonment of
first use, and in many other ways demonstrated a realistic appraisal of the
threat of Soviet power. Of the sophistication required for the use of power. The
understanding that's needed to be a mature and responsible leader in this
complex world. And I had a lot to do with that.

I think we've got more of a consensus in our Democratic Party about the
appropriate role of the United States in international affairs than we've had in
a long time, and it stands in dramatic contrast to that almost kook-right
platform adopted in Dallas. They have not stood up to the question of the proper
management of the defense budget. They are shattering the national support for
support of an essential defense program. And they still are all over the map on
arms control. You've got the President trying to talk about getting along with
the Soviets for the first time. You've got another part of the Government
pressing in to make a big issue out of noncompliance. There've been differences
in the pulling and the hauling in this Administration over Central America.

That happens to other Administrations as well. I understand that. But I think
there has been, I wouldn't say it's a ghost ship, but in some cases it looks
pretty much like it.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Walter Mondale

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CANCER PROGRESS: ARE THE STATISTICS TELLING THE TRUTH?

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1990 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 17


A small but growing band of distinguished analysts is challenging proclamations
by Government officials and leading cancer scientists that great advances have
been made in ''curing'' cancer patients.

The analysts suggest that the highly touted gains in ''survival rates'' among
cancer patients in recent years are partly, or perhaps even largely, a
statistical mirage, caused more by changes in the way cancer is detected and
defined than by any real gains in the ability of doctors to cure cancer once it
is detected.

However, leaders of the nation's cancer research and treatment establishment
dismiss the criticism as the undocumented assertions of analysts who do not
fully understand the latest advances in the clinical detection, diagnosis and
treatment of cancer.

''I think it's a bunch of nonsense,'' said Vincent T. DeVita Jr., director of
the National Cancer Institute. ''We're saving thousands of lives today that
weren't saved 20 years ago. To me, that's pretty damn exciting.''



Same Numbers, Opposite Views

The disagreement over the extent of progress in treating and curing cancer
reflects several factors. In some cases, analysts are looking at different sets
of numbers that show differing degrees of progress in curing cancer. In other
cases, they are looking at the same set of numbers but disagree on whether the
apparent gains are ''real'' or caused by statistical artifacts. And in many
cases they are not even arguing over the numbers but are simply reaching
opposite subjective judgments as to whether the apparent gains in survival rates
are encouraging or disappointing.

The issue has implications for patients, doctors and planners of national cancer
policy. If cancer treatments are less effective than officially portrayed, some
doctors and patients might have second thoughts about the wisdom of resorting to
treatments with high risk or severe side effects and little prospect of success.
Moreover, if treatment results have shown little improvement over time, policy
planners might want to emphasize other approaches to curbing cancer, such as
more extensive efforts to find and eliminate the causes of cancer so as to
prevent the disease before it needs to be treated.



Small Group of Skeptics

Those skeptical of the degree of progress appear to be a relatively small group
of analysts bearing distinguished credentials. Among them are these men:


- Richard Peto, a British epidemiologist who is the author of a major study of
cancer mortality for the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment,
contends, ''There has been disappointingly little progress in curative treatment
since the middle of this century.'' He said in a telephone interview that he saw
no reason to expect substantial progress for the rest of this century.


- John Cairns, a cancer analyst at the Harvard School of Public Health, likens
the statistical advances reported by official cancer agencies and leading cancer
scientists to the inflated and meaningless body counts used to measure progress
in the Vietnam War. ''Their body counts are way too high,'' he said in an
interview. ''It's like interrogating a general in Saigon. They come up with
statistics that don't add up.''


- John C. Bailar 3d, a Harvard biostatistician who is the statistical consultant
for The New England Journal of Medicine, one of the nation's most prestigious
medical journals, said he ''tends to agree that survival rates for cancer
victims are not going up very much'' and that statistical measures of those
gains often turn out to be ''rubber numbers'' by which people are ''very
seriously misled.''


- Haydn Bush, director of a regional cancer center in London, Ontario, wrote in
the September issue of Science 84, a magazine published by the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, ''We're not curing much more cancer
than we were a generation ago. There has been very little progress on the
biggest cancer killers of the last 25 years.''

These views stand in sharp variance to the tone of Dr. DeVita's assertion, in a
major speech two years ago, that ''the best kept secret today is that cancers,
as a group, are among the most curable of chronic diseases.''

Some scientists on each side of the debate attack the motives of their
opponents. Dr. Bush asserted, ''The more cures the press releases claim, the
more money cancer organizations raise.'' And Dr. DeVita retorted that some
skeptics were so eager to promote more money for prevention of cancer that they
deliberately tried to ''knock down'' the effectiveness of treatment programs. He
said the skeptics did not realize that the cancer institute was already spending
a third of its $1.8 billion annual budget on activities related to prevention.

But Dr. Cairns and Mr. Peto stressed repeatedly that they were not attacking the
integrity of cancer officials or attempting to be ''confrontational,'' but were
simply expressing a professional disagreement over how to interpret the numbers.

The argument is complicated by the fact that cancer is a very large and diverse
group of diseases, with more than 100 variants that affect different parts of
the body, progress at different rates and respond differently to cancer
treatments. Thus, generalizations about cancer as a whole are difficult to make.
''Progress has been remarkable in some cancers,'' said Frank J. Rauscher Jr.,
vice president for research at the American Cancer Society. ''In others, it is
anything but remarkable and we haven't made much progress at all.''

Virtually everyone agrees there have been major gains in treating and ''curing''
some forms of cancer, including testicular cancer, Hodgkin's disease and a vast
array of childhood cancers and leukemias, among others. The gains are so great
in these cases that virtually all analysts agree they must reflect improvements
in the treatment and management of cancer victims.

But it is a perverse fact that the cancers that are now the most ''curable'' are
statistically among the most rare. There has been far less progress in coping
with cancers of the lung, gastrointestinal tract and breast, which are among the
most prevalent of the cancers, and little progress on such rarer cancers as
those that afflict the brain, stomach and esophagus.

The chief statistic used to measure progress in ''curing'' cancer patients is
the five-year relative survival rate, the percentage of patients who are still
alive five years after their disease was first diagnosed, adjusted to eliminate
other causes of death than cancer. By this yardstick, both the National Cancer
Institute and the American Cancer Society contend there has been substantial
progress. In the 1950's, Dr. DeVita says, only about 33 percent of all cancer
patients were surviving five years. Now it is 50 percent.

The chief reasons for the gain, he contends, are advances in the treatment and
management of cancer patients, including the discovery and demonstration that
drugs could be used to eradicate cancers that had spread from their initial site
to distant parts of the body, the stage of cancer that is typically the most
lethal.



Major Reasons for Doubt

However, various skeptics cite three major reasons for doubting that the
apparent gains are real.

First, advances in the ability to detect and diagnose tumors mean that doctors
are now finding more things that look like cancer to a pathologist but would not
actually kill anyone. Thus when these people survive for five years they are
counted among those who have been ''cured'' of cancers, even though their tumors
would probably have escaped detection in the past and would never have killed
them anyway.

Dr. Bailar said he was ''quite convinced'' that this was happening for prostate
cancer, to a lesser extent breast cancer, and possibly cancer of the lung,
ovary, thyroid and other sites as well. ''We are including more and more lesions
that have some of the characteristics of cancer and look bad microscopically but
do not have the biologic behavior we associate with cancer,'' he said. ''When
you just look at survival rates, you may be very seriously misled. It looks like
substantial progress when it isn't.''

The second argument cited by skeptics is that the ability to detect some cancers
at an earlier stage in their development is artificially improving the survival
rates. Dr. Bush contends that the apparent improvement in breast cancer
survival, which is not all that great to begin with, probably reflects the fact
that screening programs are detecting the disease in women at an earlier stage
than in the past.

''Thus, even if these women received no treatment at all and their disease
followed its natural course, they would automatically be more likely to survive
five years,'' he wrote. ''All that has happened is that the survival clock is
being started sooner.''

This factor would primarily affect only slow-moving cancers like those of the
breast; it would not greatly affect the five-year survival statistics for
quick-acting cancers that kill people well before the five-year mark.

The third reason for doubting reports of successes is because changes in the way
cancers are recorded and registered may be exaggerating the apparent gains in
survival rates.

Mr. Peto argues that there has been little change over the past 30 years in the
accuracy of recording cancer deaths but there has been significant improvement
in registering nonfatal cancer cases. This inadvertently makes it seem as if a
greater proportion of the cancer victims are surviving today, he said, but some
of this apparent gain is simply a result of the fact that many of the survivors
were not recorded 30 years ago. ''There has been some improvement,'' he
acknowledged, ''but it's less extreme than the crude relative survival rates
would suggest.''



Extent of Effect Is Disputed

High officials of public and private cancer agencies acknowledge that all these
factors may be affecting the statistics to some degree, but they doubt that the
effect is large enough to seriously distort the amount of progress being made.
Dr. DeVita said he had seen no evidence to support the assertions of skeptics
that advances in detection ability are either starting the survival clock
earlier or finding many benign tumors that would previously have gone
undetected. ''I don't see any evidence for it at all,'' he said. ''I don't think
they have the data to back it up.''

Dr. Rauscher, of the cancer society, said there might be ''some validity'' to
the skeptics' assertions, but not much. ''Unfortunately, our means of detecting
cancer early haven't improved that much over the past 20 or 30 years,'' he said.

Dr. DeVita also said that ''good solid data'' from the most up-to-date registry
of cancer patients - the Cancer Institute program that monitors the annual
occurrence of cancer in some 10 percent of the population - shows a steady
increase in survival rates in recent years, over a short period of time in which
it is unlikely that changes in reporting practices would have an enormous
effect.

However, the monitoring data cannot yet definitively answer the key questions
raised by the skeptics. Earl S. Pollack, chief of the biometry branch at the
cancer institute, said the program had not yet followed patients long enough to
be able to tell whether the survival rates were being inflated simply because
early detection was starting the survival clock sooner. He also said he knew of
no documentation of the extent to which the survival statistics might be
improving because doctors today were finding more and more tumors that would not
kill people. But on a subjective basis, Dr. Pollack said he believed such
statistical artifacts were not the main driving force behind better survival
rates.

''My feeling is that most of these survival changes are real,'' he said. ''They
reflect real improvements in the handling of the disease.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of cancer survival rates ; photo of doctor examining x-rays (page
C5)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 19, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

RECORD BALLOON TRIP ENDS WITH BROKEN ANKLE



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 856 words

DATELINE: SAVONA, Italy, Sept. 18


An American who completed the first solo balloon flight across the Atlantic
crash-landed his 10-story-tall balloon in rain and strong winds today, breaking
an ankle but making history.

The American, Joe W. Kittinger, was flown from the crash site to a hospital in
Nice, France, by helicopter.

''You just have to go for it, go for it,'' he said at the hospital about two
hours after his silver and blue craft slammed into trees on a mountain near
Savona, in northwest Italy. ''That's the American way.''

The journey of his helium-filled balloon, Rosie O'Grady's, began Friday in
Caribou, Me., and ended 3,535 miles and nearly 84 hours later in the rugged
mountains of the Italian Riviera. ''I wanted to land in Moscow,'' he said, ''not
for political reasons but because it would have been the longest possible
trip.''

Mr. Kittinger set a world distance record for a solo balloon flight, according
to his backup crew in the United States, who gave the estimates of the distance
covered and the elapsed time.

The previous distance record for a solo balloon flight was 2,475 miles, set in
1976 by a South Dakotan, Ed Yost, who left from Milbridge, Me., and went down in
the Atlantic 580 miles off Portugal. He stayed aloft for nearly 107 hours.

Mr. Kittinger, 56 years old, of Orlando, Fla., said the landing ''was an
interesting one.''

He called his injury ''embarrassing,'' but added that it was a small price to
pay for the triumph.

A friend, Cheryl Reed, said in a telephone call from St. Roch Hospital that Mr.
Kittinger's right ankle was broken and that he was in a plaster cast up to his
knee. But she said he was ''elated and euphoric.''

(Mr. Kittinger was later released from the hospital and dined with friends,
Reuters reported.)

Six other people have tried the solo ocean crossing, but all failed and two died
in the attempt. A three-man American crew of Maxie Anderson, Ben Abruzzo and
Larry Newman was the first to conquer the Atlantic by balloon, in 1978.  Mr.
Kittinger was a record-holding balloonist even before this flight, as well as a
parachutist and a decorated military pilot in the Vietnam War, where he was shot
down and spent 12 months as a prisoner of war.

Italian aviation officials said the balloon touched down at 2:08 P.M. (8:08
A.M., New York time) about six miles northwest of Savona in northern Italy.

Mr. Kittinger said in a telephone interview from the hospital: ''The winds were
pretty strong when I landed. I couldn't go any further. There was a big
thunderstorm on the other side of the mountain, and I was in mountains and the
weather was pretty bad and the winds pretty brisk.

''I landed in the trees,'' he said. ''I got thrown out of the basket, the
gondola, and I hit rather hard from about 10 feet or so, and I rebroke an old
injury I had from parachute jumping many years ago, and actually I rebroke some
bones that had been broken before.

''It's embarrassing, really.'' he added. ''It marred an absolutely perfect
flight. But it's a small price to pay, and it could have been worse.''

He added: ''I'm proud. I'm proud of the team. It's a team effort, really.

''I took along some Willie Nelson and country-western tapes,'' he said, ''and
didn't listen to a single one because I was so doggoned busy. I didn't even have
a chance to think about such a frivolous thing because you're always busy.''

Asked by a reporter if he had calmed down yet, Mr. Kittinger replied, ''No, I'm
gonna stay up.''

Agresta Domenico, a flight controller at the Genoa airport, 20 miles east of
Savona, said the weather was ''very bad with a lot of wind and rain'' when the
balloon came down.

Mr. Kittinger entered French airspace near Biarritz at 10:29 P.M. Monday,
accomplishing the first solo trans-Atlantic flight. That was just under 68 hours
after leaving Maine. Not satisfied with that, he decided to continue across
southern France for Italy despite bad weather and low visibility so he could
break the distance record.

Jim Serna of the backup team's headquarters at the Weather Services Corporation
in Bedford, Mass., said the journey was the longest solo flight in any kind of a
balloon.

According to the Guinness Book of World Records, the longest balloon flight of
any kind was 5,208.68 miles, set by the Double Eagle V helium balloon in 1981 in
the first crossing of the Pacific Ocean from Nagashima, Japan, to Covello,
Calif.

In July 1982, Mr. Kittinger set the world record for distance in a 1,000
cubic-foot helium ballon - about one-third the size of Rosie O'Grady's - with a
flight from St. Louis to Quebec, covering 1,348 miles in 48 hours.

He also set the world record for free fall when he plunged just over 16 miles
before opening his parachute after jumping from a balloon at 102,800 feet.

Asked today what he planned to do next, Mr. Kittinger replied: ''Well, I don't
know. There's still the Pacific that's never been flown solo yet, and there's a
team that's interested in setting a land speed record and I'd like to drive the
car.''

Asked if he was thinking of retiring now, he replied: ''Oh, no. Life is an
adventure, and I'm an adventurer.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Italy (page A17); photo of Joe Kittinger

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 19, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. IS BOLSTERING SALVADOR COPTERS

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Sept. 18


The United States is planning to double the number of combat helicopters
available to the Salvadoran Army by the end of this year, according to a senior
United States official. He said 10 of the helicopters had already arrived here.

The aircraft will provide a significant increase in the military capacity of the
Salvadoran Army. They will allow the army for the first time to drop an entire
combat battalion into rebel-held areas, the official said.

''I think it's a big deal in terms of increased capability,'' he said. ''The
idea is not to create a high-tech army. But you get a big payoff in military
terms from choppers.''

The new aircraft are part of an increase of 140 percent in American military aid
to El Salvador this fiscal year. The United States sent El Salvador $81.3
million in military aid in fiscal year 1983. In the current fiscal year, which
ends Sept. 30, American military aid will total $196.55 million, according to
figures provided by the United States Embassy here.

At the beginning of July the Salvadoran Air Force had 22 Huey UH-1 and 2 Hughes
500 helicopters, according to a senior military official. Four of the Huey UH-1
helicopters are used for emergency medical evacuations. All the others are used
for combat.

In the last few weeks, 10 new Hueys have been sent to El Salvador and 10 to 15
more are expected by the end of the year, the official said. Under that
schedule, the Salvadoran fleet will have increased to 49 from 24 within six
months.

Request Made 2 Years Ago


United States officials had previously announced that they wanted to equip the
Salvadoran Air Force with at least two AC-47 gunships, which are slow-moving
airplanes designed for counterinsurgency operations. The gunships will probably
be quipped with three .50-caliber machine guns fired in tandem by the aircraft's
pilot, the official said.

United States military advisers have been seeking more helicopters for the
Salvadoran Army for two years, but Congress has refused to approve the money.

The advisers say the helicopters will let Government forces avoid ambushes and
make surprise raids into guerrilla base areas. Salvadoran troops have often been
ambushed as they entered guerrilla zones on foot or in large trucks easily
spotted by rebel units.

An American official said the helicopters, all of them refurbished, are being
sold for up to $1 million each. They will be paid for at least in part by $70
million in supplemental military aid approved by Congress last month, officials
here said. Helicopters that arrive after Oct. 1 could also be paid for with
$123.25 million in military aid that Congress is expected to approve for fiscal
year 1985.

Salvadoran Army tactics are likely to change with the arrival of more
helicopters.

The traditional tactic has been to sweep guerrilla areas in operations involving
1,000 to 3,000 troops. Such large units are usually easily avoided by the small
rebel units.

To catch the guerrillas, the army is developing long-range reconnaissance
patrols of 10 to 20 men. The patrols are trained to enter guerrilla areas to
gather intelligence and carry out ambushes at night.

Tactic Was Used in June


With a fleet of 40 to 50 helicopters, the army is expected to be able to send
such small patrols to make contact with the guerrillas and immediately reinforce
them by air with a 500- to 800- man battalion.

At least one Salvadoran Army battalion can already be deployed by helicopter and
others are being trained. An army helicopter assault was used in June to drive
away guerrilla units that had taken the Cerron Grande Dam.

Such helicopter attacks were the mainstay of American operations in Vietnam. If
the Salvadoran Army masters the tactic, it will have made a considerable advance
from the often militarily inept force that has been unable to contain rebel
offensives in the last two years.

An extra airfield is to be built at San Miguel, about 80 miles east of San
Salvador, to handle the extra helicopters, according to both Salvadoran and
United States officials.

It is not known how the guerrillas will respond to the army's developing air
mobility. There have been several uncomfirmed rumors that the rebels have sought
surface-to-air missiles to fight the helicopters and the six A-37 jets the
Salvadoran Air Force uses as fighters. But guerrilla leaders have denied the
reports.

American officials have said that missiles would be a major escalation in the
war and would require a review of United States military policy.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 19, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

RICHARD BASEHART, STAGE AND SCREEN STAR, DIES

BYLINE: By ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 700 words


Richard Basehart, the sonorous- voiced actor who starred on Broadway in ''The
Hasty Heart'' and on the screen in ''La Strada'' and ''Moby Dick,'' died Monday
in Los Angeles after suffering a series of strokes. He was 70 years old.

Mr. Basehart, who starred as Admiral Nelson in the television series ''Voyage to
the Bottom of the Sea,'' narrated the closing ceremonies of the Olympics on Aug.
12 and suffered the first of several strokes hours afterward, his lawyer, Bruce
Stiglitz, said yesterday. He died in Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles,
where he had been in a coma for several days, Mr. Stiglitz said.

Mr. Basehart was born Aug. 31, 1914, in Zanesville, Ohio, the son of Mae and
Harry T. Basehart, a failed actor who became editor of the The Times-Signal of
Zanesville. Before entering a stage career at the Hedgerow Theater in
Philadelphia, he worked as a reporter on his father's newspaper and as a radio
announcer in Zanesville and Columbus, Ohio.

He made his Broadway debut in 1938, and in 1945 he won the New York Drama
Critics Circle Award for his portrayal of the dour and dying Scottish soldier
Lachlen in John Patrick's drama ''The Hasty Heart.''

Film Debut in 1947


That triumph, which included his affecting a startlingly authentic Scottish
burr, led Mr. Basehart to win a Hollywood contract. He made his film debut in
1947 in ''Cry Wolf.'' The following year, he won critical praise for his
starring role as a gangster, in ''He Walked By Night.''

Mr. Basehart was a discriminating actor and, he said some years ago, ''I did my
best to choose a variety of roles, avoiding stereotyping at the expense of not
amassing an impressive bank account.''

His movies in the years that followed included ''Roseanna McCoy,'' ''Outside the
Wall,'' ''The House on Telegraph Hill,'' ''Decision Before Dawn,'' ''The Good
Die Young,'' ''The Brothers Karamazov,'' ''Titanic,'' and ''Being There.''

In 1951, in ''Fourteen Hours,'' Mr. Basehart gave a tour-de-force performance as
a young psychotic who stayed perched on a ledge, threatening suicide, for the
length of the film.''

Acting With Facial Muscles


''It was an actor's dream, in which I hogged the camera lens, and the role
called on me to act mostly with my eyes, lips and face muscles,'' Mr. Basehart
said in an interview. ''Actually I got so accustomed to this that I didn't feel
any real need for movement.''

''In the role of the 'jumper' Richard Basehart does a startling and poignant job
within the limitations of one square foot of acting space,'' wrote Bosley
Crowther in The New York Times.

Mr. Basehart returned occasionally to the stage, in ''The Day the Money
Stopped,'' ''The Survivors,'' and in the title role of ''Richard II'' at the
American Shakespeare Festival in Stratford, Conn., in 1962.

He also made several films in Europe, starring as Ishmael in John Huston's
''Moby Dick'' in 1956 and as the poignant clown in ''La Strada'' by Federico
Fellini in 1954.'

Possessing a deep, resonant baritone voice and craggy good looks, Mr. Basehart
stayed busy, commanding the respect of the critics and fellow actors. But it was
not until 1964, when he began a four-year run in the popular television series
''Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea,'' that he became popular with a mass
audience.

In the fantasy-science fiction series, Mr. Basehart commanded the officers and
men of the Seaview, a glass-nosed atomic submarine that roamed the seas fighting
human and alien villains.

Active for Social Causes


He also made many other appearances on television, including roles in ''Naked
City'' and ''Route 66,'' as well as a short-lived series called ''W.E.B.'' Last
fall, he narrated ''Vietnam: A Television History'' for the Public Broadcasting
Service.

In recent years Mr. Basehart was active in working for human rights in Central
America and he helped lobby the California Legislature for the protection of
animals from experimental use.

He and his wife, Diana, founded an organization called Actors and Others for
Animals.

In addition to his wife, Mr. Basehart is survived by three children, Gayla, age
15; Jenna, 20, and John Anthony, 33.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Basehart

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 20, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

UNANSWERED QUESTIONS ABOUT AGENT ORANGE

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 270 words


To the Editor:


The conclusions reached in your Aug. 13 editorial ''The Truth About Agent
Orange'' are premature and perhaps misleading.

The Center for Disease Control (C.D.C.) has several projects under way
concerning Agent Orange. The first study, a limited interview project which
focused on the risk of Vietnam veterans fathering babies with birth defects, has
been completed. The results seem to indicate that Vietnam veterans in general do
not have a greater chance of fathering children with birth defects than do non-
Vietnam veterans.

The most difficult variable in this study was determining the amount of exposure
to Agent Orange for each of the interviewed veterans. A good deal more work must
be done in Agent Orange exposure classification before any final conclusions are
drawn.

C.D.C. has two other Agent Orange projects under way, with tentative reporting
dates of 1988 and 1989. A third study, dealing with women Vietnam War veterans,
won't begin until Congress appropriates additional funds. The relationship
between women Vietnam veterans exposed to Agent Orange and their children
suffering serious birth defects must be explored fully.

Whether there is merit to the $180 million settlement is arguable. But before we
can arrive at any legitimate conclusions concerning the possible harmful effects
of Agent Orange, C.D.C. must complete its studies. This task will necessarily
require several years' work and full funding by the Congress. Any final judgment
on Agent Orange must wait until that time.

JOEL PRITCHARD Member of Congress, 1st Dist., Wash.  Washington, Sept. 11, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 20, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LAOTIAN MIGRATION WORRIES THAILAND

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: BAN VINAI, Thailand


As many as 10,000 migrants may have crossed the border from Laos in the last six
or seven months, according to Thai authorities. This is double the number of
border crossings over the previous two years, refugee workers say.

The influx, attributed to poor economic conditions, collectivization and other
problems, is a source of concern to Thai and other relief agencies.

The Laotians, who are mainly Hmong hill people, known by outsiders as Meo, have
found adjustment more difficult than other Indochinese refugees. Thailand has
refused to allow any more Hmong to settle among Thai hill tribes of similar
ethnic background.

Since May 1983, Thailand has been treating all Laotians as illegal immigrants,
not refugees. There are now 80,000 Laotians in Thailand, compared with 40,000
Cambodians and 9,000 Vietnamese.

Access to Camp Now Restricted


Part of the reason for Thailand's decision can be seen here at Ban Vinai, a camp
for Hmong that has become a settlement of 43,000 people. Some of them have lived
here for six or seven years; many of them, hearing stories of problems the Hmong
are facing in the United States, are reluctant to move. The Thais are putting
pressure on them to return home.

Thailand no longer admits Laotians to Ban Vinai, which is near the Mekong River,
about 30 miles north of the provincial capital of Loei. The refugees are now
held in detention camps and police stations along the Mekong River border. Most
Laotians swim or float on bamboo rafts across the river. Some have been entering
overland farther north.

Many Hmong have a special reason for being here. During the 1960's and 70's, a
Hmong military unit fighting the Communist insurgents and the North Vietnamese
in Laos was supported by the United States. Hmong were also recruited to
infiltrate Communist-held areas in Vietnam itself.

Old Scores Are Being Settled


In the nine years since the Communists took over Laos, and particularly since
1979, when Vietnam installed the Heng Samrin Government in Cambodia, Vietnam's
military presence in the region has increased, and some Vietnamese are settling
old scores.

''My father was a soldier in Vietnam,'' 18-year-old Xiong Kao told a visitor to
Ban Vinai. ''Two years ago, the Vietnamese came to catch him. But he is very
old, and I am still young, so everyone told me, they won't take him, they will
catch you instead. I was afraid, and I ran.''

Xiong Kao, then 16 and alone, said he fled through the wooded Laotian hills for
14 days before arriving at the banks of the Mekong. He swam for four hours, he
said, to reach Thailand. He has been at Ban Vinai ever since, one of a
burgeoning new generation of young Hmong who seem to be trapped here more by
fear, confusion and conflicting pressures than by the camp's gate.

The young Hmong are also under pressure from their own warrior leadership,
especially Gen. Vang Pao, who now spends much of his time in the United States,
to remain in Thailand and prepare for a new guerrilla war to overthrow the
Communists in Laos.

French Offer Is Declined


Further, there are clan and family pressures to stay together, and second
thoughts about emigration to the United States or other distant places. When a
French team visited the camp recently to recruit 80 more settlers for French
Guiana, an aid organizer said, only about 30 people took up the offer.

Until two or three years ago, many Hmong counted on their erstwhile American
allies, and Washington granted them asylum as a persecuted minority. That door
is still open.

''These are a nomadic people who traditionally send out a few scouts to look at
a territory before they move in numbers,'' said the Rev. Edward Brady, an
American priest working for a Thai Roman Catholic bishops' group that oversees
education at Ban Vinai.

Early Hmong refugees in the United States sent back tales of hardship and
dislocation. While there were success stories, there were also disasters.

There is now an understanding among the refugees here that life abroad can cause
social and psychological damage. Coming from a remote culture, worshipping
spirits by whom they are still often guided, the Hmong have far greater problems
dealing with Western life than do the urbanized Vietnamese, Chinese or other
immigrants, refugee officials say.



Men Are Having Worst Problem


Middle-aged and elderly men, who are reduced from positions of authority within
the clan to the unemployed, illiterate, uncomprehending margin of life, have the
worst problems.

Yang Chou, a man in his 20's with a fourth-grade education in Laos who has
learned English here well enough to teach it to other Hmong, said people of his
generation might find work.

''But what about the old man who is just a farmer,'' he asked, ''Who in America
would give a job to him?''

Hmong living in the United States, many of them in California, have been
generous in supporting fellow Hmong at Ban Vinai, refugee workers say.

''Their physical needs are being met,'' an American refugee worker said, ''What
we have here is a crisis of broken spirits. These are a crushed people with no
place to go, with no land on which to be buried when they die.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 20, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

MASSACHUSETTS SENATE RACE OFFERS A SHARP CHOICE

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section B; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1148 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 19


Voters in Massachusetts will face one of the clearest Senate choices in the
nation in the election in November after Tuesday's primary victories by Raymond
Shamie, a millionaire conservative Republican, and Lieut. Gov. John F. Kerry, a
liberal Democrat.

Mr. Shamie's defeat of Elliot L. Richardson, the former Attorney General, in the
Republican primary, gave a sharp rightward thrust to the party in Massachusetts,
bringing it more in line with the national Republican trend toward conservatism.

The Massachusetts party had long been dominated by moderate to liberal
Repulicans, often from aristocratic Yankee backgrounds, like Henry Cabot Lodge.

Mr. Shamie, who founded his own high-technology company, the Metal Bellows
Corporation, represents the Sun Belt brand of Republicanism come to
Massachusetts, with its calls for no new taxes, its religious overtones and its
frequent assertions of patriotism

'Reassessment' Is Expected


''I think Elliot was the last of an era,'' said Cile Hicks, a Republican State
Representative who had strongly supported Mr. Richardson. ''There are only a
rump of progressives left in the party now - it's going to cause a lot of
reassessment.''

Final returns showed Mr. Shamie with 173,506 votes, 62 percent of the total, to
104,565 votes, 38 percent, for Mr. Richardson.

The winner of the November contest will take the seat vacated by Senator Paul E.
Tsongas, who said he would not run again after learning he had cancer.

But Democrats outnumber Republicans 4 to 1 in Massachusetts. And the major
question now is whether Mr. Shamie's staunchly conservative message, echoing
President Reagan on issues like opposition to income tax increases, opposition
to abortion and a strong military, will win over a large enough number of
Democrats to give him victory in November.

He lost a battle against Senator Edward M. Kennedy in 1982, garnering less than
40 percent of the vote while spending $1 million of his own money. But at the
time Mr. Shamie was still a political unknown and Mr. Reagan's popularity was
not at its current level.

Shamie Confident on Vote

The 62-year-old Mr. Shamie, who has the same jovial manner as Mr. Reagan and the
same easy command of television, appeared confident he could win in November.
''The people of Massachusetts are a lot more conservative than the liberal
leadership of the Democratic Party,'' he said.

''The issues everyone is concerned about are the same,'' Mr. Shamie said after
his victory, ''whether we are going to have more taxes or less taxes, more
government or less government.I just want to go down to Washington to clean up
the mess.''

His opponent, Mr. Kerry, who is 39 years old, has certain physical and political
resemblances to Senator Gary Hart of Colorado. Both are tall, with rugged good
looks, They campaign hard on the danger of war and talk about the importance of
new leadership in Washington.

Both men were also drawn into politics by the Vietnam War, Mr. Hart as George
McGovern's campaign manager in his unsuccessful quest to stop the war and win
the Presidency in 1972, Mr. Kerry as a decorated and wounded Navy officer in
Vietnam who returned to found the Vietnam Veterans Against the War and run
unsuccessfully for Congress.

Exit polls taken Tuesday also showed that Mr. Kerry, like Senator Hart, won a
high percentage of women's votes.

Kerry Took 41% of Votes

In his victory over Representative James M. Shannon, a protege of the Speaker of
the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Mr. Kerry won 322,063 votes, 41 percent of the
total, to 298,322 votes, 38 percent, for Mr. Shannon.

Mr. Kerry's triumph suggested that not all voters in Massachusetts accepted
President Reagan's policies or were ready to become conservatives. For Mr.
Shannon is also an outspoken liberal, and David M. Bartley and Michael John
Connolly, two more conservative Democrats who ran in the primary, arguing
against tax rises and abortion, trailed far behind.

Moreover, in the three Democratic primary races for the House of Representatives
that were tightly contested, liberals defeated more moderate or conservative
challengers in each.

Representative Gerry E. Studds, who was censured by the House last year for his
1973 affair with a male Congressional page, defeated Peter Flynn, the sheriff of
Plymouth County, drawing 61 percent of the vote. Mr. Flynn had sought to make
the censure an issue, but in a victory speech Tuesday night Mr. Studds made a
sharp attack on Mr. Reagan, saying that the issue in Novemeber would be Mr.
Reagan's handling of the environment and the budget deficit.

Representative Edward J. Markey, a national leader of the nuclear freeze
movement, bested his main Democratic opponent, Samuel Rotondi, a former state
senator, winning 54 percent of the vote.

State Senator Also Wins


And in the most bitterly fought battle, Chester G. Atkins, a liberal who is
chairman of the state Senate Ways and Means Committee, defeated a conservative
state senator, Philip L. Shea, also getting 54 percent of the vote.

Analyses of why Mr. Richardson, who seemed to personify Republicanism in
Massachusetts, was trounced by Mr. Shamie focused on two factors. One was that
the state Republican party itself has changed in recent years, with many of its
moderates leaving to become independents, while conservative Democrats, many of
them Roman Catholics, have switched in the other direction.

Former Gov. Frances W. Sargent, a Richardson supporter, also noted that Mr.
Richardson had made a strategic error in starting to run for the November
election too early, trying to broaden his base state by disavowing the
Republican Party platform.

In his concession speech, Mr. Richardson admitted that might have been an error,
but said: ''I took positions I believed in, I have kept my pride.

''I believe any Senator from Massachusetts must vote his conscience, no matter
what any President, Republican or Democrat, wants.''

Washington Governor Wins

By The Associated Press

In the state of Washington, Gov. John Spellman, scored an easy victory Tuesday
over token opposition in the Republican primary. In November he will try for a
second term against Booth Gardner, a moderate who put $500,000 of his timber
fortune into his campaign.

Mr. Gardner trounced a liberal state Senator, Jim McDermott, to win Washington's
Democratic gubernatorial primary.

In Washington's First Congressional District, a television reporter, John
Miller, topped a field of nine Republicans to win nomination to succeed
Representative Joel Pritchard, Republican, who is retiring. Brock Evans, an
environmentalist, won the Democratic nomination in the First District.

In Oklahoma, Will E. Crozier was the unofficial winner by a thin margin over
George L. Mothershed in a Republican runoff for Senate. He will face the
incumbent, Senator David Boren.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 30, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Dispatches from Boston on Sept. 20 and Oct. 30 about the Massachusetts Senate
campaign misstated the role of John F. Kerry, now a Senator- elect, in Vietnam
Veterans Against the War. He was a leader and spokesman of the organization in
the early 1970's, but he was not a founder. The group was formed in 1967.

GRAPHIC: photo of Raymond Shamie

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 20, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TV CAMERAS BARRED IN WESTMORELAND CASE



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 637 words


A Federal judge said yesterday that while he favored televised coverage of Gen.
William C. Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS, he could not allow cameras in
his courtroom because of longstanding Federal court rules.

Stuart Pierson, a Washington- based lawyer for Cable News Network, which had
asked to broadcast the case if it comes to trial, said he believed the wording
of the ruling by the judge, Pierre N. Leval of the United States District Court
in Manhattan, would aid CNN. A spokesman for the network, Judy Borza, said today
that the network would petition the Chief Justice of the United States District
Court in Manhattan for a waiver of the court rule banning cameras.

George Vradenburg, a spokesman for CBS, said the network ''had no objections to
cameras in the courtroom.'' Dan Burt, a lawyer for General Westmoreland, said,
''We fervently hope that they will approve the CNN request.''



Exception Was Requested

CNN had asked the judge to allow an ''experimental exception'' because of the
important questions to be raised in General Westmoreland's suit.

The retired general has filed a $120 million suit, contending that a 1982 CBS
documentary, ''Vietnam: The Uncounted Enemy,'' wrongly accused him of a
conspiracy to distort enemy troop strength during the Vietnam War.

Earlier this month, he postponed the start of the trial until Oct. 9 pending his
decision on a CBS request that the case be dismissed. Lawyers for both sides,
however, have said that they had little doubt that the case would go to trial.

In his ruling yesterday, Judge Leval noted that 41 states now permit live filmed
coverage of court proceedings and that television equipment was no longer
''cumbersome and noisy.''

The judge said he at first had an ''instinctive negative reaction'' to the CNN
request because of the tradition of excluding cameras from the courtroom. But he
added, ''It appears that filming can be done without the slightest obstruction
of dignified, orderly court procedure.''



Importance of the Trial

He also said the importance of the Westmoreland-CBS trial was another reason to
permit filmed coverage.

''Among the questions in dispute,'' he said, ''will be whether the high U.S.
military command in Vietnam engaged in willful distortion of intelligence data
to substantiate optimistic reports on the progress of the war and whether one of
the nation's most important distributors of news and commentary engaged in
willful or reckless slander.''

The judge said it can be expected the trial will go beyond the immediate issues
to cover the ''appropriate standards for both military commanders and press
commentators.''

Judge Leval said the public's interest in the case is ''not the mere voyeurism
that emerges for a sensational murder trial.''

''It is,'' he said, ''a response to a rare debate and inquiry on issues of
highest national importance.''

Judge Leval also found a personal reason for permitting televised coverage: ''We
are told that the public today holds judges in rather low esteem. We are assumed
to be lazy, biased and venal. Recognizing that I do not qualify as a neutral
observer, I am persuaded that this view is seriously mistaken.''

He said television would show the public ''how painstakingly and how fairly
Federal judges conduct court business.''



TV Coverage Called Inevitable

Judge Leval also said he believes it is ''inevitable'' that cameras will be
permitted in the courtroom, perhaps within 5 to 10 years. ''Do we wish to adopt
a stance of two feet firmly rooted in the past?'' he asked.

Mr. Pierson, CNN's lawyer, said the judge had agreed with ''some of the
strongest arguments in favor of televising the Westmoreland trial in particular,
and more generally, in favor of allowing unobtrusive coverage of all federal
trials.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 20, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
;
A Fighting Champ In Another Bout

SECTION: Section D; Page 31, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 851 words


Muhammad Ali, now age 42, has changed perceptibly in recent years, and other
former fighters may have felt the change more deeply than most.

About a year ago, Jose Torres, the former light-heavyweight champion, was saying
that it just might be some of the pills that Ali took for high blood pressure
that had slowed him up. The look in Torres's eyes said he hoped that was it.

Not just Ali's voice but also his movements seemed to say that here was a man
aged beyond his years - tired, maybe sad, possibly quite ill. There was in him
nothing to suggest his onetime motto, ''Float like a butterfly, sting like a
bee.'' It looked as if he had fallen victim to his own wily stratagem, the
rope-a-dope. And the Ali shuffle was no longer a hummingbird's dance, but a
fatigued slouch.

Now there is news that he may be suffering from a neurological disorder -
perhaps Parkinson's disease, although his personal physician denied that
yesterday.

Ali recently underwent five days of tests at Columbia Presbyterian Medical
Center. After a short business trip to West Germany, he returned to New York on
Tuesday and checked into that hospital for further testing.

The news gave pause. Ali in his time touched most of us and roused deep passion.
His name and face became perhaps the most recognizable in the world. He was
bursting with vigor, with a love of life, with integrity and with terrible
doggerel. (''Archie Moore will fall in four.'') His loudness struck the ears of
some like the clanging of a bell. But many others were charmed by this boyish
man.


He was a many-sided human being. He could be publicly cutting and abusive at
times to his brother, Rachman Ali, and could cruelly taunt an overmatched and
ailing Floyd Patterson. And yet he could also go into a home for Jewish elderly
and give $100,000 to save it from financial ruin.

He shocked many by changing his name from Cassius Clay (''a slave name'') to
Muhammad Ali, and joined what to some seemed an ominous group, the Black
Muslims. Ali was making clear his determination to be no shufflin' Uncle Tom.
Some hated him for it, some loved him for it.

When he refused to be inducted during the Vietnam War, he said that he was an
Islamic preacher and a man of peace, and that he had nothing against ''them
Vietcongs.'' He was sentenced to five years, though he appealed and never went
to prison, and boxing officials stripped him of his heavyweight title. He was
reviled, he was praised. And in 1971, the Supreme Court, in an 8-0 decision with
one abstention, came down on his side.

He was a fighting champion. Some said he couldn't punch, but he could knock
people out with a twisting blow that cut them with the speed and sharpness of a
rapier. When he was allowed to return to the ring in October 1970 after 43
months away because of his draft stand, he fought Jerry Quarry in Atlanta. The
fight had to be stopped in the third round after Ali had torn a hole above his
opponent's eyebrow that was so deep, it was said, that one could see Quarry's
eyeball from above.

No one denied that Ali could take a punch. One memory sticks out. In his first
fight with Joe Frazier, he was hit in the 15th round with a leaping left hook
that, seen from ringside, seemed as powerful as a bag of bricks. Ali went down
but staggered quickly to his feet, eventually losing by a decision.


Thoughts here of Ali go back to the

first time he was met, in 1967,

not long after the title had been taken from him. He lay on a bed in a Manhattan
hotel, covers to his neck.

''I'd like to make a movie,'' he said, ''just one, for all the people to see. It
would be a true life story of me. Oh, I'd like that. It would start off on
Monday morning, Jan. 17, 1942, in Louisville General Hospital.''

His hands circled his left eye. ''The camera focuses down on this little ole
baby boy who's cryin'. That's me. The music goes dum-de-dum-dum,
dum-de-dum-dum.'' His voice grew deeper. '' 'This is the actual story of the man
who shook up the world, who came from a little country town and was destined to
sit with kings and monarchs, who turned down millions for a principle.' ''

Then he twisted his neck slowly, hands still cupping his left eye, and described
several scene shifts. ''That would be a hell of a movie, wouldn't it?'' he said.

It has, in fact, been an eventful life, packing in an enormous amount in a
little more than four decades.

There are some who will cite Ali's present condition as an example of the evils
of professional prizefighting. If there is an evil in this area, it is in the
economic system. For the most part, only poor boys go into fighting, seeing it
as the clearest way for them to seek fame and fortune.

Ali brought something special to the world stage, and his vehicle was boxing. He
was ebullient, compassionate and courageous. Over all, he did not disgust so
much as delight, did not outrage so much as inspire.

It seems certain that millions of people all over the world, whether or not they
know a right hook from a right cross, feel that they have come to know Muhammad
Ali, and are pulling for the Champ.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Muhammad Ali

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Ellsworth Bunker in Hospital

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 56 words

DATELINE: BRATTLEBORO, Vt., Sept. 20


Ellsworth Bunker, one of America's top diplomatic trouble-shooters for three
decades and Ambassador to Saigon at the height of the Vietnam War, was
hospitalized in critical condition today. Mr. Bunker, 90 years old, who has a
home in Dummerston, Vt., has an undisclosed ailment. He is in Brattleboro
Memorial Hospital.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BUSH, IN VERMONT, CONFRONTS ANTINUCLEAR HECKLERS

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 672 words

DATELINE: BURLINGTON, Vt., Sept. 20


On the Brattleboro Common today, a square of green in the middle of town where
people usually come to play chess and listen to music, Vice President Bush
learned what an iconoclastic place Brattleboro is in a traditionally Republican
state.

About 200 protesters, some bearing hand-quilted banners with messages opposing
nuclear weapons, peppered the Vice President with such a volley of slogans that
he scrapped most of his speech on the Reagan Administration's record on arms
control. To date he had campaigned mostly in the South and Middle West and had
not encountered such a barrage of heckling.

Mr. Bush was speaking in the heart of nuclear-freeze country. His aides said
later that he had not been surprised by the shouts of ''No more years'' and
''Six more weeks'' that kept him from being heard.

Even so, a dark-suited advance man from Washington, upset that his picturesque
event was being spoiled, walked through the protesters tugging at some of the
signs, asking their owners to take them down. Mr. Bush spoke from a
white-painted bandstand.

'America Is Turned Around'

He professed to be unruffled by the protesters, telling the crowd of about
1,000, ''You have a handful of people who are out of step who care about their
issues.'' Then, marching right on with his upbeat theme, he said: ''But America
is turned around, America is strong and nobody likes it, those guys just don't
like it.''

Mr. Bush hinted at a news conference later at the Elks Club across the street
from the common that it was possible that the Democrats had decided to retaliate
after hecklers at the University of Southern California shouted at Walter F.
Mondale, the Democratic Presidential candidate.

''When heckling gets elevated to the point where it's a real embarrassment to
one's side, the other side might well say, 'We'd better get out there and do the
same thing,' '' Mr. Bush said.

In an interview with a local television station, Mr. Bush remarked of the
demonstrators: ''They can't do it quite as well as they used to in the Vietnam
War days, but they were trying, weren't they?''

Several of the protesters said they had heard about the rally through word of
mouth and had attended, not out of partisan feelings toward the Democratic
ticket, but from determination about their own cause.

Christal Holzer, a 71-year-old widow, who held one end of one of the homemade
nuclear freeze signs, said she had learned of Mr. Bush's appearance in the local
paper.

State Backed a Freeze

Brattleboro became one of the most active centers of the nuclear freeze movement
in 1982 in a state where 186 townships out of 245 voted in favor of a mutually
verifiable freeze on nuclear weapons, according to David McCauley, the field
secretary of the American Friends Service Committee. Mr. McCauley said his
organization did not support any candidate in the Presidential race.

Before arriving in Vermont, Mr. Bush made a hasty appearance in Boston, to
embrace the election cause of Ray Shamie, the conservative victor in Tuesday's
Massachusetts Republican primary for the Senate seat being vacated by Paul E.
Tsongas, a Democrat.

Speaking in a Democratic neighborhood on the east side of Boston, Mr. Bush
appealed to Democrats to support the Republican Presidential ticket.

''John Kennedy once said that party loyalty sometimes asks too much; and I think
in 1984, party loyalists are asking too much from mainstream Democrats to stick
with Walter Mondale,'' Mr. Bush said to a crowd of about 150 Shamie workers in
the basement of an Italian restaurant.

Mr. Bush completed his trip to Vermont tonight with several appearances in
Burlington, including a question- and-answer session at St. Michael's College.
He said there that spending on most domestic programs, including food stamps and
student aid, had increased in the Reagan Administration. At a news conference,
Mr. Bush said he could not deny that the increased spending on food stamps had
been caused by the recession of 1981 and 1982.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CNN APPEALS IN CBS CASE



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 262 words


Cable News Network asked the Board of Judges at the United States District Court
in Manhattan today to permit live television coverage of Gen. William C.
Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS.

The network cited a decision Wednesday by Judge Pierre N. Leval, who said he
favored televising the trial but did not have the authority to grant permission
because of longstanding Federal court rules.

In the case, provisionally scheduled to go to trial Oct. 9, General Westmoreland
is seeking $120 million from CBS on the ground that its documentary in 1982, ''
Vietnam: The Uncounted Enemy,'' wrongly accused him of a conspiracy to distort
reports of enemy troop strength. Judge Leval is considering a CBS motion to
dismiss the case, but lawyers for both sides have said they expect the case to
go to trial.

Stuart Pierson, a lawyer for the network, said the procedure to be followed for
deciding CNN's request was uncertain because it involved an ''unconventional
matter.'' He said he believed the Board of Judges had the authority to grant an
exception to court rules and permit televised coverage of the trial.

CBS has said it has no objection to the televising of the trial, and a lawyer
for the general said his side supported the request.

CNN asked the board for ''permission to distribute live, comprehensive, national
coverage'' by ''television, radio and still photography for the benefit of the
public.'' The coverage would be ''pooled,'' the network said in a plan it
offered the judges, meaning it would be made available to other news
organizations.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SHOW FROM FRANCE OPENS NEW CENTER FOR AFRICAN ART

BYLINE: By GRACE GLUECK

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1642 words


There's cause for rejoicing this week among those who remember fondly the old
Museum of Primitive Art, the small but stellar institution that flourished in
New York from 1957 until it became the Michael C.  Rockefeller Wing at the
Metropolitan Museum. A brand-new facility along the same lines, the Center for
African Art, has opened at 54 East

68th Street. Similarly occupying

two old town houses, and committed to the high but lively exhibition

and educational standards set by the earlier museum, the new center is, however,
exclusively devoted to African art, which it will exhibit but not collect.
Interestingly, the center was formed by a group of collectors of African art
nostalgic for the Primitive Museum, and not wildly excited by the level of
activity at the Rockefeller Wing. Their director, and a moving force behind the
museum, is Susan Vogel, a former curator at the earlier museum, who also
continues as the Met's senior consultant for African art.

Right off, with its first show, ''African Masterpieces From the Musee de
l'Homme'' (through Jan. 22), the center has come up with a difficult act to
follow. It's a surfeit of riches - 100 objects from the great ethnographical
institution in Paris - and for once, the word ''masterpiece'' is not abused. The
holdings of the Musee de l'Homme (Museum of Mankind) were avidly studied by the
Cubists and Surrealists early in the century, and we can see in the objects here
abundant evidence of their influence on modern Western art.

In the happiest of coincidences, this show arrives in useful conjunction with
the big one opening at the Museum of Modern Art next Thursday, '' 'Primitivism'
in 20th-Century Art,'' some of whose exhibits are also from the Parisian museum.

By now, we are smart enough to know that the word ''primitive'' has been a
terribly patronizing misnomer when applied to African art; that the rich
symbolism of African art, its complex layers of meaning, its elegance and its
emotional power render it art in the highest Western sense of the word. So, too,
as Miss Vogel points out in her introduction to the show's handsome catalogue,
we have properly lost interest in the former debate over what's
''anthropological'' and what's ''esthetic'' in the material; African societies
made fewer distinctions between art and use than we do. And so not only is there
a vast cultural, geographical and temporal range to this show - from the Baga to
the Zulu, from Sierra Leone to Madagascar, from the 13th to the 20th century -
but a broad variety of objects as well.

There are, for example, such superlative examples of useful things as an Azande
harp, a Chokwe pipe, a Kuba box and a lock from Mali, each made with a highly
refined eye for overall form and detailed adornment. A small, attenuated Zulu
''Spoon Figure'' of a woman made of wood, whose wittily abstracted body has as
its head the bowl of a spoon, is elegance incarnate. One large piece in this
vein is a carved wooden slit drum that suggests an antelope, magnificent in its
bravura stylization of an animal form.

Alongside these are works that startle in their emotional intensity. The
accepting humility of old age is affectingly conveyed by a big, stooped Dogon
piece, carved from a single branch or tree, known as ''Hermaphrodite Figure.''
An awesome ferocity distinguishes two ''oath-taking'' figures made by Kongo
tribesmen - one in the form of a dog, the other a personage - participatory
pieces, each bristling with nails and blades driven into its body by supplicants
seeking to activate its potency as a guardian. A wonderful, small Senufo female
figure of black wood, out-Picassoing Picasso in its fanciful distortions, has
the boldly authoritative stance of a tribal matriarch.

There's plenty of humor, too, particularly notable in a European- influenced
Kongo male funerary figure of wood - presumably a portrait of the deceased -
seated on a box holding a square gin bottle and a glass. In our name-oriented
Western culture, it boggles the mind that such works as these are anonymous.

Through this show - 90 percent of its objects never before seen outside France -
and by its presence, the new museum is bound to enrich our understanding of an
art that has only recently begun to take its place among the world's great
esthetic enterprises. But it won't be easy to keep up this level of exhibition.
The show, organized by Miss Vogel and Francine N'Diaye, head of the French
Africa section of the Musee de l'Homme, will travel next to the National Museum
of African Art of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.



Also of interest this week:

''The Flame and the Lotus: Indian and Southeast Asian Art From the Kronos
Collections'' (Metropolitan Museum, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street): Reflecting a
rise in collector interest throughout the country, the more ''exotic'' art
outside the pale of Western civilization is beginning to get its due in American
museums. And at the Met, Indian and Southeast Asian art, once neglected, is
coming along nicely, thanks partly to its cultivation by Martin Lerner, curator.
This, the museum's first loan exhibition in the field, was borrowed from a
collector, Stephen M. Kossak, who with his family has already given the Met
significant objects.

The 86 works of painting and sculpture - from India, Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand,
Cambodia, Vietnam and Indonesia - form a rambling miscellany, ranging from 1500
B.C. to the late 18th century. If there's an overall rationale, it's that the
objects were chosen for their esthetic, rather than historical, interest, with
an emphasis on spirituality and refinement of craftsmanship. And while not
everything here is of equal quality, it is obvious that Mr. Kossak, aided by Mr.
Lerner, has a very discriminating eye.

Buddhist and Hindu deities abound, and two of the most beautiful happen to be
female. One, a headless ''Standing Yakshi,'' or fertility goddess, of red
sandstone from India (second to third century), is a wonderfully sensuous
specimen, her voluptuous body so vividly delineated that its pinkish stone can
be sensed almost as flesh. The other, also erotically idealized, is a standing
deity from India, too, but of a much later period (second half of the 11th
century). Given a smile of great benignity, she is carved of grayish stone with
such sharpness and precision of detail that the stone could pass for metal.

But those are only two of many treasures here. A cluster of brilliant miniature
works includes a tiny Ceylonese bronze ''Seated Buddha'' (circa seventh
century), whose grand spiritual presence belies its size. A spectacular pair of
heavy gold earrings from India (circa first century B.C.), intricately adorned
with lions and elephants, is said to be the most superb example of Indian
jewelry known (though to this viewer the earrings have a certain klutziness). A
strange, archaic-looking head of weathered wood, wearing a ferocious expression,
has no provenance at all (though it's probably northern Indian), but establishes
itself through its forceful presence. Not least of the sculptural objects is a
magnificent ''jali'' screen of pierced marble from India (circa 1638-48), its
lacy carving of stylized floral forms counterpointed by a solid border inlaid
with semiprecious stones.

The paintings, too, manuscript illustrations from northern India, are generally
of a high order. They range from the gaudy, near-primitive style of the
so-called Lodi School in the 16th century - before the refining influence of the
Mogul dynasty - to the lovely lyricism of Kangra painting, circa 1800. A
particularly fine example is the well-known ''Krishna and the Cowherds Playing
Blind Man's Buff,'' from the Punjab Hills (circa 1780), a delightful composition
in which bovine and human bodies are delicately deployed in a verdant landscape.
Coming to this art from Western culture is not the easiest of passages. But
exhibitions like this show us what we've been missing. (Through March 3.)




Joseph Nechvatal (Brooke Alexander, 20 West 57th Street): Layer on layer of
bland graphite drawing - marks and tracks from which, on closer view, faces,
figures and other imagery emerge - is the stuff of Joseph Nechvatal's work,
which owes a good deal to the elegant scratchings of Cy Twombly. It comes off
best in a series of small-scale diptychs, in which a graphite drawing is placed
next to one in pastel or oil stick, often delicately colored. The images that
can be read through the aimless trackings have a certain surprise value, like
finding stray chords in wall-to-wall music.

But when the artist blows up his work by means of photography, as in ''Blame It
on the Brain,'' a giant drawing in which convoluted brain matter and a series of
gridded heads appear, it's simply overscale doodling. Several robotlike
sculptures, out of ''Star Wars'' or a Bauhaus play, their surfaces covered with
squares of paper reproducing Nechvatal scribbles, stand around one room, and the
gallery entrance is neatly papered with photographic reproductions of the
drawings. Too much, or not enough - it's all the same. (Through Oct. 13.)




Fanny Brennan (Coe Kerr, 49 East 82d Street): Mini-Magritte, you might call
these paintings by Fanny Brennan, since in tiny scale - sometimes no more than
one inch by two - they present superreal settings in which surreal events occur.
Through the divided trunk of a tree in a grassy field we catch a poignant
glimpse of a seashore; a framed picture of a waterfall suspended in the sky
spills down on a landscape below; a large white mother-of-pearl button floats on
a cloud, a tiny tugboat sails on a lake enclosed by a room. Quite often, the
surrealism is cute, but Miss Brennan, no stranger to the New York gallery scene,
is very skilled at her craft. (Through Sept. 29.)


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of statues

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 22, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AT CAMP 'HILTON,' VIETNAMESE LEARN WAYS OF U.S.

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words

DATELINE: MORONG, the Philippines, Sept. 15


When Diep Hai Ki mentions San Diego, his weathered face lights up. Mr. Diep, 64
years old, a Vietnamese refugee, has never seen San Diego - or, for that matter,
any part of the United States.

But that is where he and six members of his family who arrived at the large
refugee center here last month are headed, to join relatives.

Mostly, Mr. Diep says, ''I am very, very happy to get out of Vietnam.''

Among all the refugee camps in the region, the Morong center is known as ''the
Hilton,'' boasting the top accommodations. The refugees live in long wood-framed
houses with concrete floors and corrugated steel roofs. Each building has 10
units separated by walls, with 7 to 10 people living in each unit.

'A Place to Educate People'


''This is not just a camp where we hold refugees,'' said Jose S. Bustos, chief
of the center's executive staff. ''This is a transition camp. It should be a
place to educate people for life in the United States.''

As ethnic Chinese, Mr. Diep said, he and his family were targets of persecution
after the Communists took control of South Vietnam in 1975.

Mr. Diep, a hardware merchant, was deemed a member of the bourgeoisie, and his
business, house, car and savings were confiscated. His 36-year-old son, Diep
Nguyen Hung, now also at the refugee camp, was formerly a second lieutenant in
the South Vietnamese Army and, after the war, he spent two years as a political
prisoner in a ''re- education'' camp.

Secretary of State George P. Shultz recently told Congress that some cases - the
Diep family would be a good example - would receive particular emphasis in the
Reagan Administration's immigration and refugee policy.

In the fiscal year starting next month, Mr. Shultz said the United States would
accept 10,000 people from Vietnam under the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees' Orderly Departure Program, with special treatment reserved for
Asian-American children and present or former political prisoners and close
family members.

17,000 People in Camp


Refugees like Mr. Diep spend six months in a refugee processing center, where
they take courses in English and cultural orientation. Although there are
roughly similar centers in Indonesia and Thailand, the one in Morong, 115 miles
northwest of Manila in Bataan Province, is by far the largest. It can
accommodate 17,000 people, and its population is just under that.

The Reagan Administration statement comes at a time when the Vietnamese
Government is displaying a willingness to release people, most destined for the
United States, through the Orderly Departure Program.

Under the program, some people leave Vietnam as immigrants with proper
documentation and go to the United States, usually after a stop of less than two
weeks in Bangkok, Thailand. But most of the people are declared refugees and are
accepted by another country, usually the United States, while they are still in
Vietnam.

'For Vietnam Only'


''O.D.P. is for Vietnam only, and it's to prevent people from becoming boat
people,'' said Gregg Beyer, the representative for the United Nations High
Commissioner in the Philippines.

The United States Government has said for years that it would be willing to
accept up to 1,000 people a month under the Orderly Departure Program. But it
was not until last spring that the numbers Vietnam allowed to depart even
approached that level. The 10,000 Vietnamese headed for the United States this
year under the program will be more than four times the total for 1983,
according to American refugee officials in the Philippines.

''The Vietnamese have now decided that it is more trouble to keep these people
than get rid of them,'' an American official said. The people the official was
referring to typically have some close ties, currently or formerly, to the
United States.

The processing centers around Southeast Asia are for all Indochinese refugees,
including Cambodians and Laotians, who have been accepted by another country.
The situation for these refugees is much better than for those in the six
''first asylum'' camps - in Hong Kong, Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore
and Palawan, the Philippines. These are essentially holding camps for refugees
hoping to be accepted by another country.

Rooms Considered Lavish


In what are considered lavish accomodations, each apartment in Morong is one
room, about 8 feet by 18 feet, with a sleeping loft overhead.

The Morong center is spread across a sun-baked, breeze-swept promontory
overlooking the South China Sea. Japanese officers were stationed at the site in
World War II, and 10 miles away a monument marks the starting point of the
Bataan death march.

The camp includes a 50-bed hospital and dental clinics. Its 40 schoolhouses
teach not only English and American rules and customs but also vocational
skills, including carpentry, plumbing, auto mechanics, welding, drafting and
electrical repair.

The Philippine Government donated the 740 acres of land for the center, which
opened in 1980. It was built and fiananced by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Of the 16,938 refugees now in the camp, all but 80
are going to the United States.

The Lucky Ones


In some ways, the 2,213 people at the Morong center who came by way of the
Orderly Departure Program are the most fortunate. Unlike the others, they did
not have to sail through pirate-filled waters or walk through tropical jungles;
they were brought to the Philippines by plane. Nor have they spent long periods
in ''first asylum'' camps; most of the refugees in the program are ethnic
Chinese.

Like Chinese in most of Southeastern Asia outside the mainland, they tend to be
better educated and, until the Communist takeover of South Vietnam, were better
off materially than the rest of the Vietnamese population.

Those in the Orderly Departure Program are treated as special cases, a situation
that sometimes draws the resentment of other refugees, officials at Morong say.
Still, the Orderly Departure Program refugees also tended to be the people with
the most to lose when the Communist Government took control, and they were some
of the most desperate to leave.

Of Mr. Diep's family, his daughter, Diep My Ai, then 33 years old, drowned in
the South China Sea in 1980 along with her husband and two sons while trying to
make it to Hong Kong in a small boat. That same year, however, three of his sons
escaped from Da Nang, but only after a 26-day ordeal at sea.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of refugees

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 22, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRUNEI IS GREETED AS THE 159TH U.N. MEMBER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 522 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 21


Brunei Darussalam, a newly independent nation on the South China Sea, became the
159th member of the United Nations today.

Under a brilliant sky, security guards raised Brunei's yellow, black, white and
red flag as Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar marked the occasion,
saying that it brought the the United Nations ''closer to one of its fundamental
aims, that of universality of membership.''

Brunei Darussalam, which means ''Brunei, Abode of Peace,'' is one of the
smallest but most prosperous United Nations members. The 2,226-square- mile
nation on the northwest coast of the island of Borneo has a population estimated
to be 200,000. Annual per capita income is $10,340. The country is expected to
produce nearly 64 million barrels of oil this year, earning $1.5 billion. Brunei
has $13 billion in currency reserves, greater than those of Switzerland or
Britain.

Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah Muizzaddin Waddaulah, the 38-year-old ruler of Brunei,
told the General Assembly this morning: ''Our country has known peace, but also
war; wealth, but also poverty; energetic commerce, but also isolation;
development, but also exploitation; self-government, but also foreign rule. All
this has not been without benefit to us. It has taught us to appreciate the
realities of this world.''

Friendly Ties Recalled


Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah added that ''in the world of today the collective
strength of the United Nations is the ultimate hope for us small countries.'' In
his speech surveying global problems, the Sultan mentioned Vietnam for its
''continued occupation of Kampuchea'' and Israel for its ''occupation of Arab
lands, including southern Lebanon,'' but he spoke only of ''the withdrawal of
foreign forces from Afghanistan'' without mentioning the presence of Soviet
troops.

Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the chief American delegate, and the heads of all the
regional groups went to the podium to welcome Brunei. Mrs. Kirkpatrick recalled
''a variety of ties, all of them friendly, extending back over the past 100
years and more,'' between the two countries.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick welcomed ''the representatives of Brunei Darussalam to New York
City and to the United States.'' Brunei has opened an embassy in Washington, and
an American Embassy has opened in Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei's capital.

The Sultan marked the entry of his country by giving a check for $1 million to
Dr. Richard Jolly of Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund.

Mr. Perez de Cuellar gave a reception this afternoon for Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah
and his representative at the United Nations, Haji Omar bin Haji Serudin. More
than 100 diplomats and Secretariat officials attended it in the south lounge
outside the Security Council. Fruit juice and soda were served because Brunei is
a Moslem country that forbids the consumption of alcohol.

Brunei, a British protectorate for 96 years, became independent on Jan. 1 this
year. The country is an absolute monarchy with almost no opposition political
activity, according to information provided by the New York City Commission for
the United Nations and for the Consular Corps.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah Muizzaddin Waddaulah, Prince Mohammed
and Prince Haji Sufri

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MERCENARIES IN FATIGUES MEET IN NEVADE GLITTER

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1127 words

DATELINE: LAS VEGAS, Nev. Sept. 21


If the presence of American mercenaries opposing Communists in Central America
becomes an international issue, no one would appear to be happier about it than
those who are doing the guerrilla training and occasional fighting.

They say that, as far as they are concerned, fighting Communism is something
America has lost the stomach for, and if it takes a few freelance fighters to
show the way, so be it.

''I keep saying, the only reason we're down there is because the Congress won't
let anyone else do the job,'' Robert K. Brown, publisher of Soldier of Fortune,
declared. ''If Washington would get its act together we wouldn't have to do it
for them.''

Mr. Brown's glossy monthly magazine is full of articles about lethal weapons and
military adventure. Its circulation of 200,000 has made it possible for Mr.
Brown to put his publication's hearty anti-Communist message into practice by
sending half a dozen military training teams, made up of veterans like himself,
to train the Salvadoran Army in what he asserts are skills neglected by the
55-man United States military training team in El Salvador. The magazine pays to
send its volunteers, who teach the Salvadoran Army infantry tactics and the use
of weapons in the Salvadoran Government's fight against leftist insurgents.

Theme of Duty Taken Up

Soldier of Fortune held its fifth annual convention here this week, and the
theme of duty neglected and taken up again was a main topic among the nearly
1,000 men wearing baggy combat fatigues, grisly knives and jungle boots who
strode among the bored blackjack dealers and people feeding slot machines in the
Hotel Sahara casino.

''From the response we've had, we could get 1,000 of these guys down there to
fight right now,'' said Thomas Posey, a founder and leader of Civilian Military
Assistance, an effort to train and supply rebels operating out of Honduras
against the Sandinista Government of Nicaragua.

Interest in unofficial United States help to anti-Communists in Central America
in general and Mr. Posey in particular reached a new level recently with the
shooting down of a rebel helicopter inside Nicaragua on Sept. 1. Two Americans
and one rebel in the helicopter were killed.

Mr. Posey said his group was unrelated to Soldier of Fortune magazine. He was
attending the convention only at the invitation of Mr. Brown, to receive
posthumous awards for patriotism on behalf of the two American men killed in the
downing of the helicopter, James Powell and Dana Parker,

Both Were Vietnam-Era Pilots

The two, both Vietnam era pilots, were members of Mr. Posey's group, and their
deaths brought widespread speculation in Washington and elsewhere about whether
the Central Intelligence Agency was backing mercenaries' involvement in the
region.

But like Mr. Brown, Mr. Posey rejected the notion of any Federal involvement in
his group's efforts in Central America.

''Everybody says 'C.I.A., C.I.A.' like we couldn't do this by ourselves,'' Mr.
Posey said.

''If the people in Washington would draw a line across the map and say, 'This is
where Communism stops,' I'd go along with that,'' he went on. ''But nobody's
done that yet, so we're the ones who are drawing the line. We're the ones making
a stand.''

The founding of Civilian Military Assistance in a restaurant in Decatur, Ala.,
13 months ago was the culmination of years of such expressions of frustration.
Like Mr. Posey, all of the half-dozen founders were members of National Guard
units in the Deep South and Vietnam veterans in their 30's or 40's still
seething over the victory by Hanoi. They were men of ordinary lives and
extraordinarily fierce anti-Communist feelings.

''We had been running into each other at meetings and kind of talking about
doing something,'' said Mr. Posey, a wiry, blue-eyed man who owns a wholesale
produce business in Decatur and who has a stomach ulcer that he nurses on coffee
and cigarettes.

'We Decided to Send Me'

''Then when the Russians shot down Flight 007, and we knew nobody was going to
do anything about it, we decided to chip in and send me to San Salvador to see
what we could do.''

From San Salvador Mr. Posey went to Honduras and finally got in touch with the
rebels of the Nicaraguan Democratic Force. He soon began delivering them
supplies, mostly clothing.

Mr. Posey insists that everything his organization did was above board.

''We said from the very beginning we were going to do everything legally,'' he
said. ''We talked to the customs department, we talked to the post office, we
spent three hours being investigated by the F.B.I.,'' he said. ''The only
question was about sending them weapons and ammo, but since we didn't have the
money for that, it didn't matter anyway.''

The two men killed in the helicopter were teaching takeoffs and landings to the
Nicaraguan rebel pilot at a base near the border, Mr. Posey said, when they
suddenly took off into Nicaragua to answer a call for help. Mr. Posey said he
assumed they were answering a call from rebels who, the Government in Managua
said, were attacking a training camp at Santa Clara.

Mr. Posey denies that the men took part in the fight. Perhaps mindful of the
fears in many Americans' minds about sending troops into another guerrilla
quagmire like Vietnam, others at the convention echoed this theme, asserting
that the anti-Communists merely needed training.

'They Have Fighters'

''They don't need guys to go down there and fight for them,'' said Dale Dye, a
Marine Corps veteran and executive editor of Soldier of Fortune. ''They have
fighters. What they need is our skills in training nonprofessional soldiers to
fight.''

Mr. Dye recently returned from one of the magazine-sponsored training missions
to El Salvador, where he helped teach Salvadoran troops to use the 60-millimeter
mortar given them by the United States.

''They didn't even know you can fire a mortar at night,'' he said. ''I spent 20
years in the Marine Corps and I don't think I've ever had a more rewarding time
in my life than when I could see the lights go on in these guys' minds when
somebody finally explained to them how to use these weapons.''

Only a handful of the men at the convention were involved in the Central
American fighting, however. Many were like Bill Stone of Denver, a carpenter and
Marine Corps veteran.

''These guys are more fun than the V.F.W., they're more gung-ho,'' he remarked
cheerfully. ''We thought it would be fun to slip on the old cammies and come on
down and drink some beer and yell a lot, and that's all we're doing. As far as
fighting in El Salvador, forget it!''

''Cammies'' are the camouflaged jungle wear favored by the conventioneers for
casino wear.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert Stroessner; photo of Dale Dye

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RECORD NOTES;
BOOK-OF-THE-MONTH EXPANDS

BYLINE: By GERALD GOLD

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words


Book-of-the-Month Records has been quietly selling classical, jazz and other
recordings for a decade, using its vast mail-order network to reach potential
buyers. All the records have been licensed productions - recordings made by
someone else but pressed anew and repackaged by Book-of-the-Month Records for
its clientele. While some of the records, even though recorded by someone else,
were exclusive to Book-of-the Month Records, such as the highly acclaimed ''Duke
Ellington at Fargo, 1940,'' most were available in stores - or had been at one
time - through the original record company.

Now, for the first time, as the record division of the Book-of-the- Month Club
marks its 10th anniversary, the company has begun producing it own recordings -
original productions, with the concept, the hiring of artists and the production
itself all under the direct supervision of the club. Further, unlike the
licensed records, which can be sold only through the mail, these original
productions will be available for sale in retail stores, although the emphasis
will continue to be on mail order sales to members and nonmembers.

Under the new program, the club will issue three-record sets, with the same
music also available on two compact disks or two cassettes, as well.
Occasionally, as the repertory dictates, there may be four-record sets. No
single LP's are planned. Each set will revolve around a theme, a composer or a
performer. All the recordings will be produced digitally and will sell for the
same price whether as LP, cassette or compact disks - $24.95 per three-record
set for nonmember mail order customers, plus $1.75 shipping costs.

George Spitzer, director of Book-of- the-Month Records, said four albums had
already been completed and were scheduled for release beginning in December and
early next year. The first two are ''The Bach Family'' and ''Songs of New
York,'' to be followed by an album of Beethoven sonatas and another titled ''The
Romantic Quartet.''

''The Bach Family'' contains works by J.S., W.F., C.P.E. and J.C.F. Bach played
by Eugenia Zukerman, flute; Pinchas Zukerman, violin and viola; Anthony Newman,
piano and harpsichord, and Peter Howard, cello.

''Songs of New York,'' for which the artistic director was John McGlinn,
features a gallery of noted Broadway performers, including Meg Bussert, George
S. Irving, Judy Kaye, Paula Lawrence and Debbie Shapiro, as well as Joseph Papp,
John Kander and Fred Ebb in ''guest appearances.'' The 37 songs, all about New
York, include such standards as ''Lullaby of Broadway'' and ''Autumn in New
York,'' as well as lesser- known titles such as ''42d Street Moon'' and ''A Tree
in the Park.''

In the Beethoven sonata album, Richard Goode has recorded seven works, including
No. 25 in G major and No. 27 in E minor, as well as the ''Moonlight'' and
''Pathetique,'' among others. Mr. Spitzer said Mr. Goode might eventually record
all the Beethoven sonatas.

''The Romantic Quartet'' a four- disk set (three CD's and three cassettes)
features the Emerson Quartet, which has been receiving outstanding reviews in
its concert appearances. This set contains such works as the Ravel Quartet, the
Borodin Quartet No. 2, the Brahms Op. 51, No. 1, plus five others.

The records are available by mail from Book-of-the-Month Records, Camp Hill, Pa.
17012.

Speedy CD Releases


The CD explosion has picked up noticeable momentum this fall, with many new
releases showing up almost daily. Some are catching up with previous LP
releases, some are brand new and some are fulfilling the hope that CD would be
seeking out repertory beyond the staples of the catalogue.

From Orfeo comes an album titled ''The Art of the Coloratura,'' with Edita
Gruberova the coloratura in question. Her repertory on this disk includes Gli
ere's Concerto for Coloratura Soprano and Orchestra and Luigi Arditi's ''Kiss.''
Orfeo is also the source for a collection titled ''Chamber Music for Winds and
Piano,'' by Darius Milhaud, with the oboist Heinz Holliger and the flutist Aur
ele Nicolet among the artists. Harmonia Mundi France's releases on CD include
Monteverdi's ''Lamento d'Arianna,'' the orchestral suite from Rameau's ''Indes
Galante'' and Hamilton Harty's Irish Symphony.

Pro Arte has just issued its first three CD's: Leonard Bernstein's complete solo
piano works; ''American Festival,'' with works by Bernstein, Copland and
Schuman; and Tchaikovsky's ''Nutcracker'' Suite under Leonard Slatkin.
Supraphon, the Czech label, offers Dvorak's Seventh, Eighth and Ninth Symphonies
with the Czech Philharmonic under Vaclav Neumann, as well as Janacek's
Sinfonietta and ''Taras Bulba.''

Angel's newest CD releases include the Brahms First Symphony with Klaus
Tennstedt and the London Philharmonic, Mahler's First with Riccardo Muti and the
Philadelphia Orchestra, Richard Strauss' Four Last Songs with Lucia Popp, and
the Schubert Quintet in C major (D. 956) with the Alban Berg Quartet and
Heinrich Schiff as the other cellist.

Finally, Vanguard offers a disk of Ravel favorites and the Saint-Sa"ens Third
Symphony, both with the Baltimore Symphony under Sergiu Commissiona.

Arts on Cassette


The first five in what is projected as an open-ended series of cassettes
featuring interviews, talks, discussions and demonstrations on the arts and
titled the American Arts Project has just been issued.

The first of these monthly ''magasettes,'' as they are called, contains an
interview with the composer Philip Glass conducted by David Dubal, a talk on
investing in American art by James D. Cox of the Grand Central Galleries and a
discussion on the American theater by Brendan Gill, Norris Houghton and A.R.
Gurney Jr. Other programs now available include interviews with Virgil Thomson,
a recording drawn from a West Side ''Y'' program called ''Back in the World:
Writing After Viet Nam,'' and an interview with Louise Nevelson by Andy Lyman.

Each cassette runs for about 60 minutes and costs $7.95. Using magazine terms,
Daniel Roth, publisher of the American Arts Projects, said a subscription for 12
issues costs $79. The cassettes are on sale at some museum bookshops here and in
other cities and at a number of Waldenbooks stores, with other shops to follow.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of album

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
FEDERAL COURTS OFF LIMITS TO TV

BYLINE: By Richard Levine

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 254 words


The 26 judges who make the rules decided last week that the Federal court system
is not ready for television. The ''alleged public benefits,'' said a report to
the Judicial Conference of the United States headed by Chief Justice Warren E.
Burger, ''are outweighed by the risks.'' They pointed to ''potential
psychological effects'' on jurors, lawyers and witnesses ranging from
''encouraging histrionics to producing inhibition.''

The conference rejected a petition by 28 news organizations, which had argued
that video coverage would increase public understanding. The judges, detecting
''a great potential for miseducation and presentation of distorted images,''
reacted unfavorably to the experience in 41 states that permit some television
coverage in state courts.

Coincidentally, a pro-television view was elucidated last week by Federal
District Judge Pierre N. Leval in New York. He was bound by the conference rule,
he said, but would have preferred to allow television coverage of the
forthcoming trial of the libel suit against CBS brought by Gen. William C.
Westmoreland in connection with a 1980 documentary on the Vietnam war.

Lawyers on both sides in the Westmoreland case were also willing to accept
camera coverage. Judge Leval cited the importance of the issues the case raises,
improved and unobtrusive camera techniques, and an opportunity to correct what
he described as ''rather low esteem'' for judges - by showing ''how
painstakingly and how fairly Federal judges conduct court business.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Chief Justice Warren E. Burger

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN POLICY: WHEN IT PAYS TO 'CUT AND RUN'

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 609 words


To the Editor:


Barry Rubin's Aug. 29 Op-Ed article on the lessons of Lebanon fails to draw some
significant conclusions.

Ronald Reagan is quoted as saying, in 1982, ''If Lebanon ends up under the
tyranny of forces hostile to the West (Syria and its allies), not only will our
strategic position in the eastern Mediterranean be threatened but also the
stability of the entire Middle East. Lebanon is central to our credibility on a
global scale.''

Two years later, with Lebanon firmly under the control of those ''hostile
forces,'' a high State Department official told Congress that, in line with
American support for a broader government capable of ''restoring stability and
security'' in Lebanon, ''we believe that Syria has been one of the helpful
players.''

Mr. Rubin goes on to discuss the lessons Mr. Reagan should have learned from his
unfortunate mistake but fails to point out the lessons that we, the American
people, should have learned about Mr. Reagan.

The President's initial assessment of the significance of Syrian influence in
Lebanon was considered nonsense by virtually all intelligent observers of world
affairs, including most of Congress and the press. Still, precious little was
said and nothing was done to keep Mr. Reagan from acting out his delusion.
Indeed, we should count ourselves lucky to have been extricated from that
enormous blunder with only 250 American casualties (and how many Lebanese?).
Perhaps the most valuable lesson the U.S. has learned from Vietnam is that it is
possible to cut and run, the President's speeches to the contrary
notwithstanding. A pre-Vietnam Reagan would surely have run up thousands of
casualties before pulling the plug on an involvement as ill-conceived as the one
in Lebanon.  What then will be our response when President Reagan, or President
Mondale, makes the same speech about El Salvador? ''If El Salvador ends up under
the tyranny of forces hostile to the West, not only will our strategic position
in Central America be threatened, but also the stability of the entire
Caribbean. El Salvador is central to our credibility on a global scale.'' In
Lebanon, we have learned that the power to end a conflict does not necessarily
reside with the most pro- Western forces involved. The Salvadoran Government,
Duarte notwithstanding, is just as much an obstacle to peace as was the Gemayel
Government so long as it continued to strive for Phalangist hegemony.  What
American administration is going to have the courage to let the Latin American
left be a ''helpful player''? How many U.S. marines and Salvadorans will have to
die before that idea is even considered?

Rubin points out that ''despite the apparent American defeat in Lebanon, Syrian
policy today takes considerable account of American interests and power'' and
that ''Damascus is welcome to try its hand at solving the knotty Lebanese
problem.''

Freed from American aggression, there is no doubt that the leftist governments
of Central America would ''take considerable account of American interests and
power,'' simply to avoid that very aggression. By choosing war - economic and
military - against leftist movements throughout Latin America, we eliminte all
incentive to respect American power.

American military power is certainly more than adequate to counter any real
threats to our security, but by drawing the line where it manifestly doesn't
belong, the U.S. is repeatedly forced to retract it. That does diminish our
credibility on a global scale.

The answer is not to stick stubbornly to our mistakes but not to make them in
the first place.

PHILIP RAPHALS Montreal, Aug. 30, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THOUGHTS OF ALI: VICTIM OF SPORT HE SAVED

BYLINE: By PETER ALFANO

SECTION: Section 5; Page 1, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 2278 words


MOST of the words spoken and lines written last week were in the past tense -
eulogies for a man who still was very much alive. Perhaps, it is the nature of
boxing and the toll it exacts that prompts some people to think that boxers die
young no matter how old they live to be. But this was not some
Johnny-come-lately or has-been, a statistic for the medical profession to use in
its continuing debate about the risks inherent in the sport. This story was
about Muhammad Ali, a man with a special place in boxing and American history.
This story touched some people in a more personal way.

Although, by week's end, the neurologist's prognosis was encouraging and Ali was
gleefully dismissing reports of his demise as premature, what lingers is a
picture of the three-time former heavyweight champion and a prominent world
figure as he entered the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center for tests, looking
dazed and weary and finding it difficult to speak, the way he has appeared at
several championship bouts and other events recently. What lingers is Ali's
admission that by his own account, he has taken more than one million punches
during his boxing career and their cumulative impact may be responsible for an
affliction he suffers from called Parkinson's syndrome.

And what is sad is that he had said that he never wanted this to happen to him.

The symptoms of Parkinson's syndrome are slurred speech and a halting gait, but
Dr. Stanley Fahn, the neurologist who conducted the tests, said that the
condition could be controlled with medication and there is no reason to suspect
it is degenerative. Still, there is a great deal of discussion in the medical
community about the effect that blows to the head have on the brain, and some
experts in the field have contended that Ali, indeed is a victim of brain
damage.

''It made me feel sad, very sad,'' said Teddy Brenner, the matchmaker who gave
Ali his first professional bout in Madison Square Garden on Feb. 10, 1962,
against Sonny Banks. ''I'm the one who told him after the Earnie Shavers fight
in 1977 that he was getting hit too often and too hard. I felt he had had
enough. He was the world champion three times, he made millions and earned his
niche in boxing history. I told him, 'From here on in, every kid who couldn't
carry your water bucket will beat you.' But I don't know why they don't listen.
He was a great heavyweight, great in any era, and as gracious and charming an
athlete as I ever knew.''

As Cassius Marcellus Clay, his given name, Ali was an irrepressible young man
full of confidence in the ring where he moved with a grace and ease
uncharacteristic of heavyweights. Joe Louis was ''the Brown Bomber'' and Rocky
Marciano may have been able to paralyze an opponent with a punch to the forearm,
but Clay's strategy was ''float like a butterfly, sting like a bee.''

''He was a kid, and when he came into my office for the first time, he told me,
'I'm going to be the next heavyweight champion of the world,' '' Brenner said.

''I remember how he asked me to loan him $10. He said, 'I'll give it back after
I win the Olympic gold medal.' He won the gold medal and on his way back to
Kentucky from Rome, he stopped in New York, came to my office and handed me the
$10.''

''What stood out were his legs,'' said Floyd Patterson, another former
heavyweight champion, who twice lost to Ali. ''He could move so beautifully
around the ring, especially for a man 220 pounds. He was like a ballet dancer.
And of all the heavyweight champions I've ever known, none could take a punch
like him. I guess sometimes, that can be bad.''



Boxing was Ali's profession and his first love. But it also would be a vehicle
to the much larger role he would play during the years when he moved from the
ring to the world stage. It began when he changed his name. There was public
resentment and resistance in the news media when he became a Black Muslim in
1964 and renounced his given name. A slave name, he called it. And Cassius Clay
became Muhammad Ali.

Even Ali's amateurish rhymes and harmless boasts could not quiet the
controversy. Marion Morrison could change his name to John Wayne and Norma Jean
Baker to Marilyn Monroe, but that was Hollywood, make- believe. Many journalists
and some of his fellow boxers - Joe Frazier and Patterson among them - refused
to call him Ali. The Black Muslims were depicted as sinister and threatening and
Ali was their dupe.

Then, in April, 1967, during the Vietnam War, Ali made a decision that elevated
him above the role of a sports figure when he refused induction into the United
States Army on religious grounds. He was a preacher, he said, a man of peace.
But the skeptics wondered how a man who could earn a living trying to punch
other men into submission could take such a stand. They thought he was a simple
draft dodger and did not weigh how much he stood to lose. He was sentenced to
five years in prison.

Ali appealed and never spent a day behind prison walls. In 1970, he won his
appeal when the United States Supreme Court voted 8-0 in his favor with one
abstention.

But the boxing establishment had long since passed judgment. He was stripped of
his championship. For more than three years - when he was in his mid-20's and
athletic prime - he was unable to practice his trade. ''He was stripped of the
title that was his property right and the right to earn a living,'' said Howard
Cosell, one of only a few journalists who supported Ali and whose career is
interwined with the former champion's.

''The 60's were the age of the birth of the drug culture, an unwanted war and
the disillusionment of young people,'' Cosell said. ''Ali was adopted by these
young people as an antihero, a symbol of a counter civilization. And there was a
failure to understand the importance of the man to society.

''He first showed that importance when he returned from Rome after the Olympics
and threw his medal into the Ohio River. It showed his depth of understanding of
his role as a black in our society.''

Ali remained a symbol after he returned to boxing in October, 1970 and
eventually regained his championship against George Foreman in Zaire four years
later. Ali could never be just a boxer again. His anti-war stand had made him
especially popular overseas. He took his boxing caravan to Kuala Lampur, Manila,
San Juan, Munich and Tokyo during his second reign. He drew adoring crowds in
the hundreds of thousands.

''This man drew people like he was God himself,'' said Murad Muhammad, a boxing
promoter who as a younger man worked in Ali's camp as a body guard and dish
washer. ''Once, in Korea, we couldn't move from the plane to the terminal
because of the crowd. And as normal as it was for black people to love him, he
represented something that all people, black and white, could look up to. That's
why, to kill him now, to let the world think he is sick, would hurt a lot of
people who have loved him from a distance.''

Ali has met world leaders such as Leonid Brezhnev of the Soviet Union. He has
been to Buckingham Palace. He has been a guest at the White House and was
appointed as a roving ambassador by President Carter, a well-meaning gesture
that did not work out well. During his hospital stay last week, Ali received
get-well wishes from hundreds of admirers and also from the presidents of Zaire
and the Philippines. He was visited by the Rev. Jesse Jackson.

And he also was treated with sympathy and compassion by the establishment and
some in the news media who once were so strongly against him. Like John Lennon,
the Beatle from Britain who was killed by an assassin in his adopted home, New
York, Ali has gone from antihero to an American hero.

In the transformation, he has never been aloof. Ali would entertain people in
airports and on city streets, always drawing a crowd. Once, said Irving Rudd, a
publicist for Bob Arum's Top Rank, a Girl Scout troop drove miles out of the way
to visit the champion at his remote training camp, then in Showlow, Ariz. The
girls chanted his name while standing below his hotel room window when they
arrived that night, Rudd said, and Ali promised to see them the next morning. He
kept his promise.

''He wasn't just the greatest fighter I ever saw,'' Cosell said. ''But he had a
place in time and to understand that, you have to understand how sports invades
the everything of society. But maybe he would have been better off if he hadn't
become the champion.''

It is sad, Cosell said, to see the problems Ali is now having. ''I never dreamed
he would end up this way,'' Cosell said. ''The doctors don't really know what's
wrong. It has to be boxing-related, though. He took blows. He had an
extraordinary ability to take punishment.''

Ali sometimes reveled in taking punishment. Murad Muhammad and Brenner talked
about how the former champion would let his sparring partners hit him at will,
daring them to try to knock him down. It was in the gym, as much as in the ring,
where Ali might have overexposed himself to punches, they said.

''He was his own worst enemy,'' Brenner said. ''If he didn't want to take
punches, you couldn't hit him.''

The reasons why are Ali's secret. Among all outstanding athletes there is a
feeling of invincibility and perhaps, Ali's religious beliefs and his
prophet-like appeal to the masses, reinforced his feeling that he could not be
hurt.



His first loss, after 31 victories, came on March 8, 1971, when he was beaten by
the then champion Joe Frazier in a grueling 15-round decision at Madison Square
Garden. Given the three-and-a-half year layoff and only two tuneup bouts
preceding this one, the performance ranks as one of Ali's more courageous and
impressive. Because of that, perhaps, he still appeared invincible.

But there followed two more punishing fights against Frazier, one against
Shavers and losses to Ken Norton, Larry Holmes and finally, Trevor Berbick, a
journeyman, in Ali's last bout, Dec. 11, 1981. ''You know, until he started
getting beat, I really thought Ali wasn't human,'' Murad Muhammad said. ''He
made the game again when he lost. The purses got bigger because people figured
the other guy had a chance.''

In his prime, it was Ali's ability to move about the ring that helped him avoid
being hit. He had fast hands, although Patterson said he thought his own were
faster. Ali was criticized for not packing the power expected of a heavyweight,
but he wore down fighters. Of his 56 victories in 61 bouts, 37 were by a
knockout.

''He changed boxing,'' said Angelo Dundee who was Ali's trainer. Well, sort of
his trainer. ''He once told me,'' Dundee said, 'you don't train me.' He ruined a
lot of fighters who tried to be like him.''

It is Dundee's contention that Ali might have stayed too long in the ring
because he liked the sport. ''He met every big name in the world but what really
energized him was being around fight guys,'' the trainer said.

And Ali was the consummate salesman, selling tickets by giving his opponents
nicknames, mocking them and predicting the round in which he would knock them
out. ''I thought at the time that he was cruel to his opponents,'' said Don
Dunphy, the voice of the Friday Night Fights. ''But he had a sense of the
theatrical and he liked to be noticed. And he had a great sense of humor.''

''He called me 'the Rabbit,' '' Patterson said, ''and I guess that was the
nicest name he gave any of us. In the beginning, we didn't hit it off very well,
our views weren't the same, but after the years passed, we let bygones be
bygones. I've visited him at his home in Los Angeles several times.''

Fellow boxers display a lack of compassion when talking about Ali's plight. They
all know the risks when they get into a ring, Patterson said. They all should be
aware of the warning signals to get out. It is suggested that Ali lingered
because he feared losing his popularity, which is a truth all professional
athletes must face. It is suggested that he was too free with his money, giving
it to worthy causes and to the hangers-on that were part of his entourage.

But it is agreed, he stayed too long. For a baseball pitcher, that might mean
losing his fastball and several more games. For a boxer, however, there is much
more at stake.

''My whole career, I did things on instinct,'' Patterson said. ''Then, in the
last year and a half of my career, I had to think about what I was doing. During
that time, I tried to get that instinct back. But I couldn't. Some fighters
don't want to admit that.''

Holmes, a former sparring partner for Ali and the current heavyweight champion
of the International Boxing Federation, said he never thinks about suffering an
injury or permanent damage. ''It's a shame when it happens, but it's God's work
and I don't question it,'' he said. ''You know what I say? I say, 'Thank God,
it's not me.'

''It isn't my job to feel sorry for anyone,'' Holmes continued. ''I respect Ali;
he's one of the greatest fighters I know and I don't want anything to happen to
him. But it's just as sad to see someone crippled and see some kid in Africa
born without any water to drink.

''If something happens to Larry Holmes in the ring, don't say, 'Ain't it a
shame?' Say, 'It was meant to be.' ''

There are doctors and journalists who disagree. There are abolitionists who say
there is no place for boxing in a civilized society. There are others who think
the sport can exist with much stricter controls. Perhaps, as Cosell said, Ali's
physical problems might help force a change.

''Maybe this is the act that will stir Congress,'' he said, ''and cause the
abolition of boxing in this country.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Muhammad Ali

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW & NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1066 words


New & Noteworthy

THE FAMILY ARSENAL, by Paul Theroux. (Pocket Books, $4.95.) Our reviewer,
Lawrence Graver, described Paul Theroux's 1976 novel,''The Family Arsenal,'' as
a thriller whose ''sensational plot turns on terrorist bombings, art theft, gun
running and guilt about Vietnam; the cast of freaky, foul-mouthed conspirators
crosses a spectrum from radical squalor to radical chic; and the sense of urban
rot edging toward ruin is palpable on every page.'' He also said Mr. Theroux
skillfully catches ''the blend of coarseness, provincialism and bigotry that is
one distinctive (and usually unexportable) brand of popular British humor.''

NEGRO: An Anthology, Collected and edited by Nancy Cunard. (Ungar, $19.95.) This
work, virtually the size of a telephone directory, was privately published by
Nancy Cunard in 1934, a time when most whites assumed blacks were inferior. The
British shipping heiress set out to prove there was no superior race. Reviewing
the commercially published 1970 edition, Julius Lester said in these pages, ''
'Negro' is the most ambitious anthology on blacks ever attempted. It covers
practically every aspect of black life: history, literature, education, law,
racial injustice, theater, art and music. It examines black life in the United
States, the West Indies, South America, Europe and Africa.''

QUARTET, by Jean Rhys. (Harper & Row, $2.50.) ''Quartet,'' published in 1929 and
reissued in 1971, concerns Marya, an English woman in Paris, who moves in with
an English expatriate couple after her husband is jailed for a petty crime. They
help to destroy Marya. Shirley Hazzard commented in The Book Review, ''The art
of Jean Rhys derives from an acute, even morbid, sensibility and perception. It
is the private sensation experienced and exchanged by her characters that gives
her novels meaning. Her power lies in the very transposition of self-pity into
literature.''

REAGAN, by Lou Cannon. (Putnam, $9.95.) Published in 1982, ''Reagan'' covers the
first third of the President's term. But Lou Cannon, a journalist, brings to it
his experience observing Mr. Reagan from his early political years in
California. Curtis Wilkie, our reviewer, said, ''Near the end of his splendid
biography, Lou Cannon writes, 'Most of the time, President Reagan was
intuitively keen but intellectually lazy.' This theme - that Mr. Reagan's career
represents a triumph of personality and intuition - runs through the book,
supported by rich anecdotes and detail.''

HEARTSOUNDS, by Martha Weinman Lear. (Pocket Books, $4.50.) Maggie Scarf, our
reviewer, called ''Heartsounds'' an ''awesome and gripping'' account of the five
years in the lives of Martha Weinman Lear, the writer, and Harold Lear, her
physician husband, from his first heart attack to his death. The husband in this
1980 book is both an ''omnipotent, authoritative physician and the vulnerable,
suffering patient'' who, ''as a patient, understood that it was the nurses who
mattered.'' ''It is an absorbing, wild, funny, tender, enraging and absolutely
remarkable account,'' Miss Scarf said, and an indictment of current medical
care.

OUTER DARK, by Cormac McCarthy. (Ecco, $7.50.) In Cormac McCarthy's 1968 novel,
a rural Southern woman bears her brother's child. And, said Guy Davenport in The
Book Review, their doom ''unfolds with a perfectly logical inevitability.'' Mr.
McCarthy's ''originality,'' he added, ''is his style which compels admiration, a
style compounded of Appalachian phrases as plain and as functional as an ax.''
The author's 1973 work,

CHILD OF GOD, (Ecco, $7.50), tells of a 27-year- old Appalachian squatter, one
of those ''characters so flattened by fate that they exist beneath the reach of
tragedy,'' our reviewer, Richard Brickner, wrote.

SHORT CIRCUIT, by Michael Mewshaw. (Penguin, $6.95.) After an excerpt from
''Short Circuit'' was printed in a magazine - but before the book was published
- Guillermo Vilas, a top player, was suspended for accepting $60,000 just to
appear in a tournament. Michael Mewshaw had written that professional tennis
players were frequently paid to guarantee their showing up on a tour. A
novelist, Mr. Mewshaw had decided to ''combine the twin passions of my life,
tennis and travel, and follow the men's professional tour for a few months.''
Our reviewer, David E. Rosenbaum, said this nonfiction work ''may be the best
picture to date of the tennis gladiators and the people who pay their way.''

THE BLUE HAMMER, by Ross Macdonald. (Bantam, $2.95.) By 1976, when ''The Blue
Hammer'' came out, Ross Macdonald had written some 20 detective novels. But our
reviewer, Michael Wood, remarked that the author had not allowed his work merely
to follow ''a program or a recipe. This intricate tale of multiple murder and
transposed identities moves fast and is full of surprises. . . . The result is
the best work Macdonald has done in a number of years.''

AN AFRICAN IN GREENLAND, by Tete-Michel Kpomassie. (Pocket Books, $4.95) In
1959, young Tete- Michel Kpomassie, living near Lome, the capital of Togo, a
west African nation, read a photographic essay on the Eskimos of Greenland and
vowed to go there. ''An African in Greenland'' tells of this lad's eight-year
odyssey, as he worked his way through the Ivory Coast, Senegal, Mauritania,
France, Germany and Copenhagen to his destination. Our reviewer, Paul Zweig,
wrote in these pages last year, ''His book contains a catalogue of (his)
impressions, combined with striking passages of fine writing.''

TOM MIX AND PANCHO VILLA, by Clifford Irving. (St. Martin's, $3.95.) As Robert
Miner explained in The Book Review, it is an ''unassailable historical fact that
in his greenhorn youth, before he became a movie-star cowboy, Tom Mix rode a
real-life revolution in the heady company of the (Mexican) peasant revolutionary
Pancho Villa.'' This fact inspired Clifford Irving's ''high-stepping,
swashbuckling romance.'' ''Who among us has not wished he'd grown up as
romantically as Mix does here?'' Mr. Miner asked. ''That's the point of 'Tom Mix
and Pancho Villa,' and that's why it's so satisfying. A gully washer of a novel,
as Mix would say, a stump mover, a real frog strangler.''B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Nancy Cunard

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 781 words


Sept. 23, 1984Fiction*1

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Berkley, $3.95.) Three generations
of a German Jewish family in New York.  *2

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) King Arthur, fulfilling
a prophecy of Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  *3

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Warner, $4.50.) The five-year relationship of two
women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  *4

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) Three generations of a San
Francisco family.  *5

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) The struggle for money and
power in Tinseltown.  *6

SAVANNAH, by Eugenia Price. (Berkley, $3.95.) The romance and ambitions of a
young man in the Old South.  *7

MONIMBO, by Robert Moss and Arnaud de Borchgrave. (Pocket, $3.95.) What happens
after Fidel Castro unveils a plan to create chaos in the United States.  *8

THE DAYS OF ETERNITY, by Gordon Glasco.  (Bantam, $3.95.) Love survives 25 years
of separation.  *9

THE SEDUCTION OF PETER S., by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) The sudden,
danger-filled success of a long-out-of-work actor.  10*

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?  Created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain.  (Warner, $3.50.) The solution to a $10,000-prize mystery is revealed
in this edition.  11

DEATH IN KENYA, by M. M. Kaye. (St. Martin's, $3.95.) Romance and mystery in
East Africa.  12

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Pocket, $4.50.) A fantastic yet realistic look
at Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  13

THE MADNESS OF A SEDUCED WOMAN, by Susan Fromberg Schaeffer. (Bantam, $3.95.) A
woman's search for love ends in murder charges and institutionalization.  14

THE BITCH, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.50.) At age 40, a woman sets out to
get what she really wants.  15

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco.  (Warner, $4.95.) Murder in an Italian
monastery.





 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.  *An
asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the
bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the
book above.



 Nonfiction

General *1

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (NAL/ Signet, $4.50.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  *2

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of an Ivy League
graduate, doctor and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.  *3

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.  (Avon, $3.95.) The plight of men who have
never grown up: a psychologist's analysis.  *4

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.  *5*

CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) The life of a helicopter pilot
in Vietnam.  *6

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.  *7

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $3.95.) Predictions about America in the
next decade.  *8*

OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $3.95.) The actress's
autobiography.  *9

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspirational talks by a California professor.  10

BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon.  (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) The back
roads of America.



Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous *1

IN SEARCH OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson.  (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $4.95.) A
new collection of the syndicated ''Far Side'' cartoons.  *2

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.  *3

RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.  (Rand McNally, $5.95.)
For 1984. *4

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson.  (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.  *5

SNIGLETS, by Rich Hall and Friends. (Macmillan, $4.95.) Newly minted words that
''deserve to appear in the dictionary.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT'S DOING IN PARIS

BYLINE: By Richard Bernstein; RICHARD BERNSTEIN is a correspondent in the Paris
bureau of The Times.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 10, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1908 words


They call it la rentree, the return. In this historic rite of early autumn,
Parisians, who take their vacations seriously and en masse in August, come back
to resume the richness of life in the French capital. Suddenly the city that was
pleasantly quiet and empty in the summer becomes pleasantly busy and full.
Schoolchildren are back on the street in their new fall clothes, leather
satchels slung over their backs. Politicians, in what is known as la rentree
politique, stake out positions for the battles that lie ahead. The universities
reopen for la rentree scolaire, and the shops and restaurants that were closed
for much of August and the early part of September are back in business. The
weather turns cooler as October approaches, but cultural life heats up
considerably.

Indeed, the accent for the fall is on exhibitions, theater, music and dance.
There are major art exhibitions at the Grand Palais and at the modernistic
Pompidou Center. Among autumn traditions are a 20- kilometer race through the
city's streets and a ceremony in Montmartre marking the annual harvest of grapes
and the making of wine. Paris remains a great city to walk in, with the
ambitious restoration at Les Halles now virtually complete and rapidly affirming
its status as a major center for strolling, shopping, sitting and simply looking
at Parisians again in possession of their city.

Exhibitions


The major art program this fall is a retrospective of the works of the 19th-
century painter Henri Rousseau, which continues until Jan. 7 at the Grand
Palais. The show consists of 65 of the works of the artist, who earned his
living as a customs agent and is known to the French as ''Le Douanier.''
Rousseau, admired by Picasso and Braque and the other fathers of modern art, is
widely viewed as the father of naive art, a painter whose large canvases united
harmoniously bright colors with poetic projections of childlike dreams. The
exhibition can be seen every day, except Tuesday when the Grand Palais is
closed, from 10 A.M. until 8 P.M. and until 10 on Wednesday. Admission: $1.80.

The central courtyard of the Louvre has been turned into a construction site as
workers put up the controversial glass pyramid, designed by I. M. Pei, that is
to serve eventually as the museum's new entrance. Inside, from the end of
October through the end of January, there will be a small exhibition of
17th-century French drawings, 140 in all, by the likes of Callot, Claude Lorrain
and Poussin. The Louvre is open daily, except Tuesday, from 9:45 to 5; admission
is $1.45. From November through February, one of the city's smaller museums, the
Musee d'Art et Essais (which links art and technology) will evoke the world of
Toulouse- Lautrec and Louise Weber, otherwise known as La Goulue, the model and
dancer at the Moulin Rouge whose life was one of the artist's major
inspirations. Two large panels painted by Toulouse-Lautrec to decorate a
celebrated, demimondian theater run by La Goulue are at the center of the
exhibition, which will also include photographs, drawings and portraits of
members of La Goulue's world. Hours: daily, except Tuesday, from 9:45 to 5:15;
admission: $1.

Meanwhile, at the Pompidou Center, the major show is a retrospective of the work
of Wassily Kandinsky, the Russian-born modernist painter who lived much of his
life in Paris. Hours: noon to 10 P.M. daily, except Tuesday; admission: $1.55.
Also at the Pompidou Center, until Oct. 8, is an exhibition of drawings by
another Russian, Marc Chagall, including the painter's sketches for stage
settings and theater costumes as well as of memories of his life in Russia.

The Paris Hotel de Ville, or City Hall, one of the most beautiful buildings in a
city of beautiful buildings, has an exhibition called ''Leclerc and the
Liberation of Paris.'' Gen. Jacques Leclerc was the commander of the legendary
Second Armored Division, which captured Paris from a retreating German army on
Aug. 24, 1944. The exhibition consists of photographs, models and documents.
Admission is free.

Music and Dance


The opera season will resume in October with a performance of Verdi's
''Macbeth'' in a new production by Antoine Vitez. In November, there will be
performances of ''Der Rosenkavalier'' by Richard Strauss and Mozart's
''Abduction From the Seraglio.'' Luciano Pavarotti will sing in ''Tosca'' by
Puccini in December. Obtaining tickets to the Paris Opera is a bit complicated.
Sometimes they are available at the box office an hour before the performance.
Or, they can be obtained by sending a letter with your name and address in
capital letters to the The,atre de l'Opera, 8 Rue Scribe, 75009 Paris,
indicating the opera you wish to attend and the preferred dates. Send no money
but enclose a self-addressed letter with an international reply coupon. The
Opera ticket office will reply confirming your order. Then, before 3 P.M. on the
day of the performance, you can buy tickets at the box office on presentation of
the confirming letter. Prices range from $5 for partial views in the fifth
balcony to $50 in the orchestra.

When there is no opera performance at the Opera, the theater usually has ballet.
''Romeo and Juliet,'' ''The Rites of Spring'' and ''Icarus'' are on the bill for
October and November. Tickets can be obtained in the same way as for the opera.

At the Musical Theater of Paris at 2 Edouard Colonne, near the Ch,atelet Metro
stop, there will be performances of Chabrier's ''L'Etoile'' from Oct. 20 to Nov.
2 and ''The Secret Marriage'' by Cimarosa from Nov. 16 to 23. The Paris Jazz
Festival takes place from Oct. 27 until Nov. 6 at various theaters in the city,
including the Musical Theater of Paris, as well as the Museum of Modern Art, and
culminates in an extravaganza at the Sports Palace. American performers like
Miles Davis, Bill Evans and Bobby McFerrin will join French musicians in the
performances. Information can be obtained from the Jazz Festival Bureau, 5 Rue
Bellart, 75015 Paris (telephone: 273.06.66).

Where to Stay


The rise of the dollar to more than nine francs has made even the most expensive
lodgings and restaurants seem moderately priced. A room for two at the Hotel
Bristol (266.91.45), for example, a place of extraordinary elegance on the Rue
du Faubourg St. Honore, ranges from about $110 to $200. Built around a garden
courtyard, the Bristol is a place of marble floors, antique tapestries and oil
paintings. Other hotels of fashion and elegance, generally starting at just over
$100 a night at the current rate of exchange, are the Crillon (296. 10.81),
overlooking the Place de la Concorde, the George V (723. 54.00), on the Avenue
George V, and, on the Place Vend,ome, a stone's throw from the Tuileries, the
Meurice (260.38.60) and the Ritz (260.38.30).

In the range of $70 to $80 are those in the Concorde chain, including the
Louvre-Concorde (261.56.01) on the Right Bank and the Lutetia-Concorde
(544.38.10) on the Left Bank. Among the smaller and still less expensive hotels
are the Atala (562.01.62), 10 Rue Chateaubriand, an oasis of quiet and charm
near the bustle of the Champs- Elysees. A room with a bath there, overlooking a
small private garden, costs from $50 to $70. Not far from the garden of the
Palais Royal, on the Rue de la Banque, is the Hotel Normandie (261.53.90),
starting at just over $30. In that price range on the Left Bank are the Perreyve
(548.35.01), near the Luxembourg Gardens, and the Abbaye St.-Germain
(544.38.11), 10 Rue Cassette.

Where to Eat


The strength of the dollar has also brought down prices at such three- star
restaurants as the Tour d'Argent (354.23.31), where duck and duckling are the
classics, and L'Archestrate (551.47.33), renowned for its nouvelle cuisine with,
among other treats, truffles and crayfish with leeks en papillote. At these
restaurants, a great dinner costs between $30 and $40 a person, without wine.
Among the very good new restaurants are the D,omarais (274.54.17) at 53 Rue des
Francs-Bourgeois, an elegant art nouveau restoration of an old trading house,
complete with a dome and wrought-iron balustrade. Lobster mousseline and
sweetbreads in cream sauce are among its special dishes. Near the renovated Les
Halles is the Pharamond (233.06.72), founded in the mid-19th century by a Mr.
Pharamond from Normandy. Among the creations here are the tripes a la mode de
Caen and a magnificent fruit charlotte for dessert. Ask for a table upstairs.

The D,omarais and Pharamond charge about $50 for two. Eating simply while
spending more on wine is becoming more and more popular. Paris is full of new
wine bars where a plate of cold cuts or some foie gras can be enjoyed with a
selection of wines by the glass. L'Ecluse is one such spot. It now has five
locations scattered through the city. One is 15 Quai des Grands-Augustins
(633.58.74). The wine costs anything from $1.50 to $24 (for a 1967 Ch,ateau la
Mission Haut Brion) a glass and about $6 for a plate to accompany it.

Neighborhoods


Paris has long been a city of ethnic neighborhoods and many of them still offer
fascinating strolls. The old Jewish Quarter, Le Marais, for example, these days
blends chic apartment renovations with tiny cafes, fine new restaurants and
ancient synagogues, all on narrow, sinuous streets. Other ethnic sections are
blossoming. Belleville in the northeast is one of the most interesting and
varied. Once largely working-class, the area around the Belleville Metro stop is
now a melange of ethnic groups. Within a few hundred yards of each other are
kosher bistros like the Dar Djerba, 110 Boulevard Belleville (797.25.32), a
Tunisian restaurant that specializes in couscous, grilled meat and fish. Closed
Friday dinner and Saturday lunch. A couscous meal for two with wine costs about
$23. Arab restaurants on the Rue Ramponeau also serve couscous, and a host of
new Chinese and Vietnamese restaurants and shops can be found on the Rue
Belleville just west of the Metro station.

A neighborhood of Oriental markets and Vietnamese and Chinese restaurants
flourishes in the southeast, in the 13th arrondissement near the Porte de Choisy
Metro station. In this new Chinatown of Paris, on both sides of the broad Avenue
de Choisy, Asian life is taking root, the result largely of the continuing
influxes of refugees from Vietnam and Cambodia. At the Phnom Penh, a Cambodian
restaurant at 8 bis Rue des Gobelins (535.03.98), two can eat for $23, including
wine. Its delicacies include a spicy shrimp soup with coconut milk and ground
cashews.

Theater


Moli ere, who wrote the great comic tragedy ''Le Misanthrope'' in 1666, during
the era of King Louis XIV, would probably never have imagined its durability.
Today, Sept. 23, the Comedie Fran,caise will perform it for the 2,000th time.
The production is a new one by the director of the company, Jean-Pierre Vincent.
''Le Misanthrope'' will run through the fall and winter season, alternating with
such other classics as ''Cinna'' by Corneille and Racine's ''Berenice.'' The
best seats cost $10.50, but you can see and hear perfectly well for $7.25 and
even 5.35.. Even if your French is not very good, the spectacle of the Comedie
Fran,caise playing in the elegant theater at the Palais Royal is still a
memorable one. Tickets are obtainable at the box office a week in advance of
each performance.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos and map

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

2 REPUBLICANS CITE RECORDS IN STATE SENATE

BYLINE: By Edward Hudson

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 1, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1142 words


STATE Senator John E. Flynn of Yonkers, who is seeking re-election in November
to a 10th term in office, says he plans to campaign in the remaining weeks
before Election Day as he always has, by concentrating on appearances before
organized groups.

Senator Mary B. Goodhue of Mount Kisco, seeking re-election for a fourth
Senatorial term, says she plans to wage an active campaign, going to every
function she can as well as ''out on the streets and door to door.''

The two popular Republicans, who emphasize that they are running on their
records in the Legislature and in serving constituent needs at home, are
regarded by most politicians as the favorites to win over their less-well-known
opponents.

But their principal challengers, two Democrats who have never held public
office, contend they have mounted viable campaigns and one, Mr. Flynn's
Democratic opponent, Patrick R. Sbarra, said he thinks that by Election Day
''I'll have a 50-50 chance of winning.''

Mr. Sbarra, 55 years old, is a businessman and tenant activist from Greenburgh
who has been active in local politics since 1968. His selection by Democrats in
Greenburgh and Mount Pleasant defeated a move by Democratic leaders in Yonkers
to cross-endorse Senator Flynn, who had run with such Democratic endorsement in
1980. The Senator decided not to challenge the Sbarra nomination.

While he has never held public office, Mr. Sbarra pointed out that he has
experience as a district leader who has helped in several political campaigns.
He said that Senator Flynn has not been serving his district well and that he
was not as qualified as Mr. Sbarra is the first time out.

''They say he's good to call if you need your sidewalk fixed,'' Mr. Sbarra said
of his opponent. ''But that's for individuals. He's done nothing for the people,
for tenants, for jobs.''

Mr. Flynn, 72, is proud of his record as a campaigner and a lawmaker. The 35th
Senatorial District he represents, which takes in most of Yonkers, Greenburgh,
Mount Pleasant and the Fleetwood section of Mount Vernon, has more enrolled
Democrats than Republicans.

''I've never run in a Republican district in my life,'' he said proudly. ''I ran
for 10 years in the Bronx, where it was five to one against me,'' he said,
referring to the district's previous lines, which included a portion of the
North Bronx.

A former three-time Yonkers Mayor, the legislator is chairman of the Senate's
Committee on Cities and of its Select Committee on the Disabled and, he said,
has seniority to insure a flow of funds into his district for various projects.

''So far I've had 29 bills signed into law by the Governor this year,'' he said
referring to his legislative record. The legislation included special penalties
for criminals who use bulletproof vests during the commission of a crime, a
tuitiion-awards program for Vietnam veterans and fiscal aid to Yonkers.

Senator Flynn, whose nickname Chippie goes back to his days as a
semiprofessional ball player with the Chippewa Democratic Club of Yonkers, said
confidently that he never changes his campaign style.

''I average 1,000 appearances every single year, not just campaign years,'' he
said. ''So whether its Scouting, the temple, Irish-Americans, Germans, Poles,
I'm there.''

Of Yonkers, his home city and political base, Mr. Flynn said it has almost
200,000 citizens ''and I think I know close to 100,000 by name.''

Of Mr. Sbarra, Mr. Flynn said he met him once briefly at a Getty Square meeting
of the elderly. ''It was for 30 seconds and at night.''

Did he size up Mr. Sbarra?

''No,'' he replied. ''He may. But I haven't. I do what I have to do every day of
the year. I service my people.''

Mr. Sbarra said that as a State Senator he would work to create an agency that
would bring labor-intensive businesses to Yonkers, giving preference to Yonkers
residents for the jobs. He also said he would seek to restore Yonkers as ''a
beautiful city'' by waging a cleanup campaign and using the decaying waterfront
for park sites.

''We want to make it so busineses want to come in and people want to move in and
send their children to school there,'' he said. ''Right now, I know 10 families
who want to move out.''

While his opponent has helped pass legislation to aid Yonkers fiscally, that was
''Band-Aid medicine,'' he charged.

While acknowledging that his opponent has a formidable record in attracting
votes, Mr. Sbarra said he would concentrate on tenants, the elderly and unions.
''There are many Democrats who don't even know he is a Republican,'' he
contends.

Mrs. Goodhue, who is 62 and has served three terms in the Senate and two in the
Assembly, represents the 37th Senatorial Districh, which includes most of
northern Westchester, part of White Plains and all of neighboring Putnam County.

In her last campaign, in 1982, she won nearly three to one over her Democratic
opponent, Michael Timm.

''Hah!'' she scoffed when asked what her campaign was built around.

''Due to the fact that I have not met my opponent nor have I heard the substance
of a single paragraph from him, I don't know what issues he will concentrate
on,'' she said. She herself will be stressing ''the fact that the Legislature
should have cut taxes this year'' but didn't. State surplus funds should be
returned to the taxpayers, she said.

Mrs. Goodhue said she would oppose any attempts by Westchester to increase the
county sales tax ''in my part of the county'' to help Yonkers, Mount Vernon and
New Rochelle. ''I'd like to help those cities, too, but I don't see why it
should be done from the pockets of my constituents,'' she added.

''I, of course, will be running on my own record,'' Mrs. Goodhue said in an
interview. ''I'm Chairman of the Senate Child-Care Committee, and I've been very
active in legislation dealing with day-care centers and also in trying to cut
down on child abuse and in making sentences for child abusers stricter.''

Mrs. Goodhue said she planned ''a very active campaign, I always do.'' In the
district, Republicans outnumber Democrats in enrollment, and she said she has
appointed a coordinator in ''every single town and city.''

Her Democratic opponent, Mr. Murray, is a 46-year-old union bricklayer from
Verplanck and a district leader in that area for 20 years.

Mr. Murray, a member of Local 55 of the Bricklayers and Allied Craftsmen of
Peekskill, said he favors an ''even distribution'' of state aid to school
districts and the reorganization of the State Public Service Commission to
create a ''citizens utility board.''

In the 35th Senatorial District, Mr. Sbarra also has Liberal endorsement while
Mr. Flynn has Conservative endorsement. The Right to Life candidate in the 35th
is Adelaide Donahue.

In the 37th District, Mrs. Goodhue has Conservative endorsement while Patricia
A. Vasta is the Right to Life candidate.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLANDERS;
MORE THAN WAGES MOVE A UNION CHIEF

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 2, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 796 words


DAVID LIVINGSTON of Manhasset likes to refer to the caption on the picture of
the turtle that hangs in his office in Manhattan. ''Consider the turtle,'' it
says. ''He makes no progress until he sticks his neck out.''

Mr. Livingston has been sticking his neck out for a long time. He stuck it out
as a student at Columbia University in the Depression, where he demonstrated
against Hitler, Fascism and war. He stuck his neck out for his fellow workers as
a labor activist in the 30's. He stuck his neck out in the 50's in the McCarthy
era. He stuck it out in the 60's during the civil rights movement and during the
Vietnam War, when he went to Hanoi.

''I don't visualize myself as a person who makes a fetish of sticking his neck
out,'' said the 69-year-old Mr. Livingston. But other people do, and apparently
they like it.

For the past 31 years, Mr. Livingston has been the president of what is now
known as District 65, the United Automobile Workers union. But before anyone
conjures up visions of an assembly line pushing out auto bodies, it should be
known that District 65 does not fit into any geographical district and its
members are not easily classifiable.

District 65 has offices from New York to California, with stops in between in
places from Vineland, N.J., to Suffolk, Va., and Phoenix, Ariz., among others.
And the 45,000 to 50,000 workers include everyone from shipping and stock clerks
to lawyers and journalists.

How does one get such a varied work force?

Mr. Livingston said that, in many instances, the members ''wanted to be in a
union in which they felt comfortable in the fight for other things besides
wages, hours and working conditions.'' He added: ''They were attracted by the
extraordinary reputation of our union in the struggle for civil rights and the
Vietnam War. That's what they thought a union should be about, about the kind of
humanist issues they were concerned with, not just wages and hours.''

In fact, Mr. Livingston said, District 65 has been formally affiliated with the
U.A.W. only since 1981, although it has been in existence for 50 years and
traces its roots to a union for textile and garment industry workers.

''I don't know whether you can say my views shape the views of the union, or
whether you can say my views reflect the views of the members,'' Mr. Livingston
said. ''Really, both things are true.''

He noted, for example, that while he was inclined to accept an invitation from
the Vietnamese labor movement during the Vietnam War - on the theory that ''if
we could make even a minuscule contribution to the achievement of peace, then it
was worth doing'' - he first consulted with the union's stewards.

He recalled: ''I said, 'I will not go as a private individual; I will go as a
representative of the union if you want me to go.' They voted for me to go.''
Leaders of other unions, who went without first informing their membership,
later suffered for their action.

''At every occasion where we took what appeared to be unpopular and even
dangerous positions, it was always done in accordance with the members,'' Mr.
Livingston maintained. ''It's one of the reasons our leadership has never been
successfully attacked. Whatever I've done, I've always had the full support of
the membership.''

Mr. Livingston did not start out to become a labor leader. A career in law was
what he had in mind. ''I guess my vision of lawyers was you became a champion of
causes,'' he said. He graduated from New Utrecht High School in his native
Brooklyn and entered Columbia in 1931. ''I think I spent more time at college in
the struggle against fascism and war than almost any other subject,'' he said.

In the end, he said, his activities cost him a scholarship to law school. He
left Columbia in 1934, and although the scholarship decision was later reversed,
he turned the scholarship down. He was already working as a shipping clerk in
the textile industry and deeply immersed in union organizing efforts.

He still loves the law, however. ''I'm a recognized practicing Philadelphia
lawyer,'' he noted wryly, adding, with pride, that one of his three children by
two marriages is also a lawyer - a labor lawyer, in fact.

From almost the time he left college, Mr. Livingston was a full-time union
worker. His pay was $14 a week, comprising 50 cent contributions from fellow
shipping clerks.

Though he is not happy with the attitude of the Reagan Administration toward
labor, Mr. Livingston remains optimistic about the future of the labor movement.

''We think the democratic process is like an art. It's not easily
accomplished,'' he said. ''We have devoted our lives to developing means to make
democracy work. It's a hard thing to do, but we have done it. That's why people
love our union.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of David Livingston

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NUTS-AND-BOLTS DIPLOMAT

BYLINE: By Robert Manning

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words


Robert Manning, editor in chief of Boston Publishing Company, was an Assistant
Secretary of State from 1962 to 1964.  THE RIGHT HAND OF POWER

By U. Alexis Johnson with Jef Olivarius McAllister.  Prentice-Hall. $24.95.

Ural A. Johnson, born in the small town of Falun, Kan., was named by his mother
for the mountain range she read about in a geography book. He altered his name
to U. Alexis Johnson when he entered the United States Foreign Service in 1935
because one of his teachers suggested that it would ''ring more impressively''
in the corridors of the State Department. He went on to a career in his
country's diplomatic service that included ambassadorships to Czechoslovakia,
Thailand and Japan, more than one close brush with death in Saigon, and a seat
at some of the world's most important negotiating tables. By the 1960's he had
become, as Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, the top career
man in the Department, the man who knew how that air-conditioned rabbit warren
in Foggy Bottom worked - and why occasionally it didn't. He was also the
Department's liaison with the top levels of the Central Intelligence Agency and
the Pentagon, a function that acquainted him with decisions and machinations
known only to a few.

Some who worked with Mr. Johnson, as I did in the Kennedy years, remember him as
a dedicated, hard-working public servant, stubborn, cautious, taciturn, a figure
frequently seated behind the potted palm. Only grudgingly would he divulge even
the time of day to an associate lacking a high security clearance.

Retirement after 42 years of devotion to duty has loosened Mr. Johnson's tongue.
With the help of Jef McAllister, a former correspondent for Time magazine, he
has composed in the form of memoirs a useful handbook of many State Department
operations in the 1950's, 60's and 70's; a diligent salute to the too frequently
maligned and too little understood Foreign Service, and some insights into how
professional diplomats strive to do their job in our jungle on the Potomac.

Mr. Johnson lets loose some pent-up animadversions. He has little use for such
political appointees to diplomatic posts as Chester Bowles or John Kenneth
Galbraith. He finds George Kennan ''an unusually subtle and profound thinker . .
. (but) an indifferent diplomat.'' Like so many career diplomats, he holds
mainly derogatory views of the press - it is a nuisance. He resents
Congressional meddling in foreign affairs. When he served as Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs under President Nixon he was appalled by Henry
Kissinger, whom he portrays here as a moral cripple lusting for power.

For all this unaccustomed loquacity, when it comes to substance the author is
the same old U. Alexis Johnson. No secrets or titillating revelations are
deliberately offered in these pages. In his own telling he comes across not as
an architect of foreign policy but a mechanic; a valuable man to have had around
because he knew how to fit the nuts to the bolts and keep the engine room
running while those on the upper decks sipped the good wine, charted the course
and got the headlines. He was, he says with inordinate frequency, widely
regarded as a man who could ''get things done.'' Because of that talent he was
chosen by a succession of Presidents and Secretaries of State for assignments of
considerable complexity. He served for three trying years as Eisenhower's
negotiator with the Chinese Communists, sat in the small executive committee
that served Kennedy during the Cuban missile crisis and spent four years under
Nixon as a negotiator with the Russians on limiting strategic arms.

There is one interlude in ''The Right Hand of Power'' that is surprising, even
disturbing. Mr. Johnson tells of his role high up in Washington's sectlike
intelligence community as the State Department's member of several secret groups
that debated and passed on major intelligence initiatives, including covert
activities against foreign governments or persons. One of those bodies was the
so-called Special Group (Augmented), set up in 1961 because President Kennedy
and his brother Robert were determined to topple Fidel Castro from power in
Cuba. The program for achieving that objective was called Operation Mongoose.
''The Special Group (Augmented) never discussed assassinating Castro,'' Mr.
Johnson writes, ''and I never had knowledge of any plan for doing so.'' Three
pages later he says, ''All programs originated by C.I.A. or proposed by other
agencies were carefully staffed and considered by the Committee.'' How does one
account for these statements from such a high-ranking official in the light of
the disclosures from hearings before Senator Frank Church's Select Committee on
Intelligence and other inquiries into the Government's efforts to rid this
planet of Fidel Castro? What do they betray about communication within the high
levels of government?


PERHAPS Mr. Johnson was absent from the special group's meeting on Aug. 10,
1962, when the Cuban missile crisis was brewing and Secretary of Defense Robert
McNamara raised, albeit ever so hypothetically, the notion that the Castro
problem might be solved by having the fellow killed. Did the C.I.A. not make him
privy to the Aug. 13, 1962 memorandum by Edward Lansdale, who ran Mongoose,
requesting from a subordinate proposals for ''liquidation of (Cuban) leaders''?
Was he not told of, or has he forgotten, the many cockamamie schemes, beginning
in the Eisenhower Administration and continuing well into Kennedy's, for
eliminating Castro - a poisoned diving suit, an exploding sea shell, a box of
cigars impregnated with some death-dealing agent, not to mention the C.I.A.'s
enlistment of Mafia figures to take the contract?

Since ''The Right Hand of Power'' is exceedingly - I would say excessively -
respectful of the roles of the C.I.A. and the Pentagon in American foreign
policy, the book's treatment of the Castro case may reveal more about the darker
side of government than the author intended. It would not be the first time -
and very likely not the last - that the intelligence community made mockery of
the liaison function and the so-called ''oversight'' process. Another possible
explanation - and this is purely speculative and probably charitable - is that
Alexis Johnson found the Castro assassination proposals so stupid, so
incredible, that he could not attribute them to a Government he had served
faithfully for more than four decades. B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 24, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE AN ISSUE IN CAROLINA RACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 549 words

DATELINE: RALEIGH, N.C., Sept. 23


Senator Jesse Helms and Gov. James B. Hunt Jr., exchanged caustic attacks
tonight in the third debate of their heated campaign for the United States
Senate.

Mr. Helms, a Republican, tried persistently to link Mr. Hunt to Walter F.
Mondale, the Democratic Presidential nominee, who trails President Reagan in the
state by nearly 2 to 1, according to recent polls. Mr. Hunt, a Democrat, sought
to put some distance between himself and Mr. Mondale on the issue of taxes,
saying he favored closing loopholes but opposed the tax increase proposed by Mr.
Mondale.

Mr. Helms has a narrow lead over Mr. Hunt of four percentage points, according
to a Gallup Poll published last week.

Attacks Over Service

The sharpest personal exchange came in a discussion of benefits for veterans.
Mr. Hunt charged that the Senator Helms had once termed them ''welfare,'' and
Mr. Helms replied that he had the support of the Veterans of Foreign Wars.

''What war did you serve in, Governor?'' asked Mr. Helms, who was a public
information officer in the Navy, assigned along the North Carolina coast in
World War II.

''I don't like you challenging my patriotism,'' Mr. Hunt responded, pointing out
that he was too young to have been called into the military in the Korean War
and too old to be drafted in the Vietnam War. Mr. Hunt was born in 1937.

Mr. Helms called on Mr. Hunt to agree to have a special prosecutor investigate
the Governor's use of state aircraft and automobiles in travel for political
purposes. The Hunt campaign agreed Friday to pay the state government $186,000
for travel expenses, which the Governor's office said had been underbilled.

''You're grandstanding here tonight,'' Mr. Hunt told the Senator. And when Mr.
Hunt said a special prosecutor was not necessary, Mr. Helms retorted, ''What
else do you have to hide, Governor?''

Contributions Challenged

Mr. Hunt, meanwhile, noted that the state Democratic Party last week filed a
complaint with the Federal Election Commission, charging that the Helms campaign
had benefited from illegal contributions and services by the National
Congressional Club, a political action committee, and Jefferson Marketing Inc.,
an advertising concern, both of which are controlled by aides to Mr. Helms. Mr.
Hunt said that if Mr. Helms would agree to a special prosecutor to investigate
the contributions, ''I will agree to anything else.''

''We'll see about that,'' Mr. Helms said.

Throughout the debate, the Senator called Mr. Hunt a ''Mondale liberal.''

''Like Walter Mondale,'' Mr. Helms said in a rhetorical thrust at Mr. Hunt, ''he
would return us to the days of tax and spend.''

Mr. Hunt told Mr. Helms that, if anyone took the words ''Mondale liberal'' out
of the Senator's mouth, ''you'd be left speechless.''

Mr. Hunt described himself as part of a ''new generation of Democrats that we
know here in the South.'' The Governor mentioned Mr. Mondale's plan to increase
taxes and asserted, ''I'll vote against him on that.'' Rather than a general tax
increase, Mr. Hunt said he would work to close loopholes and tax advantages for
oil companies and other corporate interests that he said Mr. Helms had
supported.

The debate, which was broadcast statewide, took place at WSOC-TV in Charlotte.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TERRORISTS 'HUMILIATE US,' MONDALE SAYS

BYLINE: By FAY S. JOYCE

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 989 words

DATELINE: TEXARKANA, Tex., Sept. 24


Walter F. Mondale, sharply stepping up his cricitism, acccused President Reagan
today of letting terrorists in Lebanon ''humiliate us and push us around and
kill our people.''

The Democratic Presidential nominee also said Mr. Reagan had ''changed his
spots'' with his address to the United Nations today when he proposed periodic
consultations with the Soviet Union on regional problems.

''For four years he talked like Curtis LeMay,'' Mr. Mondale commented, referring
to the former Air Force chief of staff who once suggested bombing Vietnam back
to the Stone Age. ''This morning he tried to talk like Walter Mondale. What are
we to believe?''

The line drew chuckles from a generally quiet crowd of 1,500 gathered in a
downtown street of this city that straddles the Texas-Arkansas border. Both the
onlookers - there were no hecklers on hand - and Mr. Mondale grew serious as the
candidate, standing before a backdrop of American flags, sought to ascribe
responsibility for the bombing of the United States Embassy in Lebanon to Mr.
Reagan, much as Mr. Reagan succeeding in tying President Carter to the hostage
crisis in Iran four years ago.

In a speech in Houston, Mr. Mondale said the State Department's plan to seek
more money for protecting United States embassies was partly meant ''to cover
up'' an ''atrocious abdication of leadership'' in Lebanon.

Reagan's Remark on Remodeling

At a rally here Mr. Mondale accused the President of failing to heed warnings of
danger to Americans in Beirut. He asserted that Mr. Reagan was not up to the
task of protecting the embassy, citing the President's likening of the job of
completing security arrangements at the new embassy building near Beirut to
remodeling a kitchen.

''Even though there had been three bombings, even though the State Department
had recommended that steps be taken, even though last week the State Department
warned that protection was inadequate, even though terrorists had publicly
threatened and warned they were going to attack, there were still no guard gates
at the Embassy,'' the former Vice President said.

''The earth and steel reinforcements were incomplete and 80 marines who are
specifically trained and armed to protect our people had been withdrawn.''

Mr. Mondale noted that on Sunday, ''Our Commander in Chief had a chance to show
us what he means by taking responsibility,'' adding: ''He had a chance to tell
the American people why security was indadequate and why he's letting these
terrorists humiliate us and push us around and kill our people. What was his
answer?''

''Let me quote,'' he continued. '' 'Anyone that's ever had their kitchen done
over knows that it never gets done as soon as you wish it would.' ''

Laughter in the Crowd

As people in the crowd laughed mockingly, Mr. Mondale remarked: ''That's the
problem right there. Being President and countering terrorists is a much more
difficult task than fixing up the kitchen.''

Mr. Mondale also sought to raise expectations about the President's meeting
Friday with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko of the Soviet Union. He called on
Mr. Reagan to announce plans for a summit meeting at that time.

Questioning Mr. Reagan's new, more conciliatory attitude toward the Soviet Union
and arms control, Mr. Mondale asked: ''Why this change 42 days before the
election? Has he really been born again?''

He praised Mr. Reagan's speech to the United Nations but said his remarks should
have come six weeks after he took office, not six weeks before the election.

Comments in Houston

Mr. Mondale came to Texas to raise money for state and local Democratic parties
as well as to campaign. In Houston he addressed an exuberant student audience at
the predominantly black Texas Southern University, where he drew cheers and a
standing ovation by promising to award Federal grants to black colleges.

Mickey Leland, a black Congressman, warmly introduced Mr. Mondale. When a large
Mondale banner slid from the wall and fluttered to the floor he declared,
''We're not going to let this man down.''

Also in Houston Mr. Mondale said the State Department's plan to request $371.6
million to improve the security of United States embassies was designed in part
''to cover up the fact that there was an atrocious abdication of leadership'' in
Lebanon. ''Congress appropriated a substantial amount of money already to do
just what was not done in Lebanon,'' said Mr. Mondale. ''I don't think the money
had been used; it certainly was not used efficiently.''

''Mistakes can happen,'' he said, but he said the President had received notice
of the danger, to which he failed to respond adequately.

Polls in the state show Mr. Mondale, liberal by Texas standards, far behind Mr.
Reagan. Representative Sam B. Hall Jr., a Texas Congressman who greeted him,
told reporters his party's nominee was ''not making a whole lot'' of headway
against Mr. Reagan.

But the state party chairman, Bob Slagle, recalled, ''Polls showed we had no
chance of electing Mark White,'' who won the governorship in 1982. He said the
Democrats are working to duplicate the record turnout, especially among black
and Hispanic voters, of that election.





Bush Rejects Mondale Plan




MARION, Ill., Sept. 24 - Vice President Bush said today he was ''hopeful'' that
Mr. Gromyko would accept a proposal from Mr. Reagan for annual meetings at the
Cabinet level between the two nations.

At an airport news conference after his arrival in Illinois, Mr. Bush said the
Administration did not agree with Mr. Mondale's proposal for annual summit
meetings between the countries' leaders, but believed rather in ''taking one
step at a time to formalize the relationship at the Cabinet level - Mondale's
talking about something very different.''

Mr. Gromyko is to meet with Mr. Mondale in New York Thursday.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Walter Mondale

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE REJECTS CBS MOTION TO END WESTMORELAND SUIT

BYLINE: By ARNOLD H. LUBASCH

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 773 words


A Federal judge refused yesterday to dismiss the $120 million libel suit that
Gen. William C. Westmoreland filed against CBS concerning a television
documentary about the Vietnam War.

The decision, by Judge Pierre N. Leval, clears the way for the trial to begin
Oct. 9 in Federal District Court in Manhattan. The judge said he was ruling only
that there were sufficient questions to require a trial.

General Westmoreland contended that the CBS documentary falsely accused him of
having distorted information about the size of enemy forces in Vietnam. CBS
defended the documentary and moved for dismissal of the suit on First Amendment
grounds.

The general's lawyer, Dan M. Burt, said the judge's refusal to dismiss the case
was ''a victory for responsible journalism,'' showing that ''even the largest
media network in the world'' could be ''held accountable in an American court of
law.''

Katherine R. Flickinger, assistant general counsel of CBS Inc., said the network
was disappointed, but declined to comment on a possible appeal. She said the
case involved ''important First Amendment interests.''

In the 22-page decision, Judge Leval wrote, ''CBS contends it enjoys absolute
immunity dictated by the First Amendment from a libel action brought by a high
public official challenging commentary on his performance of the duties of his
office.''

''It is undisputed since the historic ruling of the Supreme Court in New York
Times v. Sullivan (1964),'' Judge Leval wrote, ''that the press enjoys a
qualified immunity for such commentary on public officials.''



'Novel Contentions'

In that case, the Court threw out a $500,000 judgment in favor of L. B.
Sullivan, the former Police Commissioner of Montgomery, Ala. The Court, citing a
need for vigorous debate about public issues, barred a public figure from
recovering libel damages from a news organization unless he or she proved malice
- that is, that the organization knew its report was false or showed reckless
disregard for its truth.

''CBS urges the court to go further,'' Judge Leval said, ''and, as to high-
ranking officials, make the immunity absolute. CBS concedes there is no
precedent giving direct support to its contentions.''

Judge Leval said he considered it ''inappropriate to rule in advance of trial on
these novel contentions.''

The judge said CBS had also argued for summary dismissal on the ground that the
1982 documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' involved
expressions of opinion that are protected by the First Amendment.

''The principal bulk of defendants' voluminous briefs is dedicated to the point
that summary judgment should be granted because what was stated in the
documentary was true,'' he said. ''To this contention, it is sufficient to
answer that plaintiff proffers evidence to the contrary. I express no views on
the persuasiveness of the proofs offered by either side. Summary judgment must
be denied if there is conflicting evidence on any substantial issue.''

Proof of Malice


Judge Leval said ''the most forceful branch'' of the dismissal motion by CBS was
the contention that General Westmoreland had failed to offer the proof of malice
required of public figures in libel cases. Judge Leval noted that he was
referring to this as ''constitutional malice'' to reduce confusion with other
definitions of malice.

The judge said CBS contended the accusations in the documentary were ''supported
by so extensive and lengthy an investigation and by so many apparently reliable
sources that defendants cannot be found to have published with constitutional
malice.''

''Plaintiff argues,'' he continued, ''that, notwithstanding the duration and
bulk of CBS's investigation, it was biased and inadequate. He contends the
selection of interviewees, the framing of questions and the handling of
witnesses were designed to confirm a hostile premise rather than to find the
truth.''

Judge Leval said the general also accused CBS of ''dishonesty and willful
falsity in the editing and presentation of evidence'' in the documentary.

''Although a reporter may have sufficient evidence of his charge to foreclose
any material issue of constitutional malice for its publication,'' the judge
said, ''he may nonetheless make himself liable if he knowingly or recklessly
misstates that evidence to make it seem more convincing or condemnatory than it
is.''

Judge Leval ruled that General Westmoreland had cited examples in the CBS
documentary that ''sufficiently raise triable questions of knowing or reckless
falsity to foreclose summary judgment on the issue of constitutional malice.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 25, 1984 International

President Reagan urged Moscow to join Washington to bring about ''a better
working relationship'' and proposed the establishment of a new American-Soviet
negotiating ''framework'' to chart a course of arms control talks for the next
20 years. Mr. Reagan addressed the 39th session of the United Nations General
Assembly. (Page A1, Columns 4-6.)

Democrats accused the President of making light of the bombing last week of the
United States Embassy in Lebanon. The Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill
Jr., said it was ''ridiculous'' for Mr. Reagan to liken the incomplete security
measures at the embassy to the typical delays in a kitchen remodeling. (A1:1-2.)


Walter F. Mondale, stepping up his criticism, accused President Reagan of
letting terrorists in Lebanon ''humiliate us and push us around and kill our
people.'' The Democratic Presidential nominee also said Mr. Reagan ''changed his
spots'' with his address to the United Nations when he proposed periodic
consultations with the Kremlin. (A20:1-3.)

Lax American security practices contributed to the three bombings of United
States installations in the Beirut area in 17 months, in the view of Western
security officials, diplomats and others. (A3:1-3.) National

Lower gasoline prices are likely to result from a proposed antitrust settlement
involving 13 major oil companies, according to some industry experts. Under the
accords, more than 50,000 independent service station operators could sell any
brand of gasoline they choose, even though their signs and franchise agreements
identify them with one brand. The agreements would let dealers shop for the
cheapest gasoline. (A1:3.)

James A. Michener is giving Swarthmore College the $2,000 he received as a
scholarship to attend the liberal arts college in the late 1920's - along with
$1,998,000 in interest. The 77- year-old Pulitzer Prize-winning author said he
always regarded the scholarship as ''a loan.'' (A1:3-5.)

Florida barred the harvesting of citrus fruit, even in groves that state agents
have just certified disease- free. The new move in efforts to contain the highly
contagious citrus canker was expected to limit severely, if not halt, the
shipping of fresh citrus fruit from the state over the next few weeks.
(A18:1-2.)

South African holdings are being divested by an increasing number of cities and
states to protest that country's official policy of racial separation. Four
major American cities, including New York, and five states, have instituted
divestment policies, and support for Federal legislation for such divestment is
increasing in Congress. (A1:6.)

Farmers could employ illegal aliens three years longer than other employers
before discontinuing the practice under a proposal accepted by House and Senate
conferees as they neared final agreement on a comprehensive immigration bill.
(A18:1-4.)

The goal of machine vision has eluded scientists. After two decades of research,
they have yet to teach machines the seemingly simple act of being able to
recognize everday objects and to distinguish one from another. The failure has
generated a profound new respect for the sophistication of human sight.
(C1:3-4.)

Water is being collected from clouds with a new apparatus in the first
large-scale scientific survey of the chemistry of cloud moisture, its effects on
plants and its relationship to acid rain. The nationwide project is expected to
provide new insights into the role that clouds, fog and dew play in the
destruction of plant life and fish. (C1:2-3.)

A hormone called relaxin that has been a puzzle to medical science for half a
century now shows promise for several important uses, including aid to difficult
pregnancy and birth, and may even hold a clue to the origin of the human
species. (C1:1.) Metropolitan

The State Police Academy was upheld by a Federal judge against an accusation of
bias. The judge, James T. Foley, rejected a charge by the United States Justice
Department that the academy discriminated against minority recruits in its 1981
class, in which black and Hispanic recruits dropped out at much higher rates
than whites. (A1:1-3.)

William C. Westmoreland was upheld by a Federal judge. The justice, District
Judge Pierre N. Leval, refused to dismiss a $120 million libel suit that General
Westmoreland filed against CBS concerning a TV documentary on the Vietnam War.
(B3:5-6.)

A writer was beaten to death in his Queens apartment by a drifter conspiring
with the writer's adopted son, according to the police. The victim, Paul T.
Rogers, won the 1982 Editors' Book Award for his first novel about the squalid
life of Times Square hustlers. He had dedicated the novel to his adopted son,
Chris. (B3:1-3.)

Bill Green and Andrew J. Stein, his Democratic opponent, challenged each other's
qualifications in their first debate. The contest between Representative Green,
a Republican, and Mr. Stein, the Manhattan Borough President, for Mr. Green's
House seat is expected to be one of the most hotly contested and expensive
Congressional races. (B1:1-5.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. EMBARKS ON $100 MILLION STUDY OF AGENT ORANGE

BYLINE: By RICHARD D. LYONS

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1505 words


After years of bureaucratic bickering, Federal health agencies are finally
embarking on a full-scale, collaborative investigation of the health effects of
exposure to Agent Orange. The studies, which will go on for at least a decade,
may prove to be one of the largest medical research projects ever undertaken by
the Government.

Eight Federal groups are now engaged in the project, which is aimed at answering
three basic questions: Have some of the several million American veterans of the
Vietnam War been maimed by the 50,000 tons of the defoliant that was sprayed on
the forests to deprive the enemy of cover? If so, who are they and how can they
be helped?

''This is a formidable task,'' said Dr. Peter M. Layde, a researcher at the
Federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta who is directing the medical
studies. ''And I really mean formidable.''

New buildings to house the staff, scientific instruments and computers of the
$100 million Agent Orange Project are being constructed in the Atlanta suburb of
Chamblee near the old Lawson General Naval Hospital.

Many of the project specialists have been working nights and weekends to make up
for lost time, perhaps in response to several years of complaints from veterans'
groups that studies lacked direction and were taking too long to get started.

This new sense of urgency is underscored by the growing number of Vietnam-era
servicemen receiving treatment in Veterans Administration hospitals for physical
and psychological problems that they contend are related to their exposure to
the herbicide. More than 100,000 veterans have already received some form of
treatment.

Psychologists who have studied veterans exposed to Agent Orange say there is no
doubt that, for some veterans, the very idea that they might have been
physically harmed by the herbicide has helped cause depression, paranoia and
anxiety.

But scientific proof that the toxins in Agent Orange can kill or grossly maim
those exposed to it has remained lacking.

The first two studies of the possibilities of physical harm, which began before
the main project got under way, seem to have found no major physical problems
among either the vterans or their children. Yet the word ''seem'' is the
qualification on which all Agent Orange reports hinge, and the 50 or so studies
being conducted within the main project are seeking to erase it.

But even this intensity of investigation cannot be expected to produce answers
fast enough to satisfy critics of the agonizingly slow process. Indeed, some of
the answers may not come until the turn of the century.

As part of the new studies physical examinations will be given to 10,000 former
servicemen, and inquiries will be made into the health of a different group of
Vietnam veterans several times that size.

Individual service records will be examined along with company morning reports
that were kept on many of the 2.8 million Americans who served in Vietnam.

Another study is seeking out 600 pairs of identical twins. The idea is to find
one twin who was exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam and another who was not, a
method that researchers hope will prove to be the most sophisticated means of
documenting harm if it does exist.

Yet even if scientific answers are presented, they are likely to be challenged
as still not being definitive, as was the case in the birth defects study.
Spokesmen for several veterans' groups, while acknowledging the competence of
the researchers, charged that the findings were ambiguous and that the best that
could be said about the study was that further investigation was needed.

Dr. Barclay M. Shepard, director of Agent Orange studies for the Veterans
Administration in Washington, said, ''A lot of veterans are scared because of
early news reports of physical damage, while some among any large number of
people are going to have health problems as a matter of natural incidence.''

''Put that together with disillusionment over the Vietnam War and anger with the
Government,'' he said, ''and there is little wonder that many veterans truly
believe that they have in some way been hurt. But the evidence has not supported
a cause and effect relationship.''

Central to the controversy is the knowledge that the herbicides 2,4-D and
2,4,5-T, which were blended to make Agent Orange, were contaminated in the
manufacturing process by small amounts of dioxin, a highly toxic chemical.

Maddening to many of the scientific investigators is the very elusive nature of
the many questions they are trying to answer as well as the lack of unanimity in
the findings already in.

''Studying the dioxin molecule is difficult, puzzling, even infuriating,'' Dr.
Shepard said.

Dr. Shepard likened the studies to ''fitting together the pieces of a huge
jigsaw puzzle, a puzzle that is going to take years to completely solve because
of its complexities and seeming contradictions.''

For example, one group of Swedish scientists has concluded from studies of
industrial and agricultural workers who had been exposed to herbicides
containing dioxin that it has a latency period of 15 to 20 years, meaning that
harmful effects are produced many years from exposure.

However, their conclusion has been challenged by other groups of scientists as
based on scientifically flawed methods of investigation.

Another report by Italian scientists who studied the broad exposure of
townspeople in the city of Seveso after a chemical explosion there eight years
ago, concluded that dioxin did not seem to be as harmful to people as had been
feared.

Scores of animals died as a result of their exposure to dioxin there, and dozens
of people became ill, but it has been impossible to conclude that anyone died as
a result of dioxin poisoning. This has led scientists to speculate that the
highly toxic chemical might be ''species specific,'' that is harmful to some
species of birds and animals but not to all species, including humans. Previous
studies have proved that dioxin can cause cancer and birth defects in animals.

The reports from Sweden and Italy, one suggesting that the problem is more
serious than at first believed and the other suggesting the exact opposite,
illustrate the confusion and conflicting evidence that confront the researchers
as the series of Federal investigations gets under way.

''This is the reason we're seeking answers,'' said the Dr. Vernon N. Houk,
director of the Center for Environmental Health at the Centers for Disease
Control. He added that the complexities of the research would account for the
length of time spent.

The results of some of the studies are 10 to 15 years away, which accounts in
part for the restlessness and uneasiness expressed by some of the veterans'
groups.

For more than a decade many Vietnam veterans have maintained an almost constant
drumbeat of demands for more money for Agent Orange research and medical help
for former servicemen who believe they have been injured by dioxin.

As a result, Congress has appropriated about $75 million for Agent Orange
studies and it is likely this amount will rise substantially by the time all the
projects are completed.

While not part of the scientific studies, almost 150,000 veterans have already
been examined as part of an Agent Orange Registry program, which was started by
the Veterans Administration in 1978.

The larger studies that have either started or are about to start at the Centers
for Disease Control will focus on 30,000 Vietnam veterans, divided into five
groupings of 6,000 men each for statistical purposes.

A staggering amount of detail about the rank, age, military unit, health, race,
marital status and other facts will be analyzed to seek clues that might link
exposure to Agent Orange to harm in some group.

In addition to the birth defects study, the Air Force earlier this year made
public results of its studies of almost 2,000 airmen who handled Agent Orange,
either as ground crewmen who loaded the herbicide onto planes or as aviators who
flew the missions that dropped the chemicals.

As with the birth defects investigation, the health studies of those who took
part in Operation Ranchhand, as the defoliation work was code-named, could not
connect exposure to large numbers of physical abnormalities.

Yet researchers did find an increase in psychological disturbances. A study
conducted at the University of Minnesota by Dr. Gregory P. Korgeski and Dr.
Gloria R. Leon found the uncertainties of Agent Orange exposure produced
psychological problems akin to those of survivors of atomic explosions.

''We have a group of people in our society who may have been exposed to a deadly
toxin which still may be in their bodies, thus they consider themselves rightly
or wrongly to be walking time bombs to some extent,'' Dr. Korgeski said.

''These veterans not only have a right to be scared, if they have any sanity at
all they should be scared,'' Dr. Korgeski added.

This is the nub of the scientific studies - to allay such fears, if possible.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 26, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE TENTATIVELY APPROVES PACT ON AGENT ORANGE

BYLINE: By JOSEPH P. FRIED

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 610 words


A Federal judge in Brooklyn yesterday tentatively approved a settlement under
which seven manufacturers of Agent Orange had agreed to create a $180 million
fund for Vietnam War veterans and their families who contended that the
herbicide had harmed them.

The judge, Jack B. Weinstein, said his final decision on the proposed accord
would have to await development of a plan for distributing the money and
evaluating injury claims.

He made various suggestions for such a plan, saying ''ease of proof should be
stressed'' in handling claims to be made on the fund by veterans and their wives
and children.

''Compassion - not scientific proof - would be the underlying principle of such
a program,'' he said. ''Many veterans - and particularly their widows and
children - may have difficulty in authenticating claims.''

Approval 'Subject to Hearings'


Judge Weinstein also said in his 456- page ruling that his tentative approval
was ''subject to hearings'' on how much of the settlement fund should go to
lawyers representing veterans and their families in the litigation.

About 1,000 lawyers around the country are estimated to have been involved over
the last five years. They are said to have submitted fee and expense claims
totaling about $25 million. The first of the legal-fee hearings was scheduled
for today in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, where Judge Weinstein is the
chief judge.

The judge also said that representatives of veterans and their families in the
class-action suit had until Nov. 21 to file a proposed plan for administering
the settlement fund, and that hearings on the proposal would be held next March.
''Until such a distribution plan is developed and hearings are held, a final
order approving or disapproving of the settlement is not appropriate,'' he said.

According to Kenneth R. Feinberg, a lawyer named by the judge as a special court
master to help develop a plan, about 35,000 people so far have filed claims of
harm stemming from use of Agent Orange in the Vietnam War. It was used to
defoliate jungle and roadside areas considered helpful to the enemy.

Cancer and Illnesses Charged


The seven chemical companies that agreed last May to create the fund said they
continued to believe that Agent Orange was not responsible for the harm the
veterans blamed on it, including cancer and other illnesses in the veterans and
miscarriages by their wives and birth defects in their children. The companies,
including Dow Chemical and Monsanto, said they had settled, among other reasons,
to avoid years of continued litigation.

Judge Weinstein said in his ruling that ''sufficient evidence'' had ''thus far
not been produced'' to support a finding that exposure to Agent Orange as
occurred in Vietnam could cause the claimed ill effects.

The companies that made Agent Orange, and the wives and children of veterans,
also have suits pending against the United States Government, which is not a
party to the settlement. The companies hold that they made the product in strict
compliance with Government specifications and that the Government should
reimburse them for the $180 million.

The Veterans Administration has said the scientific data linking the defoliant
with particular diseases was far from conclusive. Judge Weinstein held yesterday
that ''evidence strongly suggests'' that even before Agent Orange's use in
Vietnam, ''many in the Government were aware of possible dangers in the
herbicide spraying program.''

Dean St. Dennis, a spokesman for the Justice Department, which is representing
the Government, said his agency had no comment on the judge's statement.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 27, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Justice in the Dark The judges who set administrative policy for the Federal
judiciary find that the public benefits of televising trials are merely
''alleged'' and ''outweighed by the risks to the administration of justice.''
And with that swift conclusion, the Judicial Conference of the United States,
headed by Chief Justice Warren Burger, dismissed a serious proposal from two
dozen news organizations - including The Times - for a change in the rules.

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 345 words


A ban on courtroom photography no longer belongs in any code of judicial ethics,
if it ever did. Half a century ago, in the wake of the raucously reported
Lindbergh kidnapping trial, the American Bar Association added such a rule to
its canons. The idea was carried forward in the A.B.A.'s 1972 code revision and
adopted by the Judicial Conference without much examination. Since then the
A.B.A. itself has repudiated the undiscriminating rule against cameras.

The new report of the Judicial Conference, however, bars even experiments with
photographic coverage, and even where both sides in a trial give consent. It
speaks of ''potential'' adverse psychological effects on jurors, lawyers and
presiding judges. It simply assumes effects on courtroom behavior that range
''from encouraging histrionics to inhibition'' and worries about ''a great
potential for miseducation and presentation of distorted images.'' But the
report offers only meager support for those conclusions. It ignores the
experience in 41 states, which suggests that cameras in court can often enhance
justice and increase public understanding.

The conference's position is particularly untimely because just last week Judge
Pierre Leval in Manhattan's Federal court delivered a thoughtful opinion arguing
for a rule change. In Gen. William Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS News,
the judge agreed with both sides that cameras wouldn't hurt and might help.

The lawsuit tests whether the network maliciously accused the general of
conspiring to falsify intelligence reports about the Vietnam War. It raises
issues of military and media responsibility that concern the public no less than
the opposing parties. The case offers a powerful argument for changing the rule,
or at least a special exception.

In Judge Leval's opinion, relaxing the rule would be in the judiciary's own
interest, since television could show ''how painstakingly and how fairly Federal
judges conduct court business.'' How unfortunate that the Judicial Conference is
unwilling even to test that proposition.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 354 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 28, 1984 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'THE WILD LIFE' OPENS

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Weekend Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 636 words


''THE WILD LIFE,'' which opens today at the Eastside Cinema and other theaters,
is something like a sequel to ''Fast Times at Ridgemont High.'' The characters
are different, but the perspective on teen-age Americana, West Coast-style, is
very much the same.

This time around, though, the material is less funny. Some of that is
attributable to a director, Art Linson, with a heavier hand than that of Amy
Heckerling, who gave the first film its sprightly, offbeat style. Then there's
the fact that comically reckless teen- age characters inevitably seem a little
sadder once they're out of high school.

Also, the new film doesn't so much follow ''Fast Times'' as repeat it. Cameron
Crowe, who masqueraded as a high school student to write the book on which the
first film was based, and who wrote the screenplay for ''The Wild Life,'' has
come up with some promising new possibilities here, like a tough-as-nails 15-
year-old boy (Ilan Mitchell-Smith) who's obsessed with Vietnam, and his
straight-laced older brother (Eric Stoltz), who leaves the bosom of his family
to move into a singles complex replete with doctors and stewardesses. But too
much of the material seems familiar, almost deliberately so. The filmmakers have
even recruited Christopher Penn, Sean's younger brother (who was so good in
''All the Right Moves'' and ''Footloose''), dyed his hair blond, and cast him in
something very like his brother's role as a stoned surfer in ''Fast Times.''

As Tom Drake, a wrestler rather than a surfer, Mr. Penn does a fine job of
playing the consummate slob. But neither he nor much else about ''The Wild
Life'' gets past the earlier film's shadow. Lea Thompson is appealing as the old
flame who's been jilted by Bill Conrad (Mr. Stoltz), who now considers himself
too mature to go out with mere high school girls, and who then finds herself
another boyfriend. (''We don't go out for three months and this is what
happens?'' cried the indignant Bill when he finds out.) Rick Moranis, last seen
pining after Sigourney Weaver in ''Ghostbusters,'' this time shows up in a new
wave wardrobe and a lot of strange hairdos to pursue the equally unavailable
Eileen (Jenny Wright). Eileen is either Tom Drake's fiancee or someone who can
barely stand him, depending upon whom you ask. Tom's the one who announces their
engagement, which he views mostly as an excuse to throw himself a bachelor
party.

Feisty, self-possessed little Jim (Mr. Mitchell-Smith), whose favorite film is
''Apocalypse Now'' and who listens to Jimi Hendrix and Jim Morrison with a
vengeance, is easily the film's most interesting invention. But he is given an
unnecessarily ''big'' scene, a minor epiphany that is conventional if not
altogether false; Miss Thompson's Anita gets one of these, too. The film's best
sequence has the Conrads' mother taking video movies of her older son's efforts
to pack up and leave home. That episode has both the zaniness and the ring of
truth that were so evident in the earlier film, and are so much scarcer here.

After High School

THE WILD LIFE, directed by Art Linson; written by Cameron Crowe; director of
photography, James Glennon; edited by Michael Jablow; music by Edward Van Halen
and Donn Landee; produced by Mr. Linson and Mr. Crowe; released by Universal
Pictures. At Warner Twin 2, Broadway and 47th Street; Orpheum, Third Avenue and
86th Street and other theaters. Running time: 95 minutes. This film is rated R.

Tom Drake . . . . . Christopher Penn
Jim Conrad . . . . . Ilan Mitchell-Smith
Bill Conrad . . . . . Eric Stoltz
Eileen . . . . . Jenny Wright
Anita . . . . . Lea Thompson
Tony . . . . . Brin Berliner
Harry . . . . . Rick Moranis
David Curtiss . . . . . Hart Bochner
Donna . . . . . Susan Blackstone
Julie . . . . . Cari Anne Warder
Craig Davis . . . . . Robert Ridgely
Mr. Parker . . . . . Jack Kehoe

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ELLSWORTH BUNKER DIES AT 90; ENVOY HAD KEY SAIGON ROLE

BYLINE: By ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1938 words


Ellsworth Bunker, a high-ranking United States diplomat for three decades, died
last night at Brattleboro Memorial Hospital in Vermont. He was 90 years old and
lived in Dummerston, Vt.

Mr. Bunker was admitted to the hospital with a general viral infection on Sept.
13 and, according to a hospital spokesman, died of complications attributable to
his advanced age.

A Skilled Negotiator



One of this country's most skilled and patient negotiators, Ellsworth Bunker,
who had been a businessman for 30 years before turning diplomat, capped a
distinguished career by serving as Ambassador to South Vietnam during the six
years in which the United States became most deeply embroiled in the Vietnam
War.

Before his service in Vietnam, Mr. Bunker had been involved in top-level
negotiations to forestall war between the Netherlands and Indonesia when those
nations were quarreling over Dutch New Guinea.

In 1965, he had been part of a three-man team sent to the Dominican Republic to
keep a cease-fire between warring factions there.

His last major assignment, with the rank of Ambassador at Large, was as the
chief United States negotiator in the delicate, protracted and ultimately
successful effort to come to agreement with Panama on the Panama Canal treaties.

In these and other assignments, which included stints as Ambassador to Argentina
and to India, Mr. Bunker, a tall, stoical, taciturn diplomat who seemed happiest
when operating in secrecy, won a reputation as ''the unflappable Bunker.'' He
was also known, in some diplomatic circles, as ''The Refrigerator'' because of
his ability to adapt to trying circumstances without showing emotion. The
sobriquet was not always used in a pejorative sense.



Presidential Confidence


''Bunker could stick with the most tiresomely complex situation without
revealing dismay, disappointment or frustration,'' a former high-level aide to
the diplomat said. ''He could listen as well as present our viewpoints clearly.
He wrote lucid, valuable reports for the President. All Presidents had
confidence in him, starting with Harry Truman and going on to Eisenhower,
Kennedy, Nixon and Ford.''

When asked, in 1975, what had brought him into the diplomatic service after a
highly successful business career, Mr. Bunker said simply: ''When the President
calls on you to do a job, you do it.''

And why had he continued the often frustrating life of the diplomat so many
years? ''Same reason.''

''I'm an old-fashioned patriot,'' Mr. Bunker said. ''I have always assumed that
my country was fundamentally right in its dealings with others.'' In his view,
he said, the United States, as a great power, assumed a set of major
responsibilities, and it was a matter of national honor sullied when the nation
failed to live up to them.

''For example, Vietnam,'' he said. ''During my entire stay there, I had to
remember that what we did involved our reputation as a great power
internationally. We had to persuade the Vietnamese to do for themselves. The
object of our diplomacy there, as elsewhere, was the quite proper one of not
winning arguments but achieving goals.''



Son of Sugar Executive


Mr. Bunker was born in Yonkers on May 11, 1894. His mother was the former Jean
Polhemus Cobb, and his father was George R. Bunker, co-founder of the National
Sugar Refining Company. He went to private schools in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., and was
a 1916 graduate of Yale.

As his family had planned for him all along, Mr. Bunker went into the sugar
business, learning it from the bottom up, first as a laborer on a raw sugar
unloading dock in Yonkers. He spent 13 years learning about refinery operations.
Shortly after being elected a director of National Sugar in 1927, he was forced
to retire for almost a year because of severe arthritis. The ailment was to
plague him on and off for the rest of his life.

In the early 1930's Mr. Bunker was an officer of National Sugar and of several
of its subsidiaries, and a director of the American-Hawaiian Steamship Company.
As the first chairman of the Cane Sugar Refiners Association, founded in 1936,
he supported lobbies dedicated to lifting quotas on the importation of foreign
sugar.

During the 1940's Mr. Bunker invested heavily in sugar-refining companies in
Cuba, Puerto Rico and Mexico. He also helped in the formation of the Sugar
Research Foundation in New York and was chairman of a governmental advisory
agency, the Cane Sugar Refiners War Committee. He became board chairman of
National Sugar in 1948.



Appointed by Truman


Mr. Bunker's active business career ended in 1951, when President Truman
appointed him to the sensitive post of Ambassador to Argentina. President Juan
Domingo Peron was at the height of his power and Argentine- American relations
were at an all-time low, notably following President Pero n's expropriation of
the influential independent newspaper La Prensa.

During his year in Buenos Aires, the fledging diplomat mastered Spanish and
enveloped himself in Argentine culture, even going so far as to suffer through
concerts by backwoods child prodigies in the hope that the people he met on such
occasions would give him insights into the Argentine way of life. He also won
sufficient favor with President Peron to hear the Argentine dictator refer to
him as ''our country's good friend.''

Mr. Bunker was next appointed, in 1952, Ambassador to Italy, even though he had
never seen that country, not even as a tourist, until he took over the embassy
in Rome. That did not seem to be a particular disadvantage, however, and in the
year he spent in Rome he was credited with being an effective negotiator in a
controversy involving the Government's closing of several missions of the
Protestant Church of Christ in Italy.

Having joined the State Department at the behest of his Yale classmate,
Secretary of State Dean Acheson - like himself a Democrat - Mr. Bunker resigned
his post in Rome when the Republican Administration of Dwight D. Eisenhower took
over in 1953. For the next three years he served as the first salaried president
of the American Red Cross.

In 1956 Mr. Bunker was appointed Ambassador to India and Nepal by President
Eisenhower. Before he left New Delhi in 1961, American aid to India had
increased to more than $5 billion. Mr. Bunker supervised distribution of that
aid.



Major Role in Settlement


In 1962 Mr. Bunker was credited with having taken a major role in the settlement
of one of the knottiest problems of postwar diplomacy, the dispute between the
Netherlands and Indonesia over West New Guinea. For 12 years they had been at
loggerheads over the area, whose status had been left in abeyance when the rest
of the Dutch East Indies became independent.

Indonesia was girding for a military showdown with the Dutch when the Kennedy
Administration asked Mr. Bunker to try his hand at mediating the dispute under
United Nations auspices. The ''Bunker plan'' that emerged from his efforts and
was finally accepted on all sides led to the relinquishing of Dutch claims on
the disputed area, which is now the part of Indonesia known as West Irian.

Of the accord, the man who engineered it had a typically understated and laconic
comment: ''What was successfully attempted was an effort to resolve the issue
before it had deteriorated into open warfare.''

President Kennedy also sent Mr. Bunker to the Middle East, in 1963, to mediate a
dispute between Prince Faisal of Saudi Arabia and President Gamal Abdel Nasser
of Egypt over the future of the emerging Republic of Yemen. He was largely
unsuccessful, and the dispute continued for years.

In 1964 President Johnson appointed Mr. Bunker, by then officially retired, his
representative on the council of the Organization of American States, which
elected the diplomat as its chairman.



Dominican Dispute


Mr. Bunker honed his reputation for coolness under fire in the year he spent,
beginning in 1965, as the key member of a three-man O.A.S. team sent to the
Dominican Republic to end factional fighting in the wake of the fall of the
Government of the dictator Rafael Trujillo, who had been assassinated.

Attired in a well-cut suit with high starched collar and Panama hat, the
imperturbable Mr. Bunker seemed in startling contrast to the sweating, bearded
rebels in fatigues he dealt with. He kept his aplomb throughout negotiations
with all sides, and was able to have installed a provisional civilian president.
The Dominicans, responding to his discreet manner, nicknamed Mr. Bunker the Sly
Fox.

After the Dominican political situation stabilized, President Johnson said of
the diplomat: ''Mr. Bunker belongs not only to the United States but to the
Hemisphere. He has rendered great service to both.''

Mr. Bunker would have preferred to live in retirement on his 600-acre farm near
Putney, Vt., but in 1967 Mr. Johnson needed an able troubleshooter to serve as
Ambassador to South Vietnam. He tapped Mr. Bunker to preside over what he hoped,
at the time, would be the ending of American involvement in the war there and
the transition from military to constitutional rule.



'The Tunnel Was Longer'


But Mr. Bunker was to be in Vietnam for six years, the longest tour served by an
American Ambassador there, and during that time the American participation in
the fighting was to expand greatly.

When he left Saigon on his 79th birthday in May, 1973, after a cease- fire had
been effected and direct American involvement in the war had ended, Mr. Bunker
observed, ''The tunnel was longer and the light was dimmer and farther away than
any of us realized at the time I came here.''

Although some critics thought that Mr. Bunker was ''soft'' in his dealings with
President Nguyen Van Thieu, and that he was too optimistic about the Saigon
Government's ability to function after the pullout of American forces, on the
whole he was given good marks for his conduct in Saigon.

Mr. Bunker returned to Washington with the rank of Ambassador at Large. In 1974
he took on the job of chief negotiator to the highly secret talks with Panama
concerning a new and revised canal treaty.

His patient negotiations in the often acrimonious struggle for a settlement was
regarded as the greatest tour de force of his career. In 1978, when he retired
permanently, the Senate, after 38 days of debate, ratified two treaties for
which Mr. Bunker had served as principal negotiator.

The first treaty called for turning over the Panama Canal to Panama by the year
2000, and the second guaranteed the United States the right to defend the canal
after that date.

Without the treaties, Mr. Bunker said in an interview shortly before his 90th
birthday this year, Panama would have been plunged into internal turmoil and the
canal would be in great jeopardy.

''Any terrorist with a hand grenade can shut the canal for a while,'' he said.
''It's not really defensible except through a partnership where everybody works
together, and that's what the treaty achieved.''

A man with the stereotypical appearance of a diplomat, Mr. Bunker stood ramrod
straight, 6 feet 2 inches tall, even as he entered his 80's. He loved
theater-going, and he enjoyed reading, particularly the novels of Joseph Conrad.

Mr. Bunker's first wife, the former Harriet Butler, died in 1964. They had three
children, Ellen, John and Samuel.

In 1967 he married a career Foreign Service officer, Carol C. Laise, who was
then serving as Ambassador to Nepal.  The couple maintained a Washington
apartment as well as the 600-acre Bunker dairy farm at Dummerston, Vt., near
Putney.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ellsworth Bunker (page B8); photo of Ellsworth Bunker and
Nguyen Van Thieu (page B8)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE CHARGES REAGAN IS EVADING BLAME IN BOMBING

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1589 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 27


Walter F. Mondale accused President Reagan today of an ''inexcusable'' attempt
to shift the blame for last week's bombing of the American Embassy near East
Beirut. Earlier, the White House sought to soften Mr. Reagan's implication that
the fault lay with the ''near destruction of our intelligence capability''
before his Administration took office.

At a news conference after his meeting in New York City with Andrei A. Gromyko,
the Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr. Mondale asserted that Mr. Reagan should quit
trying to pass on the blame for the incident.

''The latest statement by the President is inexcusable,'' Mr. Mondale said. ''He
should stand up and say he is responsible. By saying the C.I.A. is weak, he
encourages terrorists and our enemies around the world to believe that we don't
have an effective intellignce capacity, when we do.''

It was one of Mr. Mondale's most blistering criticisms of the President.



Reagan Charges Distortion

In Washington, Mr, Reagan complained to reporters about ''the way you distorted
my remarks about the C.I.A.''

The White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, said the President was referring to
''reports in the media putting the blame entirely on the Carter
Administration.'' Several reporters said they had based their articles Wednesday
on guidance from Reagan White House officials.

But today Mr. Speakes said Mr. Reagan had been talking about ''a decade-long
trend and a climate in Congress'' in which ''human intelligence capabilities had
been weakened considerably.''

He said the President had not meant that this trend had led specifically to the
bombing, although Mr. Reagan's comments had come in answer to a specific
question about that incident. Two Americans and an unknown number of Lebanese
died. The President has no interest in second- guessing officials in Beirut for
decisions that preceded the bombing, a White House spokesman said. (Page A8.)

Several former senior intelligence officials said the cutback in overseas
intelligence agents began in 1967, long before the Carter Administration. It was
carried out, they said, under Presidents Johnson, Nixon, Ford and Carter, and by
1978, the Carter White House had reversed the trend and was pushing for
increases in intelligence funds.  Moreover, several officials said, there had
been no intelligence failure before the Beirut bombing because warnings from
terrorist groups about such an attack had been made public.

Former President Jimmy Carter, saying he had previously restrained himself in
the face of ''a stream of false assertions'' by President Reagan, issued an
unusually strong statement. It charged that Mr. Reagan's ''claim yesterday that
his predecessors are responsible for the repeated terrorist bombings of
Americans is personally insulting and too gross in its implications to ignore.''

''He only has to question his own Administration officials to determine that his
statement was also completely false,'' Mr. Carter added. ''This series of
tragedies in the Middle East has been brought about by the President's own
deeply flawed policy and inadequate security precautions in the face of proven
danger.

''His frivolous reference to tardy kitchen repairs is indicative of his refusal
to face the reality of his own responsibility,'' Mr. Carter went on, alluding to
Mr. Reagan's likening of constructing security barriers to getting a kitchen
remodeled on schedule. ''Mr. Reagan should apologize for these misleading
statements,'' he asserted.

Mondale Sees a Divisive Move

Mr. Mondale said it was wrong for Mr. Reagan to suggest any division between the
two major political parties on the need for a strong C.I.A. and to imply that he
had inherited a weakened intelligence network.

Mr. Reagan's comment came in response to a student's question about the Beirut
bombing at a campaign stop at Bowling Green State University in Ohio Wednesday.
As he had said previously, Mr. Reagan observed that no security ''can make you
100 percent safe'' and ''an embassy is not a bunker.''

Then he turned to intelligence as ''the real protection, and where we're feeling
the effects today of the neardestruction of our intelligence capability in
recent years, before we came here, the effort that somehow to say, well, spying
is somehow dishonest and let's get rid of our intelligence agents. And we did
that to a large extent.

Seeking to 'Know in Advance'

''Your biggest protection is to, and we're trying, to rebuild our intelligence
to where you'll find out and know in advance what the target might be and be
prepared for it,'' the President added.

Campaigning in Saginaw, Mich., Vice President Bush, who was a Director of
Central Intelligence in 1976, said today that it would be wrong to interpret Mr.
Reagan's comments as laying the blame for the Beirut bombing on the Carter
Administration.

''But I do believe there were cuts made in the intelligence business that were
inappropriate,'' Mr. Bush went on. ''Laying off a lot of people and thus
curtailing a lot of our sources on intelligence was not good for the overall
intelligence community, and I think that's what the President's trying to say.''


Colby Says Reagan Errs

Former intelligence directors as well as Democratic politicians took issue with
Mr. Bush's implication that this began with the Carter Administration. William
E. Colby, who served in a Republican Administration as Director of Central
Intelligence from September 1974 to January 1976, also called Mr. Reagan
''mistaken on two counts.''

''The first is that we began to reduce the size of the agency in 1967,'' Mr.
Colby said. There was a gradual decline in numbers because there was a decline
in covert action, in operations that try to influence other countries and a
shift to intelligence collection and analysis, he said.

''The second is that the problem in Beirut was not a failure of intelligence but
a problem of putting in proper security,'' Mr. Colby added. Mr. Speakes said
that was the thrust of a report given the President today by Robert Oakley, the
State Department's top specialist on terrorism.

Cuts Under Johnson and Nixon

Other former senior intelligence officials said Richard Helms and James R.
Schlesinger, the Directors of Central Intelligence under Presidents Johnson and
Nixon, had eliminated 1,000 to 1,500 overseas agents under a deliberate plan to
scale down the agency as American involvement in Vietnam and Southeast Asia was
phased out.

Senate investigations of the agency in the mid-1970's led to disclosures of
assassination plots, drug experimentation with unwitting human subjects,
surveillance of Americans and a string of other abuses that hastened the
agency's shift away from agents to increasingly sophisticated satellite,
electronic and photographic intelligence-gathering.

Mr. Carter's former intelligence chief, Adm. Stansfield Turner, retired, said
that in 1977, he eliminated 820 positions in the C.I.A. headquarters staff on
the basis of a report compiled under the Ford Administration. In all, Mr. Turner
said, only 17 people were dismissed; the other cuts were made through early
retirement and attrition.

Inman Adds Details

Vice Adm. Bobby R. Inman, for many years head of the National Security Agency
and Deputy Director of Intelligence in 1981-83, said that as the Ford
Administration left office in early 1977, it proposed increasing funds for
intelligence, but that the Carter Administration's budget specialists blocked
that move for about a year. The actual turn upward in manpower and funds began
in early 1979, he said.

Admiral Turner contended that it was unfair for Mr. Reagan to blame earlier
Administrations when he had had ''plenty of time to do what he wants to do.''

The Reagan Administration has continued the increases in intelligence budgets
that were begun in the Carter Administration and has also increased the number
of people involved in covert operations, such as paramilitary and political
action operations.



Bill on C.I.A. Introduced

WASHINGTON, Sept. 27 (UPI) - The chairman and vice chairman of the Senate
intelligence committee introduced a bill today requiring future directors and
deputy directors of the Central Intelligence Agency to be career intelligence
officers.

The current director, William J. Casey, was chairman of the Securities and
Exchange Commission in the Nixon Administration and was Mr. Reagan's campaign
manager before being appointed to head the agency in 1981.

The agency's mission ''is best carried out by professional intelligence
officers,'' said Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, who
introduced the bill along with the committee chairman, Barry Goldwater,
Republican of Arizona.

Mr. Moynihan cited ''the one great breakdown'' in the intelligence committee's
relationship with the C.I.A., when the agency failed to notify the panel about
the mining of Nicaraguan harbors.

Mr. Monihan questioned whether the ''misadventure would have happened if a
career intelligence professional with strong interest in the long-term welfare
of the intelligence community had been serving as director.''

Mr. Moynihan said the United States did not have a ''career intelligence class''
when the intelligence agency was created in 1947, but now, ''with almost 40
years of experience, there is no longer any need to look outside of our highly
qualified pool of career civilian and military intelligence officers'' to head
the agency.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

KEY SECTIONS OF SPEECH BY GROMYKO TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4592 words


Following are key sections of Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko's address to
the United Nations General Assembly yesterday, as translated by the United
Nations and recorded by The New York Times:


Mr. President, distinguished delegates, in the course of almost 40 years the
words - the United Nations - have become firmly established in the world's
political lexicon. There is virtually no major international problem in whose
connection these words would not be uttered in different languages both within
these walls and beyond them.

The extensive involvement of the United Nations in world affairs and
developments is dictated by the very raison d',etre of this forum which was
brought into being in order to unite the political will and resources of states
for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security.

The conclusion reached by the founding members of the United Nations was
extremely simple. It was born of the experience of the most bloody and
destructive war that mankind has ever known.

Indeed, it was precisely through united efforts that the aggressor was crushed.
The 40th anniversary of this great victory achieved at such high cost will be
observed next year, and all the peoples who fought against fascism contributed
to this victory. But the decisive role of the Soviet Union in this is
indisputable.

Need for United Efforts


United efforts were and are still needed today in order to build the postwar
world. For it is the major lesson of World War II that states must stand
together in the fight against war. It is common knowledge however that while the
war-ravaged earth was still smoldering and thousands of towns and villages lay
in ruins, the international atmosphere once again began to deteriorate and
ultimately to become critical.



The blame for this lies with those who, in their quest for world hegemony, began
to behave in a way that contravened obligations as allies in the anti-Hitlerite
coalition, oblivious to the lessons of the past.

In disregard of the lofty purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter,
to which they too had just affixed their signatures, a group of states set out
to escalate their military preparations by piecing together a system of
aggressive military blocs with the North Atlantic alliance as its pivot. These
states pledged themselves to a policy based on a position of strength, a policy
of brinkmanship. It is they who are responsible for the beginning of the cold
war, which for so long stemmed the normal flow of international life for which
the peoples of the world yearned.

The Postwar Years


As a result, in the postwar years the world has been in a state of fever. And
whenever international relations have been marked, as was the case in the period
of detente, by the rise of cooperation between states with different social
systems, no effort was spared to undermine these positive processes. And, thanks
to the NATO military bloc, this is exactly what happened.

It is precisely this approach in world politics that has led to the situation
that marks the international climate today: the threat of war has grown, and the
foundations of world peace have become more shaky. This course, which is more
than ever such a marked feature of the current policies of the United States and
of those who have chosen the role of its accomplices, is opposed by a broad
front of peace-loving states, peace- loving forces.




Preventing Nuclear War


The Soviet Union and the states of the socialist community are concentrating
their efforts on achieving the key objective: that of preventing a nuclear
catastrophe. For if the destructive potential which has now been accumulated in
the world were unleashed, the human race could well become extinct. To prevent
this is a task of overriding importance.

Our country strove for a ban on nuclear weapons, both before it possessed them
and after it had developed these weapons. The U.S.S.R. continues to favor
immediate measures to reduce and ultimately to eliminate nuclear weapons
totally. This is the goal of a comprehensive set of initiatives put forward by
the Soviet Union.

Whenever the U.S. side has shown realism and willingness to come to agreement on
the basis of the principle of equality and equal security - and this has
occurred - it proved possible to reach important agreements. Thus, a major step
forward was taken with the conclusion in 1972 of the Soviet-U.S. interim
agreement on limitations of strategic offensive arms, SALT I, and also the
treaty on the limitation of antiballistic missile systems, the A.B.M. treaty.

However, in the years that followed, our attempts to reduce, or at least to
limit nuclear arms, failed to produce concrete results. The tug-of- war between
the groups that determine U.S. foreign policy has been won by the
militaristically minded. They have attempted to devalue the existing
Soviet-American accords by wrecking what had been achieved earlier through
lengthy and painstaking work on both sides - as was the case with the SALT II
treaty.

Stories designed to mislead people are being churned out in endless profusion.
Not that they are particularly reticent about saying that should they eventually
feel like negotiating they would only do so from strength. To that end, they
claim that the United States must first build up its military muscle.

The Talks in Geneva


It took Washington a long time to send its representatives to the negotiating
table in Geneva. However, at these talks the U.S. side followed a scenario not
designed to lead to agreement. How else can one describe the fact that while
negotiating the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe, our partners did exactly
the opposite. Beforehand, they set the date - I repeat, beforehand! - they set
the date for deploying new U.S. missiles of medium range on the territories of
several West European states. We were told to either accept the U.S. position or
there will be no agreement. So there is no agreement.

It was Washington's deliberate intention to wreck the negotiations on nuclear
arms, both medium-range and strategic. And it did succeed in this.

Now they are rejoicing that they were able to embark on the deployment of their
missiles in Europe as planned. Even here, in the course of the General Assembly,
you can meet representatives of Western European states who are rubbing their
hands with pleasure at the fact that the plan for the deployment is being
implemented.

The Soviet Union is in favor of serious talks. We are not only prepared for such
talks, but we are insisting on them. Our proposals for the limitation and
reduction of strategic arms, and the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe,
remain valid. They offer no advantages nor do any harm to either side.

The United States must remove the obstacles it has erected to the holding of
talks. Unless these obstacles are removed, of course, these talks will not take
place - and this is what the U.S. has in mind.

Quite often it is asked: since it is difficult for the time being to arrive at a
radical solution of the problem of nuclear arms, would it not be possible to
take steps which would create a favorable atmosphere for this by raising the
level of trust among states and reducing international tensions. We are
convinced that this is both possible and necessary.

For a Freeze on Arsenals


An effective measure of this kind would be the implementation of our proposal,
endorsed by the United Nations, for a quantitative and qualitative freeze on
nuclear weapon arsenals by all states which possess them. This could be done
first by the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A. on a bilateral basis. I repeat: the
U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A. on a bilateral basis by way of an example for other
nuclear powers. Why shouldn't we do this?

We are proposing to Washington: let us set this example.






On Weapons in Outer Space


In view of its particular urgency, it is necessary to single out the question of
preventing the race in nuclear and other weapons in outer space, which some
people want to turn into a springboard for waging war. And we know who this is,
who these people are.

The extension of the arms race to outer space, unless checked in time, could
become an irreversible process.

It is our belief that the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A., as the leading powers in the
field of outer space exploration, should do everything in their power to keep
outer space peaceful and, in particular, with the view to accomplishing this
task, to lay the foundations for multilateral agreement. And we believe this
idea is alive in many states.

But responsibility for the failure to hold the talks lies wholly with the U.S.
side. Washington is unwilling to engage in the talks.

We urge the U.S. Government to recognize that the militarization of outer space
threatens the whole of mankind, including the American people themselves. We
express the hope that the United States of America will refrain from actions
which would render irreversible the process of turning outer space into the
arena of military rivalry and that it would be willing to engage in talks with a
view to reaching agreement. For its part, the U.S.S.R. continues to favor the
idea of starting such talks as soon as possible.

In seeking to do everything possible to promote this goal, the Soviet Union
proposes the inclusion on the agenda of the current session of the General
Assembly as an important and urgent item, an item entitled, ''The Use of Outer
Space Exclusively for Peaceful Purposes, for the Benefit of Mankind.''

The idea first and foremost is to ban immediately and for all time the use of
force in and from outer space against the earth, as well as from the earth
against targets in outer space. In other words, agreement must be reached on the
prohibition and elimination of space-attack weapons of all systems and kinds,
whatever their mode of basing, designed to destroy targets in case. Above all,
this applies to states with a major space capacity.



Non-Use of Force


Surely the implementation of a proposal by the socialist countries to conclude a
treaty on the mutual non-use of military force in relations between the states
of the Warsaw Treaty and the North Atlantic alliance would help to dissipate
mutual apprehension And it would could be welcomed if an obligation not to be
the first to use either nuclear or conventional weapons against one another - in
other words, not to use force - if such an undertaking were entered into by
states whether not they belong to military alliances or are of a neutral or
nonaligned status.

We have tabled these and some other major proposals at the Stockholm conference
as well. They have been submitted in combination with certain
confidence-building measures in the military field.

However, the representatives of NATO countries, in actual fact, have taken up
what amounts to an obstructionist position with regard to these proposals. What
is proposed under the guise of military and technical measures is a program
drawn up by them of barely disguised espionage.

The NATO countries are avoiding businesslike discussion of cardinal questions,
above all those dealing with arms reductions. But without such discussions there
can be no genuine strengthening of security and stability on the European
Continent.



At the Vienna talks, too, there should be no room for any kind of political
maneuvering, of which our negotiating partners are so fond.

Our country expresses its readiness to take part in multilateral negotiations on
the limitation of naval activites and naval armaments, and on the extending of
confidence-building measures in seas and oceans, particularly for those regions
with the busiest sea lanes, the regions with the highest likelihood of conflict
situations.

We have originated a proposal - and it's worth recording this - for an agreement
on appropriate measures, including measures applicable to particular regions
such as, for example, the Indian, Atlantic or Pacific Oceans; the Mediterranean
or the Persian Gulf.

Restructuring Economic Rela

tions


What we need is a restructuring of international economic relations on a just
and democratic basis. By pressing for the implementation of tangible measures
for curbing the arms race and achieving disarmament, in close connection with
the solution of the world's economic and social development problems, we
consider that reduction of military budgets in either percentage or absolute
terms to be a promising means of achieving this goal. Yes, military budgets I'm
talking about.

The U.S.S.R., together with other Warsaw Treaty states, has put forward a
proposal to the North Atlantic bloc to begin talks on the question of the
increase in military expenditures and the consequent reduction of them.

However, so far there has been no response from NATO, and this is no accident.

If by using the most sophisticated technology available today a photograph were
to be taken showing the magnitude of worldwide military preparations by the
United States and its allies on a planetary scale, it would reveal a panorama
which would be mindboggling to any thinking person: a palisade of missiles,
strategic bombers, naval armadas flying the seas and oceans, hundreds of
military bases scattered all over the globe - hundreds of military bases - and
colossal stockpiles of weapons of every description.

Some may say that we in the Soviet Union also have weapons - on land, in the
air, on and under water. Our answer is yes, we do. But this is not our choice.
The objective facts of postwar history make it undeniably clear that it was not
the Soviet Union, not socialism, but the other side that started the arms race,
and each new spiral in this arms race. This is where the truth lies.

Forced to take countermeasures, our country only did so in response to, and to
the extent commensurate with, the protection of its own security and the
security of its friends and allies. We have never sought, nor do we seek,
superiority. What we want is to maintain the equilibrium, and at the lowest
possible level.

Soviet Proposals


Of our own free well and unilaterally, we have assumed a number of obligations
ranging from the non-first use of nuclear weapons through practical steps
limiting our armed forces and armaments in Central Europe.

Yet no matter what proposal or argument we put forward, our opposite numbers
would say, no, not acceptable. They would swear that they favor a halt in the
arms race, but only through the modernization of them, of these weapons, and
through the improvement and stockpiling of these weapons.



It's absurd, yes it's absurd. But it's what underlies their policy. They offer
assurances that they favor a reduction in world tensions but only by
establishing ever more military bases, by intensifying military preparations, by
militarizing outer space, by deploying new types of U.S. nuclear weapons in
Europe.

What is necessary to prevent hunger and disease from claiming the lives of
countless millions of people? According to the logic of NATO countries, it would
appear that this can be achieved by throwing as much money and as many resources
as possible into the insatiable maw of the war industry.

It would appear that there's no other path towards insuring peace than war
preparation. This is perverted logic, the logic of out and out militarism. All
states must clearly realize why none of the important and urgent international
problems has found a solution so far. And this applies above all to nuclear
weapons and to the arms race.

Even elementary decency is lacking in cases where representatives of the two
powers - the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A - have met to discuss something or other.
Everything the U.S. side says is designed to secure unilateral advantages for
the United States. Therefore, from the very outset, everything is doomed to
failure.

Moscow's Future Policy


The Soviet delegation is authorized to state in this high forum that the
U.S.S.R. will follow precisely the same policy it has been pursuing up to now,
namely, a policy of peace, disarmament, the limitation and subsequent
elimination of nuclear armaments and the solution of other urgent problems of
the day.

Today many people are wondering anxiously whether everything has been lost and
the only thing left is to acknowledge that international relations have plunged
into a dark night.

We do not accept such a view of the situation in the world. A feeling of doom is
alien to our world outlook. An insurmountable barrier must be erected against
war. We must put an end to the stockpi,ing of weapons in the world.




Outlook on World Affairs


Understandably, the prevention of war is a difficult task. The machine of
military production is continuously at work and influential forces - which place
the interest of world domination above everything - will not stop it.

Examples are readily available. They are at hand, all you have to do is to reach
for them.

In defiance of the elementary norms of international war morality, an act of
vanity was committed against the tiny state of Grenada, which dared to assert
its sovereignty. It was occupied and stripped of its independence.

And witness the gross interference in the internal affairs of El Salvador. No
effort is being spared to prop up the regime of those stooges who are committing
such brutal crimes against the Salvadoran people.

A virtual siege - military, political and economic - has been mounted against
Nicaragua, whose people, defending their national freedom and independence, and
democratic achievements are heroically resisti.g in the face of the undeclared
war organized against them by Washington. But they just want one thing, the
Nicaraguan people. They want their independence and they want to resolve their
internal matters as they see fit, exclusively.

Nor can they reconcile themselves yet with the existence of socialist Cuba. Cuba
is the target of threats that are attempting to force that country off its
course to which it has placed itself in words and deeds.

Situation in Central America


The situation in Central America, where a dangerous hotbed of tension is being
created, should be settled by peaceful means, on the basis of the unconditional
cessation by the United States of interference in the internal affairs of the
countries' governments. It is possible that such a settlement has been opened up
thanks to the constructive approach of Nicaragua and Cuba and to the initiative
of the states of the Contadora group. The Soviet Union supports these efforts to
reach a political settlement of the problem.

Turning now to the Middle East, here again, we can see what imperialist policies
mean for peoples and countries. Still fresh in our memories are the barbaric
acts in Lebanon. Undertaken in an attempt to force upon it a capitulation
agreement with Israel. And these acts are still going on today, in fact show
that the U.S., which relies upon strategic cooperation with Israel, has no
intention of establishing lasting peace in that region.

The Soviet Union has recently put forward a proposal on the principles of a
Middle East settlement. This proposal is well known and has won a broad
response. We call upon all parties of the conflict to act with sober- minded
regard for each other's legitimate interests and rights and for all other states
to facilitate the search for a just settlement in the Middle East.

Pakistan and Afghanistan


Provocative intrigues are still going on against the sovereign and nonaligned
people of Pakistan. The foes of the Afghan people will stop at nothing and will
not abandon their hopes of plunging it back into its medieval benightedness. To
this end, military incursions from the outside are being organized. Is it
possible to solve the foreign policy aspect of this problem? Yes it is. The way
to do this is to stop forming, arming and infiltrating into the country from
outside anti-Government gangs of bandits and saboteurs and not to interfere in
the internal affairs of Afghanistan. There can be no doubt that Afghanistan has
followed and will continue to follow the path it has taken - the path of
independence, freedom, social progress, peace and nonallignment.



In Southeast Asia the situation is being exacerbated by the policy pursued by
outside forces. Acts of provocation against Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea are
going on unabated. Attempts are being made to pit their neighbors, the states of
Asean, against these countries. We regard as constructive the initiative of the
three countries of Indochina to turn Southeast Asia into a zone of peace, good
neighborliness and cooperation and also the efforts to start a political
dialogue among the states of the region.

The Soviet leadership has repeatedly stated its positions on the questions of
its relations with the People's Republic of China. These positions are well
known. The Soviet Union is in favor of normal, good-neighborly relations between
these two great states.

Obstacles are being created to the normalization of the situation in the Korean
Peninsula, thus increasing tension in the Far East. The U.S.S.R. has
unswervingly expressed its solidarity with the struggle of the Korean people and
the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea and for the peaceful
reunification of their homeland without any outside interference. The proposals
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea provides a positive basis for a
settlement of the Korean question.

South Africa and Namibia


The racist regime of Pretoria has all but been formally named a historical ally
of the U.S.A. In defiance of the decisions of the United Nations, this regime is
trying to keep Namibia under the colonial yoke for as long as possible and is
threatening - in particular, by overt interventionist actions - the independence
of Angola and other neighboring African states. This regime could not engage in
such lawlessness were it not for the complicity with it of some major powers.

There can be no doubt, however, that the Namibian people will win their freedom
and independence. In the present-day world, the colonial policy of South Africa
and its patrons is a historically doomed anomaly.

The economically weak countries of Asia and Africa and Latin America are being
virtually plundered by the industrialized capitalist states. The U.S.S.R., like
other socialist countries, will continue to render assistance to the extent of
its capability to the newly independent states in their efforts to develop their
national economies.

Soviet-U.S. Relations


There's a great deal of truth in the statement that the international situation
depends directly on the state of Soviet-U.S. relations.

Today, more than ever before, our country believes in the maintenance of normal
relations with the United States. And there's been much talk about this. Until
the recent past, this is precisely how these relations were developing, although
not without certain vicissitudes, while in the years of World War II they were
actually allies.

In recent years these relations have been disrupted through the efforts of
Washington. They have spared no effort to wreck all the gains that have been
accomplished together and to undermine the confidence that had been built up
earlier. What is more, they virtually flaunt their indifference to the
reputation of the U.S. side as a partner in international affairs. But there is
nothing here to be proud of.

History does not begin on the day a particular U.S. adminstration comes into
office. Those periods when the two powers combined their efforts to defeat
fascism will stand out as the best pages in the history of Soviet- U.S.
relations. And those who dictate U.S. policy today have a great deal to do if
they want their words and the obligations they assume to be trusted.

Deeds, Not Words


The Soviet Union believes that it is precisely concrete deeds and not verbal
assurances that can lead us to the normalization of the situation in our
relations with the U.S. The U.S.S.R. will not be found wanting. Every American,
every American family should know that the Soviet Union wants peace and only
peace with the United States.

We have developed normal, and in some cases good and fruitful relations with the
countries of Western Europe. But we cannot disregard the fact that some of them
have permitted the deployment on their territories of new U.S. nuclear missiles
intended for use as first-strike weapons.

Nor can one overlook the fact that in some quarters hopes have not yet been
abandoned of revising postwar realities in Europe. Recently such revanchist
sentiments have been fueled by statements which seek to question commitments
assumed by members of the anti-Hitlerite coalition.

We would caution against yielding to this dangerous psychosis and we appeal for
sobermindedness. No one has the right to disrupt what has not really become a
pillar of international law, but was born of innumerable sacrifices of the last
world war.

We regard the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America, which make up the
majority of the nonaligned movment - an influential force of today - as our
fellow fighters in the struggle between those who work for peace and those who
work against it. The only intention of the Soviet Union is to continue to do
everything in its power to deepen and develop friendly ties with these
countries.

Distinguished delegates, it is our firm conviction that it is possible to
reverse the current alarming tilt in international developments, to halt the
arms race and to send it on a downward spiral, to reduce and then totally to
eliminate the threat of war.

This requires the combined effort of the states, nuclear or nonnuclear, big or
small, whatever their social system, regardless of their social system.

The future of mankind is a common responsibility of all countries. And the
peoples of the world are entitled to expect that the whole of the U.N.'s
activities will be viewed with this sense of responsibility.



 Arms Control: Three Proposals

Soviet Union

* Talks between the United States and the Soviet Union aimed at preventing the
militarization of space.

* A Soviet-American freeze on the development of new nuclear weapons.

* Agreement on complete prohibition of nuclear weapons tests.

* Renunciation by both countries of first use of nuclear weapons.

* Drafting of an international convention on the prohibition and elimination of
chemical weapons.

President Reagan

* Regular Cabinet-level meetings aimed at preparing for possible summit
meetings.

* Visits by officials of both countries to each other's nuclear test sites.

* Consideration of an exchange of five-year military plans for weapons
development and procurement.

* Periodic consultations at ''policy level'' between experts from both countries
on regional disputes.

* Formation of an ''umbrella group'' to deal with a variety of arms control
matters.

Walter Mondale He has also proposed other measures, including:

* A temporary moratorium on the testing of all nuclear weapons.

* A temporary moratorium on the testing and deployment of space weapons.

* Cancellation of the MX missile and the B-1 bomber, to be replaced with other
weapons systems.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Andrei Gromyko

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTHEAST ASIANS UNEASY OVER ISLAMIC RADICALS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1554 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, Sept. 25


Islamic radicalism, an unsettling force in the Middle East, could also threaten
the stability of the rapidly developing nations of Southeast Asia, according to
some political leaders in this region.

Two of the larger nations in the region, Indonesia and Malaysia, have Moslem
majorities or pluralities, and the rest have Moslem minorities.

Government officials in the region are reluctant to attach religious labels to
dissent, for fear of upsetting the region's traditional interreligious harmony.
Further, some officials and scholars say, it is often not Islamic fundamentalism
itself that creates problems, but the use made of it by politicians seeking
ready-made bases of support.

But certain trends in the Islamic areas of Southeast Asia are being watched, and
from time to time outbursts of violence focus attention on the volatility of
some Islamic groups.

Rioting in Indonesian Capital


Two weeks ago, riots involving Moslem fundamentalists in the Tanjung Priok port
district of Jakarta, the Indonesian capital, left 9 to 22 people dead, according
to a variety of sources, and more than 50 wounded.

The Indonesian Army, which subsequently reported discovering pamphlets in
circulation calling on Moslems to defend Islam against its enemies in the armed
forces, is now trying to link the rioting to what it describes as a new
opportunity for subversion by Communism, which has been outlawed in Indonesia
since 1965.

Indonesia, with more than 120 million people, is the world's most populous
Moslem nation, although the religion gets no special recognition in the
constitutionally secular state.

In Malaysia, where Moslems are in a plurality and Islam is given a special place
in the Constitution, the coalition Government of Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad
is under pressure from the opposition Islamic Party. The Prime Minister has been
challenged to a public debate on the Government's record in regard to Islamic
practice, and ground rules are now being worked out by the two sides.

Contacts With Iran Reported


Last week, Malaysia's Deputy Foreign Minister, Abdul Kadir Sheik Fadzir, said
that ''extremists'' had taken over the Islamic Party, which has existed in one
form or another for decades, and that these extremists had established contacts
with militant groups in Iran.

''The activities of these groups are regarded by Malaysians as interference by
the Iranian Government itself,'' the minister told a visiting envoy from
Teheran.

Islamic radicals, who want Malaysian law and practice to conform with the tenets
of their faith, were reported to have played a part in the dispute early this
month over the New York Philharmonic's plan to play a work by Ernest Bloch
titled ''Schlomo, a Hebrew Rhapsody'' in Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian capital.
The orchestra's visit to Malaysia was canceled after its management decided not
to eliminate the work from the program.

Officials say one element in Islamic activism is that young Islamic radicals in
the region are now better educated, many in Western universities, and that they
are skilled in communications, a skill Iranian students used effectively in the
rebellion against Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi.

International Training Programs


Young Moslems are also said to be taking part in more international Islamic
training and study programs linking the Moslems of once-remote Southeast Asia to
the Islam of the Middle East. These links are made easier through the wider
ability to use English or French as international languages.

In Malaysia, a publication called Islamic Vision reports on Islamic youth
activities in the region. James Piscatori of the Australian National University,
who prepared a paper for the Asia Society this year on Islam in the relations
between Asian countries, said of the publication:

''Reading this, one could learn of the activities of the Sri Lanka Moslem
Students Federation or of the Assembly of Moslem Youth of Singapore, and more
importantly, of how Moslem youth in one country interact with those in other
Asian countries.''

In the Philippines, where Moslems make up 5 percent of the population, a
long-running Moro rebellion in the Islamic south has defied all attempts by the
Government to stamp it out.

Libya has sought for more than a decade to get the backing of the Islamic
Conference, an organization of Moslem nations, to support secession by the
southern Philippine Moslems and to censure Manila. But these efforts have been
fended off through intercession in the Islamic organization by the Philippines'
neighbors and fellow members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
Malaysia and Indonesia, where the idea of secession is always actively
discouraged.

Thais Fighting an Insurgency


In Thailand, an armed insurrection in the country's Moslem south along the
Malaysian border continues to take a toll in Government forces. Thai politicians
are careful never to offend Moslem sensitivities, even in a nation that is more
than 90 percent Buddhist, for fear of making the situation in the area worse.

Recently, a reporter leaving an interview with a Thai official was pursued into
the corridor by the official's aides seeking to explain that comments made about
the strengths of Buddhism should not be construed to imply criticism of Islam.

Burma and Vietnam also have Islamic minorities. In the past, the Burmese have
tried to deport rebellious Moslems to neighboring Bangladesh, a predominantly
Moslem nation. In Bangladesh itself, as in India, the specter of Islamic
fundamentalism is always present. A Bangladeshi official said recently that
pictures of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the Iranian leader, ''have been turning
up in peasants' huts throughout the Indian subcontinent.''

In Singapore, where Malay Moslems form about 15 percent of a population
dominated by ethnic Chinese and where freedom of religion is guaranteed and
discrimination forbidden by law, the Government of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew
has been ruthless in suppressing attempts to interject religious or ethnic
crusades into politics.

'We Lock Them Up Without Trial'


''Any dakwa group that tries to incite the population goes to jail
immediately,'' a Singaporean politician said, referring to associations that
campaign for increased Islamic influence and civil conformity to religious law.
''We lock them up without trial and make no apologies.''

Scholars of Southeast Asia stress that Islam in the region has developed an
indigenous style and history over the centuries since Arab traders brought it
here, possibly as early as the eighth century. After the first conversion of a
ruling sultan in the 15th century, Islam started to become an ''official''
religion in many parts of the region.

Remote from the theological centers of the Middle East, it soon felt the
influences of other religions - Buddhism, Hinduism, Taoism, Confucianism and
elements of the animism or spirit worship widespread in both mainland and island
regions of Southeast Asia.

Ethnic Ties Are Strong


Most Southeast Asian Moslems, who are members of the Sunni sect, continue to be
tolerant, well-integrated members of their respective societies, whether they
form the majority or minority, scholars say. At the same time, they are
unusually unified by language and ethnic ties that cross borders.

''Most Moslems in Southeast Asia are Malay-speaking,'' Sharon Siddique, a senior
fellow at the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies in Singapore, said in an
interview. ''Linguistically and culturally they transcend national boundaries.
Southern Thai Moslems have more in common with Malaysian Moslems than with
Buddhist Thais.''

Dr. Siddique, a Singaporean scholar who has written on Moslems as well as other
regional ethnic groups, says she does not believe Islamic fundamentalists pose
any immediate threat to the region. ''During the whole colonial period,'' she
said, ''Islam was a vehicle of protest against colonial rule, but there was
never a serious uprising.''

What has often provoked an Islamic reaction in the region has been the perceived
threat posed by hard-working, urbanized ''overseas'' Chinese, who control
business and banking in most of Southeast Asia. Largely rural ethnic Malays may
come to resent what they consider the economic domination of the Chinese, whose
outlook on life they do not always share.

'Something in Their Culture'


''Malays seem to have something in their culture that runs contrary to
progress,'' said a young Chinese Singaporean, trying to explain the difference.
A recent graduate of the National University of Singpore said that among her
Malay friends, some young women took to wearing the traditional chador, a head
covering, veil and shawl worn by Moslem and Hindu women, ''when they couldn't
cope with the pressures of an intensely competitive campus.''

Malays who believe they are disadvantaged or out of step with Southeast Asia's
race to development thus may take refuge in their Islamic roots and become
attracted to a fundamentalist revival that preaches that there is more to life
than money-making and material progress.

''To be a Malay nationalist,'' Dr. Siddique said, ''means to search for a large
part of your legitimacy through religion.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 75 words


FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 28, 1984 International

Ellsworth Bunker, a high-ranking United States diplomat for three decades, died
Thursday evening in Vermont. Mr. Bunker, a skilled and patient negotiator who
had been a businessman for 30 years before becoming a diplomat, served as
Ambassador to South Vietnam during the six years in which the United States
became most deeply embroiled in the Vietnam War. (A1:1-3.).


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ART: A GOLUB RETROSPECTIVE AT NEW MUSEUM

BYLINE: By MICHAEL BRENSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1391 words


AT the age of 62, Leon Golub has become a star. While artists rise and fall
overnight, while the radical chic dote over graffiti artists and art dealers
scour the ranks of teen-agers for new talent, Golub is widely experienced as an
artist to believe in. His career evolved slowly, according to its own patient
but insistent rhythm. The pictorial investigations of political terror that have
placed him at the center of the present debate about politics and art are the
culmination not only of sustained political concern, but also of a lifelong
journey into the human heart.

The New Museum of Contemporary Art deserves a great deal of credit for mounting
a Golub retrospective at a moment of maximum urgency for his work and for the
issue of political art. The exhibition, organized by the curators Lynn Gumpert
and Ned Rifkin and running through Nov. 25, leaves no doubt about what separates
Golub from most other political artists. For one thing, Golub has a passionate
knowledge of the history of art. For another, the commitment to political
subject matter evolved logically from Golub's acute awareness, from the
beginning, of the interdependence of vulnerability and power. Golub brings to
his political commitment a rare human and artistic breadth.

In part because many works are so large, the exhibition has been restricted to
41 paintings, all done since 1952, almost two-thirds dating from 1970. A more
complete retrospective would have included a lot more early work, with examples
of what Golub did before he was Golub. Since photographs are so important to the
artist - Golub's recent figures are a composite of several photographic images -
it would also have been helpful to provide a sampling of his photographic
documentation, preferably in a section of its own.

This being said, the exhibition provides a clear sense of Golub's development
and achievement. Golub was Golub almost from the beginning. From the 1950's on,
the work of the Chicago-born artist was largely defined by a sense of conflict.
For example, there was invariably a clash between the human figure, initially
presented in a classicized Dubuffetlike manner, and a vague, unidentifiable
background. The effect was a post- World War II Existentialist sense of
isolation.

In the 1954 ''Siamese Sphinx I,'' the heads on either end of a half-human,
half-animal creature, both heads resembling the artist, pull the body two ways.
In the 1958 ''Philosopher III,'' one hand of an otherwise pensive male figure is
a clenched fist. In the 1960 ''Horseman II,'' a head of a man and a head of a
horse suggest an attempt to deal with the disturbing sense that human and animal
are wedded together.

One reason such works are introspective without being self-absorbed is Golub's
strong and physical sense of form, which developed from a study of Primitive,
Greek, Roman and Assyrian art. Another reason is Golub's special and crucial
feeling for his materials. With the earliest works in this show, the canvas was
an extension of him. While the artist was capable of treating it with the
greatest tenderness and respect, he also treated it much as his later
mercenaries and interrogators would treat their victims - grilling, attacking,
rubbing it out. Golub's approach to painting, shaped by the turbulent and
liberating Abstract Expressionist years, gave him an essential way into his
political subject matter.

There is a key turning point in the early 1960's. In a painting such as ''Combat
I,'' the single male figure in conflict with himself becomes two men battling,
like the two figures in Goya's ''Dual With Cudgels'' who are intent on
bludgeoning each other into submission. A tension that had largely been internal
and psychological now becomes worldy, physical drama. Golub's work now explodes.
The large-scale ''Gigantomachy'' series of battling men in the mid- 1960's leads
into the ''Vietnam'' series of the early 1970's. The concern with vulnerability
and power takes increasingly more specific form.

Since 1976, Golub has pitched his work higher and higher. While his mercenaries
and assassins can be identified with Africa and Central America, the
backgrounds, in some paintings flooded with blood-red oxide, remain general and
abstract. In the recent ''Horsing Around'' series, in which we glimpse the
twitchy hirelings with their women, the backgound may suggest the immemorial
calm of the pictorial architecture of Piero della Francesca. One way in which
Golub builds his pitch is to rub the form of his paintings against the content.

The success of this work depends upon a high degree of risk. If Golub is
repelled by the acts he portrays, he is also driven to understand them. That
means finding ways - through his uninhibited dialogue with the canvas, through
gestures, through formal correspondences - to enter his subjects' minds. If the
exploration into political terror is not also a journey into self, as in
''Interrogation III,'' where the artist cannot find anything to identify with in
the torture of a naked woman, the edge and impact of the work are lost. If the
artist feels only superior to the actions he portrays, so will we, and we will
be let off the hook. When Golub journeys into the human jungle and does find
traces of himself, as he has been able to do so consistently over the last eight
years, he finds us as well.

The exhibition will travel to La Jolla, Calif., Chicago, Montreal and
Washington. ''Golub'' was supported in part by grants from the National
Endowment for the Arts, the New York State Council on the Arts and by public
funds from the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs.



Also of interest this week:

Markus L"upertz (Mary Boone, 417 West Broadway): This handsome exhibition,
organized in collaboration with the art dealer Michael Werner, presents an
unusually engaging picture of the German Neo-Expressionist painter Markus
L"upertz. The artist in this show is not the L"upertz who has said that
''picture-making is disgusting,'' but one who finds pleasure in painting. Here,
as before, one of his missions is to challenge the notion of guilt and, in the
process, raise questions about current artistic thinking.

In these clearly articulated but elusive paintings, L"upertz uses loaded images.
They include German helmets, which bring to mind Nazi Germany, a horse that
suggests art- school anatomical studies and equestrian portraits and a buxom,
tinny nude that is signed Markus Maillol.

These paintings seem to say: Here are these images, rich in artistic potential,
but with discredited historical associations. What are we to do with them? Do
those associations mean that a contemporary artist has no alternative but to
reject them, or else - as many postmodernists believe - to build an
unmistakeable awareness of those histories into the way they are treated?
L"upertz's challenge to this prevalent definition of artistic responsibility - a
definition that has led to art so self-conscious that it can hardly breathe -
has also understandably been subjected to fierce critical attack.

Some paintings in the show suggest answers that are effective even if they are
not new. The horse is a classical subject awkwardly drawn in classical terms but
eloquently drawn by using its shape as a means of exploring problems raised by
the pictorial surface. In the 12-canvas series ''Alice im Wunderland,'' L"upertz
does not conceal the importance of Jackson Pollock, but rather focuses attention
on the early Pollock, which he uses as a guide through a wonderland of painting.
(Through tomorrow.)




Susan Laufer (Germans Van Eck, 420 West Broadway): Although the paintings in
this show bring to mind Susan Rothenberg, Louisa Chase, Enzo Cucchi and Mimmo
Paladino, they reveal a promising pictorial intelligence and ambition. In a work
like ''Scarlet Bishop,'' the forms scratched onto the surface link graffiti to
cave painting. In ''Crow Black Night,'' there are totemic objects applied to the
surface that push out and painted forms that swim, swirl about or remain buried
within the opaque, almost liquid surface. There are intimations not only of
water and night, but also of fire and blood. Laufer seems determined to turn
painting into a primal element in which all that is basic inside and outside
painting can run together. (Through Oct. 13.)



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of painting

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 29, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS IN TIGHT CONTESTS KEEP DISTANCE FROM TICKET

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH , Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1493 words

DATELINE: NEW HOPE, Pa., Sept. 24


As the cold cuts were being prepared for an informal political supper,
Representative Bob Edgar made a strong pitch to 50 people in a living room for
help in his campaign and that of Representative Peter H. Kostmayer, a fellow
Democrat.

Their suburban Philadelphia districts, he said, must ''make the right choice on
Nov. 6, as it relates to Bob Edgar and Peter Kostmayer, and as it regards
national policy.''

Not a word about Walter F. Mondale or Geraldine A. Ferraro.



An Intentional Distancing

Asked about that omission, Mr. Edgar, a former Methodist pastor who must get up
to 60,000 Republican votes to survive this year, said, ''There were Republicans
in there, and you have to appeal to people where they are politically.''

Like Democrats in sharply contested districts around the country, Mr. Edgar and
Mr. Kostmayer are putting distance between themselves and their Presidential
ticket, cushioning themselves against a possible Reagan landslide.

In Congress, the polls showing President Reagan leading Mr. Mondale by 15 to 20
percentage points have brought widespread discussion about Mr. Mondale's
prospects and the impact of his race on Congressional Democrats. The House
Republican leader, Robert H. Michel of Illinois, is talking of gaining 30 to 40
seats.

In the view of Democratic strategists, however, the best the Republicans can do
is gain 5 to 10 seats; if Mr. Mondale runs a close Presidential race, they
predict a Democratic pickup of about 5 seats.

But no one disputes that the Congressional election is becoming almost as
important as the Presidential campaign because it will affect the balance of
power in government next year and the kinds of policies that will emerge.

Addressing the B'nai B'rith chapter in nearby Warrington, Mr. Kostmayer
emphasized the importance of the next Congress. His appeal for re-election was
keyed to two points: his personal efforts to bring jobs to the Bucks County
region and the need for the ''insurance'' of a Democratic Congress to check
President Reagan.

''If the President wins re-election and if the Senate stays in the hands of his
party, I think we need some balance,'' Mr. Kostmayer said. ''I don't think they
should run the whole show. If you don't want a rubber stamp on arms control, on
education, on women's issues, then you need to vote Democrats back into
Congress.''

Michel Looks to 26 Seats

Mr. Michel says his party must get back the 26 seats they lost to Democrats in
1982 for Mr. Reagan to have reasonable control of the legislature. That would
not produce a Republican majority, but big gains combined with some Southern
Democrats could revive the powerful Reagan conservative coalition of 1981.

With the President enjoying a lead of 21 percentage points over Mr. Mondale in
the latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll, Republican Congressional candidates
from New Hampshire to Arizona are counting on Reagan strength and Mondale
weakness.

Jim Kolbe, an Arizona Republican seeking the seat won in 1982 by Jim McNulty, a
Democrat, said, ''Our message has got to be clear - that a vote for McNulty is a
vote for Mondale because it will stymie the Reagan program.''

A Drift Toward the G.O.P.

There are several indicators of a drift toward Republicans. More people now
identify themselves as Republicans than did four years ago. In a New York
Times/CBS News Poll taken in mid-September, 29 percent of the respondents
identified themselves as Republicans and 41 percent as Democrats. The Republican
figure was up 5 percentage points and the Democratic figure down 5 points from a
similar poll taken in September 1980.

Another encouraging sign to Republicans is the trend in two key Senate races.
Recent polls show Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina and Roger W. Jepsen of
Iowa, two Republican conservatives, moving slightly ahead of opponents they had
trailed.

A third indicator cited by Republican strategists is a new party poll that
indicates that Democrats hold a margin narrower than normal when voters are
asked which party they would back in Congressional elections, without reference
to specific candidates. The poll, taken Sept. 20-21 by Market Opinion Research
of Detroit, showed Democrats leading by just 47 to 44 percent, with 9 percent
undecided.

But a Democratic Party survey taken after Labor Day by Peter Hart found a larger
Democratic lead, 45 to 35 percent, with 15 percent undecided. At best, other
Democrats argue, these are only rough indicators, not reflecting individual
candidates' popularity.

Doubt About the Coattails

''I don't think there's much coattails from the President,'' said Representative
Tony Coelho of California, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign
Committee. ''I had 22 pollsters in on Monday and found that our incumbents are
all right. You have to give Republican incumbents an edge, too. This thing is
turning into an incumbents' election.

''The key is if Reagan continues to build a lead in the race with Mondale and
then focuses his efforts on individual Congressional races. That would have an
impact. But I think Mondale will tighten the race.''

The Democratic view of Mr. Mondale is not an unqualified negative. Mr. Edgar
said there were places in his district, like Swarthmore College, where Mr.
Mondale would get a warm reception. But Democratic National Committee officials
say most Congressional candidates ask for Representative Ferraro rather than Mr.
Mondale, with the polite excuse that ''it's too much to expect'' the
Presidential nominee to go to their districts.

Leaning on Reagan's Strength

On the Republican side, local candidates want to try to ride the President's
strength and create a bandwagon. In Maryland, Helen D. Bentley, in her third
attempt to unseat Clarence D. Long, a 22-year Democratic veteran from just
outside Baltimore, is linking her campaign to the Presidential election. So is
Elise duPont, who is seeking the Delaware seat held by Thomas R. Carper, a
first-term Democrat.

''Naturally, Long is trying to run away from Mondale but we're trying to tie him
to Mondale and tie Helen to the President,'' said Al Dinnis, the Bentley
campaign manager. ''We're doing Reagan-Bentley mailings and we have
Reagan-Bentley bumper stickers.''

''Mondale's going to hurt me,'' said Mr. Long, who had avoided a Baltimore rally
for Mrs. Ferraro. ''If Reagan carried my district by 50,000, I could still win,
but it would be close.''

Mrs. duPont, who served three years as a Reagan appointee in the Agency for
International Development, is for the Reagan-backed proposal for a
constitutional amendment to balance the Federal budget and accuses Mr. Carper of
''favoring the Mondale tax increase,'' a charge he denies.

Ticket-Splitting Indicated

Mr. Carper suggested that at the polls the expected strong Reagan margin would
be offset by the popularity of Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., a Democrat. In New
Jersey, Representative Joseph G. Minish, another Democrat with a tough fight,
looks to Senator Bill Bradley for a similar ticket-splitting effect.

Democrats like James R. Jones of Oklahoma, the House Budget Committee chairman,
and James McClure Clark of North Carolina, emphasize personal independence in
districts where the Reagan lead is large. ''My district has not gone for a
Democratic Presidential candidate since Franklin Roosevelt,'' Mr. Jones said.
''I have to sell my own record and experience.''

National Republican strategists give high priority to the strongly pro-Reagan
challengers they have lined up in the Philadelphia suburbs: Dave Christian, a
Vietnam War hero running against Mr. Kostmayer, and Curt Weldon, an energetic,
experienced politician opposing Mr. Edgar.

Not only do the Republican challengers bank on a 2-to-1 Reagan lead but they are
also going after the blue- collar vote with charges that the Democrats have not
done enough to save jobs in steel mills and defense plants in their regions. And
they are seeking to link the two liberal Democratic incumbents to Mr. Mondale.

Mr. Edgar, a five-term Congressman whose district has twice as many registered
Republicans as Democrats, acknowledges it is a tough battle. By hewing to an
independent line in 1980, he won, even though Mr. Reagan carried his district by
53,000 votes. ''If Reagan gets a 70,000-vote majority this year, I think I'll
lose,'' Mr. Edgar said. ''My race is based on getting 60,000 split tickets. I
think I can get that.''

In Mr. Kostmayer's conservatively oriented district, there are 25,000 more
Republicans than Democrats. But because he was a Mondale delegate at the
Democratic convention, he feels a ''terrible problem'' about splitting off from
the ticket:

''If I move away from Mondale too much, then I hurt the ticket and if it goes
down further, that hurts me. But if I embrace the ticket too closely, I
jeopardize my own chances because Reagan is so strong here.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Peter Kostmayer; photo of Davve Christian; photo of Bob Edgar;
photo of Curtis Wedlon

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 29, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Shultz Mourns Bunker

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 76 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 28


Secretary of State George P. Shultz today mourned the death of Ellsworth Bunker,
saying he was responsible for ''remarkable achievements that have few parallels
in American history.'' Mr. Bunker, who served as a diplomat under seven
Presidents and was Ambassador to South Vietnam at the height of United States
involvement there, died Thursday night.



 Please use only with BUNKER OBIT. It can be used all editions. Thanks.





LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Agent Orange Deadline

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 37, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 106 words


Vietnam War veterans who believe their health problems or those of their
families were caused by exposure to Agent Orange have until Oct. 26 to file
claims with the New York State Division of Veterans Affairs. They must meet that
deadline to be eligible for aid from a $180 million fund to be established by
chemical companies that manufactured the herbicide. The fund settles a
class-action suit by veterans exposed to the herbicide; veterans who filed
previous claims must file new ones, the division said. More information is
available from the Division of Veterans Affairs office at 80 Centre Street, New
York, N.Y. 10013.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Topics ;
Public Servants

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 253 words


The Elder Statesman

The generation that grew up early in this century may have produced more than
its share of distinguished public servants. The roll (why so many Democrats?)
includes W. Averell Harriman, born in 1891, who represented America in Russia
during the darkest days of World War II . . . the late David K. E. Bruce, born
in 1898, who was Ambassador to France, England, West Germany - and then
President Nixon's first envoy to Peking . . . Clark Clifford, born in 1906, who
worked in President Truman's White House and has been a landmark, in and out of
Government, ever since . . . and Ellsworth Bunker, who died Thursday at the age
of 90.

Mr. Bunker served six Presidents, starting with Truman. He was Ambassador to
countries on four continents, including South Vietnam where, starting at age 73,
he served during six brutal war years. In 1978, he came back from retirement to
be the chief American negotiator in the wretchedly difficult talks that produced
the Panama Canal treaties.

Calm, laconic and starched, he tickled his friends, from Lyndon Johnson on down,
when, while Ambassador in Saigon, he married Carol Laise. That created a helpful
precedent for the coming generation of two- career families: The bride was the
American Ambassador in Nepal.  Ellsworth Bunker had two careers of his own. He
was a successful businessman before coming to Government service. Many able
Americans serve one President or one party. There are few who so ably and truly
serve their country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS;
PUBLIC SERVANTS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 129 words


Respectable At Last

Politicians have been known to embellish their credentials with fiction - an
imagined college degree, award, oak-leaf cluster. Last spring, in the
Connecticut Legislature's debate of a motion to open each session with the
Pledge of Allegiance, Representative Robert Sorensen said he'd fought in
Vietnam. Mr. Sorensen opposed the pledge idea but wanted to be sure everyone
knew he wasn't unpatriotic.

His patriotism hasn't been questioned but his Vietnam experience has, by his
opponent. Mr. Sorensen now admits his war story was untrue and has withdrawn
from the race. His trespass against legitimate veterans was unfair, but it does
certify one constructive change of climate: True or false, service in Vietnam is
finally worth boasting about.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Sports of The Times ;
Britain Is Sorry for Ali

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section 5; Page 6, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1114 words



DATELINE:
THEY have always loved him


in Britain, since the first time

he posed for pictures in front of Big Ben and tried to mimic the local dialects
and then got off the canvas and won after taking a left hook from Our 'Enry
Cooper in 1963.

Britain has a special fondness for characters, and after three fights in London
in the 1960's, Cassius Clay/Muhammad Ali became a favorite not only with boxing
fans but also with the mix of free thinkers who write letters to The Times of
London, block country roads during hunt season and, like Ali, were never charmed
by America's Vietnam adventure.

Now people are saddened by the news that Muhammad Ali's subdued pace of recent
years has been diagnosed as Parkinson's syndrome, most probably connected to a
quarter-century of brain-pounding.

''We have not tried to exploit it,'' said Dr. James P. Payne, who helped prepare
a devastating study of boxing for the British Medical Association. ''The last
time Ali appeared on television, his sluggish speech and his lack of awareness
was very sad. It wouldn't surprise me if he has brain damage.''

The news of Ali's ill health comes two months after the British Medical
Association voted to take an activist stance toward the abolition of boxing.
Because of the smaller size of Britain and the socialized form of government, it
is easier to debate and legislate there than in the United States, with its
tradition of states' rights.

Boxing is already regulated by the British Boxing Board of Control, which has
broad powers to deny licenses and turn down fights. But boxing in Britain is not
immune from tragedy. In June 1982, a Nigerian named Asymin Mustapha, who used
the name Young Ali, went into a coma following a fight at London's Dorchester
Hotel. He died six months later.

''The circumstances of this tragedy were particularly unattractive, smacking of
gladiatorial contests in the Roman Coliseum,'' wrote Jim Mulligan in The New
Statesman in July 1983. ''The event was a boxing evening promoted by the World
Sporting Club - an evening dress affair, where Ascot Week revellers enjoyed a
night out (complete with brandy and cigars) while being treated to the spectacle
of young men, mostly from very underprivileged backgrounds, punching one another
insensible.''



Apart from the Ascot Week backdrop and maybe the brandy, the scene was not so
different from major fights in gambling palaces in the United States, where the
expensive seats are filled with well- dressed patrons urging two athletes to
pound each other's heads until one can no longer stand. No other so-called sport
tolerates such an outright assault on the brain and other vital organs.

In Britain, the response to Young Ali's death was to reduce the length of title
fights from 15 rounds to 12, the same kind of Band-Aid concessions made by some
anarchic boxing boards in the United States. But the British Medical
Association's policy-making board had voted in July 1982 ''That in view of the
proven ocular and brain damage resulting from professional boxing, the
Association should campaign for its abolition.''

Last March 8, the B.M.A. released the study that said ''Brain damage is a likely
consequence of boxing, whether in amateur or professional fighting.'' It cited
studies that headguards may protect against external injuries to the skin and
eyes but do little to keep the jelly-like substance in the brain from being
shaken by punches to the head.

The report (available through the B.M.A. House, Tavistock Square, London WC1H)
cited one unpublished survey of 165 British neurologists in 1974 that claimed
the ''punch-drunk'' syndrome was found in 12 jockeys, 5 soccer players, 2 rugby
players, 2 professional wrestlers, 1 parachutist and 290 boxers.

At the June 1984 meeting in Manchester, the B.M.A. resolved to ''organize a
campaign to influence political opinion ultimately to ban boxing.'' Pamela
Taylor, an official of the association, said in a telephone interview last week,
''As a result of the tragic publicity about Muhammad Ali, we're beginning to see
editorials against boxing.'' She added that Ali's boxing damage might be linked
with abolitionist bills when Parliament meets in mid-October.

''Boxing is supposed to be a noble art and it was carried out by upper- class
boys at one time,'' she said. ''Conservatives in the House of Lords will say,
'Why shouldn't people be able to do what they want?' Interestingly, the
socialistics might say that at a time of high unemployment, boxing is a good way
to earn a living. We say, it's a pretty sad society when that's what you offer
people.''

Ray Clarke, the general secretary of the boxing board, said medical studies were
outdated or inconclusive and claimed his board had tightened up supervision of
British boxing in recent years.

''Virtually everybody is sorry to hear about Ali,'' Clarke said. ''We hear
conflicting reports, including the report that his problem has nothing to do
with boxing. However, if it was due to boxing, it was due to one thing: that he
was allowed to go too far. You know where those latter fights were held.''



As Ali's fighting and verbal skills diminished after the punishing ''Thrilla in
Manilla'' in 1975, he fought in San Juan, Landover, Md., Munich, Tokyo, New
York, Landover, New York, Las Vegas, Nev., New Orleans and Las Vegas. Finally,
when not even the seediest boxing authorities would touch him in the United
States, he lost his last stand in that boxing capital of the world, Nassau, the
Bahamas, to Trevor Berbick in December 1981.

''There's no way those fights would have been allowed here,'' Clarke said.
''Never mind that he was passed fit by specialists. We wouldn't let John Conteh
have his license back last year. He took us to court and the judge upheld our
concern. We said there is a big difference between being fit for living and
being fit for boxing. He had nowhere to go but down, and we said no.

''The weakness in the States is that each state has a different board, and
sometimes different cities have their boards. We have fighters come over here,
we have no way of knowing the last time they fought.''

In the United States, Dr. George D. Lundberg, editor of the Journal of the
American Medical Association, has called for the abolition of boxing. In July
1983, the association's House of Delegates labeled boxing ''a health hazard''
and urged greater education and control, as well as eliminating boxing among
young people. But Congress has gone nowhere with several proposed bills.

Facing the obvious damage to the once-vital Muhammad Ali and its own legacy of
injury and death, centralized Britain has a challenge to save lives - and also
set an example to the colonies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Muhammad Ali

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 645 words


Sept. 30, 1984Fiction*1

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Berkley, $3.95.) Three generations
of a German Jewish family in New York.  *2

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) Three generations of a San
Francisco family.  *3

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) King Arthur, fulfilling
a prophecy of Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  *4

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Warner, $4.50.) The five-year relationship of two
women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  *5

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) The struggle for money and
power in Tinseltown.  *6

SAVANNAH, by Eugenia Price. (Berkley, $3.95.) The romance and ambitions of a
young man in the Old South.  *7

MONIMBO, by Robert Moss and Arnaud de Borchgrave. (Pocket, $3.95.) What happens
after Fidel Castro unveils a plan to create chaos in the United States.  *8

GRANDMASTER, by Warren Murphy and Molly Cochran. (Pinnacle, $3.95.) Two chess
prodigies in the world of espionage.  *9

THE DAYS OF ETERNITY, by Gordon Glasco.  (Bantam, $3.95.) Love survives 25 years
of separation.  10

THE SEDUCTION OF PETER S., by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) The sudden,
danger-filled success of a long-out-of-work actor.  11

THE BITCH, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.50.) At age 40, a woman sets out to
get what she really wants.  12

MISTRAL'S DAUGHTER, by Judith Krantz.  (Bantam, $4.50.) The art world of the
20's and the fashion business of the 80's. 13*

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Pocket, $4.50.) A fantastic yet realistic look
at Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  14*

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/ Washington Square Press, $6.95.)
Black women and their families in the South.  15*

THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR, by Jean M. Auel.  (Bantam, $3.95.) The beginning of
the saga continued in ''The Valley of Horses.'' The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores and from representative
wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail outlets, including newsstands, variety
stores, supermarkets and bookstores. These figures are statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. The number of
titles within the two subdivisions of nonfiction can change from week to week,
reflecting changes in book buying.  *An asterisk before a book's title indicates
that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are
barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Nonfiction

General *1

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (NAL/ Signet, $4.50.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  *2

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of a respected
physician and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.  *3

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.  (Avon, $3.95.) The plight of men who have
never grown up: a psychologist's analysis.  *4

CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) A helicopter pilot's Vietnam
experiences.  *5

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  *6

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.  *7

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $3.95.) Predictions about America in the
next decade.  *8

OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $3.95.) The actress's
autobiography.  *9

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspirational talks by a California professor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 354 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT

BYLINE: By Eduardo Garrigues. Translated by Helen R. Lane. (Macmillan,
$17.95.)By Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $16.95.) By J. K.
Klavans. (Morrow, $12.95)

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2890 words

Claudine, one of the beauticians at La Boudoir, a beauty parlor in Ocean View,
Va., is fond of saying, ''It's not a pretty story.'' And she's right. Nothing
good can come to anyone we meet in the small Navy town where J. K. Klavans sets
her first novel. Claudine and her co-workers, Dolores and Sheila, stave off the
early warning signs of lifelong poverty by hiding behind thick masks of garish
cosmetics and holding fiercely to adolescent dreams. They are still in their
20's but their ''true loves'' have come and gone, leaving illegitimate children
in their wake. New men replace the vanished ones, but they are little more than
a convenience around which to wrap temporary illusions. Everyone gathers at The
Blue Garter, a bar where Loretta Sweate and her young daughter, Louise Little
Feet Sweate, do a mother-daughter strip act - ''Not a pretty story.'' Neither is
the story of Claudine's severely handicapped son who's ''been dying since he was
born.'' Or of the devoutly religious Sheila who is unwed, pregnant and hiding
the fact that she has herpes. Or of anyone else. For the girls at La Boudoir,
the only escape from this relentlessly hopeless world is in fantasy. They stare
at the posters of glamorous hair- style models and attempt to paint the same
unblemished faces on themselves and their customers. As Claudine says of
herself, ''Without her beauty routine she would hate to think of life. No man in
his right mind would want her the way she really looked in the morning. . . . To
look just like Bettina, that was her goal. To know that her face was perfect
enough to be hanging on the wall in a beauty parlor.'' Unfortunately, Miss
Klavans doesn't do more than smudge her characters' makeup. She never allows
them the luminosity they require to bravely face such a sordid world and make us
care about their futures. - Cheri Fein

* THE SKOOK. By J.

P. Miller. (Warner, $17.) ''The Skook'' is a metaphysical adventure yarn by the
author of ''Days of Wine and Roses.'' Span Barrman, incompetent businessman and
notorious cuckold, is forced to take refuge in a small cave by a motorcycle gang
bent on human sacrifice; unable to flush him out, the Space Angels dynamite the
hillside above his hiding place and, in the weeks that follow, the world thinks
Barrman is dead. In fact, he has survived, if only barely, by breaking into a
vast unknown cavern whose bottom is a prehistoric sea. Enter the deus ex
machina. Long ago, to entertain his children, Barrman invented a friendly beast
called the Skook (a small, pre-Columbian-looking winged dragon, to judge from
the hologram on the book's dust jacket); in the hero's hour of need, this
creature of his old imaginings reappears and grants him the courage to live, the
strength to admit that he is afraid and the realization that he loves his
faithless wife (''a wildflower, immune to moral laws''). After a full six months
of eating coelacanths and dodging giant sea- bears, Barrman at last finds his
way back into the sunlit world, where he must deal with the fact that people
have already made fortunes on his supposed demise. The insistent parallels with
other symbolically reborn figures - Ulysses, Jesus, even Don Quixote - seem
exaggerated, but some of J. P. Miller's best passages recall the travails of
John Gardner's Mickelsson, and Barrman in extremis (he is tempted by the ''cool,
nurselike rustle of death'') could be a pale echo of Thomas Mann's Hans Castorp
in the snow. The Skook itself seems superfluous and arch; in the cave, at least,
it amounts to a Platonic tease - it glows but does not illuminate.- William
Ferguson

* THE ROADS OF EARTH. By Allen Drury. (Doubleday, $16.95.)By Anwar el-Sadat.
(Continuum, $12.95.) By Fred J. Cook. (Putnam, $18.95.) By Joanna Colenbrander.
(Andre Deutsch/ David & Charles, $24.95.)By Ismail Akhmedov. (University
Publications of America, $20.)

''The civilized,'' Isak Dinesen wrote, ''must take lessons in silence from the
wild before they are accepted by it.'' While she was referring specifically to
hunting in her adopted Kenya, the remark hints at a deeper truth about African
life. Survival comes from adapting to it rather than superimposing order on it.
In ''The Grass Rain,'' which is set in emerging Kenya, Eduardo Garrigues
portrays both approaches. In this accomplished first novel he examines how
so-called civilized people, Western and African alike, have disrupted the
rhythms of Kenyan life - its countryside, wildlife and social order. Mr.
Garrigues has written a fictional counterpart to Dinesen's ''Out of Africa,'' a
paean to Kenya's red-earthed beauty, a lyrical cry against its corruption. Into
this he has woven a taut suspense story that trades on the narrative paradox of
the hunter and the hunted. Set in 1977, the story opens when an American
ecologist, Bob Fender, arrives in Nairobi and discovers that his friend John
Murphy has been killed in a violent accident. What he fails to suspect is that
Murphy, a C.I.A. agent bent on infiltrating the nation's opposition party, was
murdered. Mistaken as Murphy's replacement - a misunderstanding perpetuated by
the American Embassy - Fender proceeds to the National Park where he begins his
research on its grasslands. In a series of unpleasant coincidences, Fender
realized he's being used to lure culprits suspected of trafficking in contraband
ivory and machine guns, the very means by which the opposition party hopes to
topple the Government.Fender soon learns that it's not just the ivory-tusked
elephant that risks extinction but the American eagle and British lion as well.
If ''The Grass Rain'' examines the price of political sovereignty, it also
assesses the vestiges of colonialism and the eclipse of American influence in
Kenya. To illustrate this, Mr. Garrigues has fashioned a splendid cast of
adventurers, shady characters drawn to sunny climates. None, with the exception
of Fender, learns from the wild. Its silence is still shattered by the rip of
the hunting rifle, the spray of the foreign machine gun. -

FICTIONTHE GRASS RAIN. Alexander Johnson

* THE PASSION OF MOLLY T.

This is a rum sort of effort from an author who has scored over 10 previous best
sellers. Lawrence Sanders' premise is interesting enough: Molly Turner, a
small-town feminist activist, takes up arms against a male-dominated world in
reaction to the shooting death of her female lover by a vanload of drunken good
ol' boys. With the help of a local policeman and Vietnam veteran, namely her
sister's husband, she torches the culprits. Very soon she and a growing band of
female revengers are running the military branch of a nationwide feminist
organization. Wife-beaters, rapists, pornographers and other assorted male ogres
are brought to summary justice against a background of political and sexual
chicanery as the movement becomes important enough for Washington to become
involved. The sheer mechanics of political deal-making are well observed and
quite convincing. The story is set circa 1990 and chronicled sometime later in
the neutral tones of dispassionate reportage; unfortunately, since the overall
plot is implausible to the core, one begins to doubt the impartiality of the
author's narrative voice and ultimately to question his motives. Women in this
novel are coolly portrayed as capable of committing murder on the one hand, and
cuddling infant offspring with the other. Too many men are stereotypically
corrupt, too many ''sisters'' heroically violent. The grand acts of political
violence go by so unceremoniously one is left with the impression that the
reader is supposed to consider them as blithely self- justifying and natural as
Molly T. and her cohorts do. This reader didn't; believable characters wouldn't.
While ''The Passion of Molly T.'' moves along efficiently, the author's bias
reduces it to a sterile exercise in unconvincing fantasy.- Melik Kaylan

* IT'S A LITTLE TOO LATE FOR A LOVE SONG.

In a prefatory note to ''The Roads of Earth,'' Allen Drury warns of the
''absolutely undeviating intention of the Soviet Union to destroy the United
States and conquer the world if it possibly can.'' As soon as the actual novel
commences, he delivers himself of a similar opinion, and then a couple of pages
later on, and a couple of pages after that. By page 40 I began to get used to
the sight and sound of this prophecy, as though it were nothing more outlandish
than a new car without a running board. Mr. Drury embellishes his hortatory
manner with his specific dislike for liberal politicians, humanitarians and
journalists; they are all either Soviet dupes or treacherous cowards. He likes
realists who will launch pre-emptive actions that will thwart Soviet intentions.
In ''The Roads of Earth'' our Republic is hard- pressed to withstand a series of
Soviet-manufactured crises in various trouble spots around the globe. An overly
ambitious Soviet chief of state grunts a lot between uttering his intentions
whereas his American counterpart is genial, courtly with women, but tough-
minded. Needless to say, our Republic survives because this incumbent President
is prepared to launch counter- measures, including a counterrevolution in Cuba
with a Fidel Castro double to lead it. The Russians retreat and change to a more
cautious leadership which, more or less, certifies Mr. Drury's theme that using
force is, at least, realistic whereas political scruples are the folly of
cowards and sellouts. But, by requiring that his characters act out his
political ideas - at the expense of credibility and dimension - Mr. Drury may
just have created a bomb equal to anything in Soviet arsenals at present.-
Richard Elman


NONFICTIONTHOSE I HAVE KNOWN.

A strange little book, ''Those I Have Known'' contains taped reminiscences by
the late President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt and a two-page foreword by former
President Jimmy Carter. Some of the reminiscences were published in a propaganda
newspaper called Mayo created by Sadat. Most readers should approach these
musings with caution. Those seriously interested in the complex man who made
possible the Camp David peace accords between Egypt and Israel will probably
find interesting, if not verifiable, historical footnotes. But the most
intriguing aspect of this fragmentary work is the insight it gives into Sadat
during his last days - the pedagogic streak that permeated most of his domestic
speeches and the increasingly disturbing bouts of megalomania that became
evident during the crackdown he ordered on Egyptian dissidents just before his
assassination in October 1981. Early in 1981, Sadat began taping his
recollections of meetings and encounters with such leaders as the Shah of Iran,
Nikita Khrushchev, Muammar el-Qadaffi, Gamal Abdel Nasser, Marshal Tito and King
Faisal of Saudi Arabia. In all the accounts, Sadat looms large, and, according
to him, he always seems to have had the last word or, in the case of gatherings
of Arab leaders, to have made the biggest splash. Some direct quotations of the
praise heaped on him by other heads of state buttress the notion that this
collection of newspaper articles, meant primarily for consumption by a young
Egyptian audience Sadat wished to sway, should be prefaced with ''caveat
lector.'' No one unfamiliar with Sadat should begin to try to understand what
motivated him by reading ''Those I Have Known.'' - William E. Farrell

* THE HOTEL TACLOBAN.

 By Douglas Valentine. (Lawrence Hill, $12.95.) ''The Hotel Tacloban'' is a
World War II story, replete with bayonetings, torture and profanity. It's
overloaded with cliches, but when the author's candor breaks through the macho
melodrama, the book can be moving. Its most painful sections are the most
convincing; the violence is raw but not lurid. And if the book is painful to
read, it must have been particularly so to write, because Douglas Valentine,
whose first book this is, is the son of the book's subject, who lived through
the agony of being a Japanese prisoner of war. Having been captured by the
Japanese in New Guinea, the author's father was taken to a P.O.W. camp on the
island of Leyte in the Philippines. The camp housed 120 Australian and British
soldiers; the author's father was the sole American there. Only 16 years old, he
was adopted by the Australians and soon joined them in their hatred of the
ranking P.O.W., a British major who cooperated with the Japanese in return for
good food and quarters. When four Australians escaped, the major reported them
to the Japanese, who captured them, brought them back and publicly beheaded
them. Outraged, the other prisoners decided to kill him ''before he betrayed one
more man.'' The author's father was chosen to serve as a lookout while two
Australians garroted the major. All this is very dramatic, but Mr. Valentine
tells his father's story in the first person. This makes the tale compelling,
but it also makes it confusing: the book's ''I'' is both the author and his
subject. And whether a vicarious expiation of guilt like this can be called
history is questionable. - Alison Knopf

* A MAN WITH A CAMERA.

 By Nestor Almendros. Translated by Rachel Phillips Belash. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $17.95.) ''A Man With a Camera'' is one of the few books by a master of
both a craft (in this case, cinematography) and criticism. A political exile
three times - from Franco's Spain, Batista's Cuba and Castro's Cuba - Nestor
Almendros became one of the leading figures of both the American independent
cinema and the French New Wave. He served as the director of photography for
some of the leading French and American directors, and the bulk of his book is
devoted to describing his experiences and the artistic decisions that were made
when he worked with such directors as Francois Truffaut, Eric Rohmer, Alan
Pakula and Robert Benton. Two motifs emerge from Mr. Almendros's reminiscences.
The first is the power of the most basic element of the cinema - light -
essential for both film making and projection but so often taken for granted.
Second and closely related is the conscious awareness of both directors and
cinematographers of the history and traditions of Western visual representation
- the light sources defined by Vermeer's windows, the Impressionists' analysis
of light and color. It may be surprising to learn that the child's bedroom in
''Kramer vs. Kramer'' came from Magritte, that the color scheme of ''The Blue
Lagoon'' was based on Gauguin and that the faded stock of the flashback
sequences in ''Sophie's Choice'' owed much to the pastels of Nazi Germany's
Agfacolor films. ''A Man With a Camera'' is a fascinating, elegantly written
and, so far as I can tell, fluidly translated evaluation of the cinematic image
and its relationship to cinematic meaning. - Gerald Mast

* MAVERICK: Fifty Years of Investigative Reporting.

Now in his 70's, the journalist Fred J. Cook looks back on his career as an
advocate of the underdog in this tough-minded, spirited and somewhat
self-righteous memoir. The desire to see justice done is what has motivated Mr.
Cook to come to the defense of those who, in his view, have been persecuted by
the establishment. He has written articles and books that argue the innocence of
Alger Hiss and Sacco and Vanzetti, among others. Over the years, his larger
targets have included the Mafia, the military-industrial complex and the Warren
Commission. Not surprisingly, Mr. Cook himself has been a target of the
political right. His, he writes, is ''the kind of mind that wants to know the
'how' and 'why' of everything before it is satisfied about anything.'' He adds,
''that kind of mind can be troublesome, even dangerous to some.'' In
''Maverick,'' Mr. Cook, the winner of four awards from the Newspaper Guild of
New York for investigative reporting, re- creates the events that shaped his
point of view. He takes readers back to his early years as a cub reporter in
Ocean County, N.J., and describes his subsequent career at The New York
World-Telegram and Sun. He then covers his later years, a time of personal and
professional turmoil during which he wrote a number of consequential articles
for The Nation. ''Maverick,'' which includes a brief introduction by Studs
Terkel, contains some valuable lessons for aspiring journalists. - Thaddeus
Rutkowski

* A PORTRAIT OF FRYN: A Biography of F. Tennyson Jesse.

The worst fate many young women can imagine is to grow up to be like their
mothers. F. Tennyson Jesse was born in 1888 to a mother who didn't want her and
a father who could ill provide for his family. She grew up to write novels,
plays and nonfiction (memoirs, history, war reportage, true crime). Like the
mother she amply despised, she spent much of her adult life fighting off bouts
of madness. Also like her mother, she was able to accumulate exceptionally loyal
friends and helpers, one of whom, Joanna Colenbrander, has written ''A Portrait
of Fryn,'' which is as much an apology as a painstaking biography. According to
Rebecca West, Jesse was ''one of the loveliest girls of her time.'' But when she
went flying with the playwright H. M. Harwood, she lost several fingers to a
propeller, and she became addicted to the drugs she took to ease the pain. She
married Harwood secretly, because he was still involved with a married woman
with whom he had had a son. The fascination of this biography comes not from
Jesse's work (which, though plentiful, is of minor literary interest) or the
almost unmentioned fact that she was the grandniece of Alfred Lord Tennyson but
rather from the grotesque contradictions in her character. She wrote soppy
declarations of love to her husband between periods of refusing to see or talk
to him. She delighted in cutesy baby talk - referring to the many operations she
underwent as being ''cutty open'' and inventing the name Fryniwid for herself -
yet she could call things by their right names when, for instance, reporting
from the Belgian front during World War I. - Anna Shapiro

* IN AND OUT OF STALIN'S GRU: A Tatar's Escape from Red Army Intelligence.

Soviet defectors make uninviting targets for criticism; finding fault with their
stories of survival can make one feel guilty and unnecessarily harsh.
Unfortunately, ''In and Out of Stalin's GRU'' by Ismail Akhmedov, a former
officer in the G.R.U., Stalin's military intelligence unit, provokes one to risk
a little guilt. Born into an Islamic Tatar family in 1904, Mr. Akhmedov left
home and embraced the Communist Party, hoping for education and advancement. He
remembers himself as a helpless pawn who narrowly survived famine, war and
purges by remaining apolitical and devoting himself to his engineering work. He
describes his years of suppressed rage against the cruelty of the N.K.V.D, the
precursor of the K.G.B. But his memoir betrays him, leaving the impression he
was something of an opportunist who now is repenting in safety and at leisure.
For example, while at school, he wrote to his family only once during the year
before they died in a famine brought about by Stalin's farm collectivization
program. He rose quickly through the ranks of the G.R.U., kept his qualms to
himself and worked with much devotion and apparent skill for Soviet interests.
He was finally driven into exile only when the N.K.V.D. tried to purge him.
Forty years later, he sees this episode as the inevitable break with the
tyrannical ethnic Russians who persecuted his people (and perhaps killed his
Jewish wife). One can only hope Mr. Akhmedov's confession, with its
justifications and rationalizations, has eased his heart. - Jonathan M. Elukin



CANINE CAMERA It is appropriate that three of William Wegman's Surrealistic
photographs of his Weimaraner, Man Ray, are included in this alluring visual
essay on the enduring relationship between man and dog. Subjected to a battery
of indignities for art's sake, Man Ray's unruffled mien expresses the universal
tolerance of dogs for the excesses of humankind.

THE DOG OBSERVED: Photographs, 1844-1983 (Knopf, $25), edited by Ruth Silverman,
a former associate curator at the International Center of Photography in New
York, is not just another book about dogs. Viewed individually, the more than
100 black-and-white photographs by such diverse photographers as Weegee, Diane
Arbus, Eadweard Muybridge and Berenice Abbott form an assemblage of fine
pictures that happen to share a similar subject. But when the photographs are
viewed successively, the book's emphasis seems to shift from dogs per se to the
vicissitudes of the human-canine bond as it has been understood over time, in
different cultures and within the photographic medium itself. Pictures set in a
variety of situations - like Margaret Bourke-White's doleful picture
''Sharecropper's Home,'' of a boy and his mutt, and Horst's serene depiction of
Gertrude Stein and her poodle - are united in the broad perspective of that
man-dog bond. For dog lovers, though, the book's significance will not be found
in its contribution to the history of photography or even anthropology but in
its appeal as a collection of exceptional portraits of some very fine friends. -
Sue M. Halpern

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Francois Truffaut

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
