
                               1 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 2, 1980, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 29 words

'79 food production in Vietnam was only 13.5 Million tons, 2 million tons less
than officials were hoping for, and about 6 million tons short of estimated
requirements (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 2-80-

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               2 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 2, 1980, Wednesday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 61 words

Karleton Armstrong, convicted of '70 bombing in protest against Vietnam War, is
granted Federal parole and will be released Jan 31 after serving about 8 years
in prison.  Armstrong, now 32 years old, was arrested in Toronto 18 months after
bomb killed physics researcher, Robert Fassnacht, at Army Math Research Center
at University of Wisconsin in Madison (S)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 2-80-

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               3 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 5, 1980, Saturday

BYLINE: BY CHRISTOPHER S WREN

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 160 words

Militants holding US diplomatic personnel hostage, Teheran, Iran, order Foreign
Ministry to hand over American charge d'affaires L Bruce Laingen, who, along
with 2 other diplomats, have been at ministry since Embassy was seized in Nov.
Demand that Laingen be brought to Embassy for questioning about documents found
in its files.  Laingen's colleagues identified as Victor L Tomseth and Michael H
Holland.  Militants also accuse Embassy air attache Lieut Col David M Roeder of
war crimes, because he flew bombing missions in Vietnam.  Say he will be put on
trial.  Violence erupts in Teheran, Tabriz and Qum between supporters of
Ayatollah Khomeini and backers of Ayatollah Shariat-Madari.  CBS-TV is refused
permission to transmit reports to US because of recent report quoting Foreign
Min Sadegh Ghotbzadeh to effect that Khomeini was 'out of touch' with political
reality.  Govt charges CBS with false and provocative news reporting.  Illus.
Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 5-80-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               4 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 5, 1980, Saturday

BYLINE: BY CHRISTOPHER S WREN

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 160 words

Militants holding US diplomatic personnel hostage, Teheran, Iran, orders Foreign
Ministry to hand over American charge d'affaires L Bruce Laingen, who, along
with 2 other diplomats, have been at ministry since Embassy was seized in Nov.
Demand that Laingen be brought to Embassy for questioning about documents found
in its files.  Laingen's colleagues identified as Victor L Tomseth and Michael H
Holland.  Militants also accuse Embassy air attache Lieut Col David M Roeder of
war crimes, because he flew bombing missions in Vietnam.  Say he will be put on
trial.  Violence erupts in Teheran, Tabriz and Qum between supporters of
Ayatollah Khomeini and backers of Ayatollah Shariat-Madari.  CBS-TV is refused
permission to transmit reports to US because of recent report quoting Foreign
Min Sadegh Ghotbzadeh to effect that Khomeini was 'out of touch' with political
reality.  Govt charges CBS with false and provocative news reporting.  Illus.
Map (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 5-80-

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Combination

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               5 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 5, 1980, Saturday

BYLINE: BY FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 195 words

China apparently concludes that best strategy in dealing with major Vietnamese
offensive against Pol Pot loyalists in Cambodia and Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan is to continue to mobilize international pressure and let long-term
attrition take toll in Hanoi and Moscow.  Chinese diplomats abroad have dropped
hints that Government is considering whether to 'teach Vietnam another lesson'.
Western diplomats say there is no evidence that Peking has begun to mobilize
along Vietnamese border.  China reportedly has ruled out intervention to counter
Soviet troop movement in Afghanistan.  Country plans generous military aid to
Pakistan.  Carter Administration reportedly is seeking Chinese cooperation to
shore up Pakistani defenses against Soviet pressure.  Defense Secretary Harold
Brown is scheduled to arrive in Peking on January 5 for 9-day visit.  China
reportedly is providing arms, medicine and perhaps food to Pol Pot guerrillas.
Chinese officials reportedly persuaded Pol Pot to step down formally and make
Khieu Samphan Prime Minister.  China reportedly may be preparing beginnings of
insurgency against Vietnamese-dominated Government in Laos (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 5-80-

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               6 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 7, 1980, Monday

BYLINE: BY LEE A DANIELS

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 129 words

5 US chemical companies that produced military defoliant Agent Orange in '60s
and '70s, in reply to suit by veterans group.  Agent Orange Victims
International, seeking compensation for alleged victims, charges that Federal
Government's negligent misuse of chemical is responsible for any inuries or
disabilities suffered by Vietnam veterans and their families.  Each company
files separate briefs, but one filed by Dow Chemical reportedly contains
allegations made by all.  Brief charges include accusations that Government used
chemical recklessly, without adequate testing, in ways not intended by
manufacturers, without adequate warnings and failed to provide medical care to
discharged veterans.  Holds Government should pay all reparations, damages and
fees (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 7-80-

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               7 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1980, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 8, Column 3

LENGTH: 99 words

Phnom Penh, Cambodia, celebrates 1st anniversary of Vietnam's overthrow of Prime
Minister Pol Pot with parade and tokens of support from Vietnam, USSR and
allies.  No other government recognizes President Heng Samrin's regime.  About
200,000 Vietnamese troops remain in Cambodia.  Cambodian resistance is strongest
in western Cambodia, along Thai border.  Most opposition comes from Pol Pot
loyalists, but non-Communist resistance groups are also active.  Heng Samrin and
Vietnamese Communist Party Secretary Le Duan comment.  Conditions in country, in
which many are starving, noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-80-

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               8 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 8, 1980, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 30 words

Australian Government agrees to form independent study group to probe possible
link between illnesses of Vietnam veterans and Agent Orange, defoliant used by
US during war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 8-80-

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                               9 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 9, 1980, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 6

LENGTH: 33 words

Warrant Officer Francis Anton, former Army prisoner of war in Vietnam testifying
at trial of Marine Corps PFC Robert Garwood, says Garwood was either
collaborator or great actor.Garwood illus (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 9-80-

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              10 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1980, Thursday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD J WALTON

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 65 words

Author Richard J Walton article on Soviet invasion of Afghanistan charges
American politicians are trying to exploit situation and are resorting to
oratory that should have been forever discredited by Vietnam War.  Says US, when
crisis is over, should initiate specific actions to reduce tensions, but should,
in meantime, do nothing to make such action more difficult when time arrives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 10

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              11 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 5

LENGTH: 78 words

Former Vietnam war prisoner Luis Antonio Ortiz-Rivera says Marine PFC Robert
Russell Garwood was honored at 'liberation' ceremony by Vietnamese Communists in
1967 and subsequently lived with Communist guards in prison camp, testimony
during military hearing on desertion and collaborating-with-enemy charges
against Garwood.  Admits he and several other prisoners were also given
ceremonies.  Maintains Garwood was only prisoner to stay in camp after ceremony
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 10-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              12 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 10, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

Vietnam accuses China of conducting large-scale military exercises and moving
more troops and supplies to border areas.  Recent military incidents noted (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 10-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              13 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 12, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 6

LENGTH: 43 words

Military prosecutors, in surprise move, finish presentation at hearing to
determine whether PFC Robert Russell Garwood will be court-martialed on charges
of desertion and collaboration with enemy in Vietnam.  Cross-examination is to
begin on January 29 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 12-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              14 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 14, 1980, Monday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 4

LENGTH: 12 words

Vietnam accuses US and China of military alliance against USSR (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 14-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              15 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 14, 1980, Monday

BYLINE: BY NEIL SHEEHAN

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 183 words

Neil Sheehan interview with Tran Ngoc Chau, former South Vietnamese Army officer
and Government official, who underwent 're-education training' by Communist
Vietnamese officials after war's end.  Chau, who is refugee living in Van Nuys,
Calif, says Hanoi leadership undertook unprecedented experiment to convert and
reconcile former opponents instead of killing them.  Notes there were some
trials and long prison terms, but he does not know of anyone from South Vietnam
was was executed for acts committed during war.  Says tens of thousands,
possibly more than 100,000, remain confined because authorities are still afraid
or unwilling to release them.  Describes life in re-education camp.  Notes
hundreds of thousands who have been released are untrusted minority of 2d-class
citizens.  Notes Government effort to repopulate ricelands, so-called New
Economic Zones, is failing because authorities do not have enough seed rice,
tools and other essentials to help settlers.  Notes his view of Vietnamese
Communists has changed, that they are nationalists 1st and then Communists.
Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 14

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              16 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1980, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY TALAT HALMAN

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 55 words

Talat Sait Halman article on prevalent myths relating to Islam's current domain
with regard to the Islamic state, power bloc and holy war.  Holds that tragedies
of Hungary and Czechoslovakia, Vietnam and Cambodia, and now Afghanistan, have
made it imperative for Moslem nations to take their destiny into their own hands
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 15

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              17 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 15, 1980, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY YURI TAVROVSKY

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 49 words

Yuri Tavrovsky letter disputes December 19 editorial claim that USSR, Cambodia
and Vietnam are obstructing movement of relief supplies in Cambodia.  Holds USSR
has supplied aid that is several times greater than that delivered by all
international organizations, worth about $85 million (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 15

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              18 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 6

LENGTH: 53 words

Pakistan Pres Mohammed Zia ul-Haq, commenting on Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
and problem it poses for US policy in region, says, in Quotation of the Day:
'You take Pakistan out of the region, and you will find that you have not one
inch of soil where America can have influence--right from Turkey down to
Vietnam'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 18-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              19 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Page 5, Column 2

LENGTH: 31 words

China accuses Vietnam of killing at least 4 Chinese in artillery attacks during
January.  New China News Agency says Vietnam provoked 14 border incidents in 1st
10 days of month (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 18-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              20 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 18, 1980, Friday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM BORDERS

SECTION: Page 1, Column 3

LENGTH: 86 words

Pakistani Pres Mohammed Zia ul-Haq, interview with several US correspondents,
belittles $400 million that US has offered to Pakistan, in response to threat
from Afghanistan, as 'peanuts'.  Declines to name figure for US aid but
indicates it has to be much more than $400 million offered.  Asserts that
Pakistan is only place in southern tier of Asia 'where America can have
influence--right from Turkey down to Vietnam'.  Warns, however, that he does not
want any US bases or US military presence in Pakistan (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 18

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              21 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 24, 1980, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JOHN SOMERVILLE

SECTION: Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 24 words

Prof John Somerville letter likens US 'hysteria' over Afghanistan to Vietnam
crisis.  Notes nation's relative restraint in Iranian crisis (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 24

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              22 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 24, 1980, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JOSEPH B TREASTER

SECTION: Page 14, Column 2

LENGTH: 18 words

Article on history of Selective Service System, draft and controversy over draft
during Vietnam War (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 24-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              23 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 25, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Page 12, Column 4

LENGTH: 32 words

Senate approves 15% increase in educational benefits for millions of veterans of
Vietnam War era, ignoring warning by Senator Muskie that $800 million cost would
'bust' Federal budget (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 25-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              24 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 26, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 2

LENGTH: 10 words

ILO announces membership of Vietnam in organization (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 26-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              25 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            January 27, 1980, Sunday

BYLINE: BY KAY CAMP

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4

LENGTH: 39 words

Letter by Kay Camp (Women's International League) holds Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan and subsequent 'overreaction' by US represent most serious setback
to international relations since Vietnam War and are alarming threats to peace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 27

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              26 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 29, 1980, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 4

LENGTH: 86 words

Chinese Foreign Ministry says its chief negotiator in talks with Vietnam, Deputy
Prime Minister Han Nianlong, is 'too busy' to take part in talks.  Vietnamese
Embassy spokesman expresses shock.  Talks are aimed at bettering relations
between Vietnam and China.  Shortly before announcement New China News Agency
reported that more than 4 Chinese were killed and others wounded in border
clashes with Vietnamese troops January 15-19.  Vietnamese delegation is headed
by deputy Foreign Minister Ding Nho Liem (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 29-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              27 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           January 31, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 5

LENGTH: 33 words

China issues document reasserting claim to Paracel and Spratly Islands in South
China Sea, also claimed by Vietnam.  Vietnam occupied some Spratly Islands in
1975 and claimed them as territory (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 31-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              28 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 3

LENGTH: 102 words

Defense witness Staff Sgt John E Peterson, in hearing to determine whether there
is enough evidence for court-martial against Vietnam war deserter PFC Robert R
Garwood, says Garwood suffered head injury and complained of headaches before
being sent to war zone.  Says Garwood, while stationed on Okinawa in 1965,
occasionally had to be relieved of duties as jeep driver because of ailments.
Under cross-examination, says many jeep drivers complained of headaches because
they had to drive in hot sun.  Major T B Hamilton Jr is expected to announce
recommendation on court-martial shortly.  Garwood por (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 32-80

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              29 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 1, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 62 words

Karleton Armstrong is released on Federal parole from Fox Lake (Wis)
Correctional Facility, almost 8 years after he and others waged campaign against
US involvement in vietnam War that included predawn boming of University of
Wisconsin Army Mathematics Research Center, in which physicist, Robert E
Fassnacht, died.  Armstrong illustration with lawyer Sarah O'Brien (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 32-80

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              30 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 2, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 111 words

Military judge Major Thomas B Hamilton Jr recommends court-martial for PFC
Robert Russell Garwood, charged with desertion and collaborating with enemy in
Vietnam.  Says death penalty should be considered if Garwood is convicted.
Recommends dismissal of charges of unauthorized absence and attempting to cause
insubordination among American prisoners.  Recommends Garwood stand trial on
charges of soliciting American troops to refuse to fight and mistreating 2
American prisoners.  Recommendations will be forwarded by Brigadier General
David Barker, Camp Lejeune commander, who has final authority to convene
court-martial.  Garwood declines comment.  Por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 33-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              31 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 3, 1980, Sunday

SECTION: Section 3; Page 17, Column 4

LENGTH: 40 words

Article on growing popularity of board game Risk, battle between 2 warring
nations, put out by Parker Brothers.  Game was introduced in '59, but Vietnam
War and consumer resistance to combat toys had till recently put lid on sales
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 34-4-

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              32 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 3, 1980, Sunday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM K STEVENS

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 145 words

New York Times/CBS News Poll finds Americans are struggling to come to grips
with 1st major US-Soviet crisis since '62--precipitated by Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan.  Finds feeling of confused ambivalence among Americans, many of
whom believe basic American interests may be at stake but who shrink from armed
intervention.  Finds spirit of detente is dead or dying, and that new cold-war
mentality is fast developing.  Finds Americans perceive vast difference between
situation in Vietnam in 60's and current situation in Middle East.  American
involvement in Vietnam is regarded as tragic misadventure, while Soviet move
into Afghanistan is compared to early aggression of Nazi Germany.  Poll finds
many Americans believe that Russians cannot be trusted and that US must keep its
guard up.  Opinions of Louis Cerre family and others discussed.  Family illus
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 34

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              33 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 6, 1980, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY GRAHAM HOVEY

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 178 words

US State Dept, in its annual report to Congress on human rights conditions
around world, makes public long list of human rights abuses by Pakistan, which
has received offer of military aid from US to deal with possible Soviet
encroachment.  Dept also indicates that despite improvements, Argentina is still
guilty of widespread human rights abuses, including arbitrary arrest, torture
and summary execution by Army-led Government.  Indicates that North Korea,
Rhodesia and Taiwan 'may be of interest to members of Congress'.  Criticizes
Iran for subjecting American hostages to 'inhumane and degrading treatment'.
Also cites rights violations by USSR, China, Cuba, Vietnam and Cambodia.  While
report does not select any worst cases of abuses, such designations might be
applied to Vietnam's treatment of 'boat people' and to suffering of Cambodians.
For 1st time since Congress mandated annual human rights survey in '76, dept was
ordered to report not only on countries that receive American economic or
military aid but also on all members of UN as well (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 37-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              34 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 4

LENGTH: 34 words

Rev Raymond J DeJaegher, Roman Catholic missionary and educator in China and
Vietnam and more recently director of Asian Speakers Bureau in NYC, died Feb 6
at age 74.  Biographical sketch.  Portrait (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 39

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              35 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            February 8, 1980, Friday

BYLINE: BY HOWELL RAINES

SECTION: Page 15, Column 1

LENGTH: 99 words

American Bar Assn's Standing Committee on Federal Judiciary, which has found
Pres Carter's nominees to Federal District Court in Alabama Fred D Gray and
State Sen U W Clemon, blacks, not qualified for judgeship, extends its
investigation of Gray to include questions involving legal ethics and reports
that Gray paid $40,000 to settle suit arising from fraud that bilked American
former prisoners of war in North Vietnam and charges that he solicited clients
in private practice in violation of Canon of Professional Ethics.  Suit that led
to Gray's settlement detailed.  Gray portrait (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 39-80

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              36 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 9, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 9, Column 6

LENGTH: 69 words

Americans seeking to avoid draft will find it more difficult to take refuge in
Canada than those doing so during Vietnam war as result of changes in Canadian
immigration laws that bar visitors from applying for permanent residence.  Prime
Minister Clark says draft evaders would have low priority in applying for
immigrant status and says there is difference between draft evasion and
conscientious objection (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 40-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              37 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 13, 1980, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY WALTER H WAGGONER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 1

LENGTH: 22 words

Samuel D Berger, former US Ambassador to South Korea and deputy ambassador in
South Vietnam, died Feb 12 at age 68.  Biography (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 44

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              38 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 14, 1980, Thursday

BYLINE: BY JAMES Q WILSON

SECTION: Page 26, Column 4

LENGTH: 60 words

Harvard Univ Prof James Q Wilson letter comments on George F Kennan's Feb 1
article on Carter Adm's handling of Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.  Says Kennan
ignores extent to which conduct of any responsible foreign policy toward USSR
required fundamental shift in passive, accommodating, post-Vietnam mentality of
makers of foreign policy currently in power.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Letter 45

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              39 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 14, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 1

LENGTH: 51 words

Camp Lejuene, NC, Marine base commander Brigadier General David B Barker orders
court-martial for PFC Robert Russell Garwood on charges of desertion and
collaboration with enemy in Vietnam.  No trial date is set.  Barker orders that
death peanalty not be considered for Garwood.  Garwood comments (S)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 45-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              40 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 18, 1980, Monday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 4

LENGTH: 62 words

Cambodian Ambassador to Peking Pich Cheang says Cambodian guerrillas are
gathering evidence to present to UN that Vietnam is using poison gas and
chemicals in war against them, killing 100 people daily, interview.  Pich Cheang
represents former Pol Pot regime.  Says Vietnamese aircraft sprayed toxic
chemical near Thai border to attack people they do not control (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 49-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              41 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1980, Thursday

BYLINE: BY ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Page 23, Column 1

LENGTH: 44 words

Anthony Lewis scores Supreme Court decision imposing heavy penalties on former
CIA agent Frank Snepp for publishing book about last days of Vietnam War without
prior clearance from agency.  Claims decision opens way for major increase in
Government secrecy (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 52

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              42 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 21, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 60 words

Editorial scores Supreme Court ruling against former CIA agent Frank Snepp for
writing book about US withdrawal from Vietnam in last days of war without prior
agency clearance.  Sees double standard when Presidents and Secretaries of State
can write their memoirs with impunity, but those further down the pecking order
are sued for doing same thing (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial 52

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              43 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 22, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 73 words

Michael Sovern, President-elect of Columbia University, declares in Quotation of
Day 'In the '60's you had campuses united on two main interests: race and
Vietnam.  Nowadays, race issues are a divisive factor on campus, even among
those who might feel victimized.  And I don't see registration provoking
widespread protests.  There are students who see it as a wise course.  Also,
it's not induction, and there may be not be induction'.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Text 53

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              44 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 23, 1980, Saturday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 104 words

Cambodian Prince Norodom Sihanouk, visiting Washington as guest of State
Secretary Cyrus R Vance, says he is getting 'much sympathy but little concrete
support' for his plan to lead new armed insurgency in Cambodia to restore him to
power.  Apparently Sihanouk is popular figure among Cambodian exiles in Thai
camps and probably within all of Cambodia, but he has no international standing.
Pol Pot regime is supported by Chinese and is still recognized by most countries
as legitimate Cambodian Government.  Sihanouk contends neither Pol Pot nor
current President Heng Samrin, backed by Vietnam, rule country.  Por (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 54-80

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              45 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 24, 1980, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 1

LENGTH: 93 words

About 1,500 Vietnamese refugees have escaped since January 1980 from Vietnam
across Cambodia and are living in holding center at Khao-I-Dang, Thailand, with
more than 110,000 Cambodians.  Many more reportedly are planning to escape by
overland route.  In addition, unknown number of Vietnamese soldiers have
defected to Thailand in hope of resettling in US.  Fewer than 3,000 'boat
people' have reached shore in Southeast Asia in 1980, indicating growing
importance of Cambodia as exit route.  Refugees cite lower cost as advantage of
overland route (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 55-4-

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              46 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1980, Monday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Page 15, Column 5

LENGTH: 70 words

Group of veterans headed by Jan C Scruggs seek to erect memorial near Lincoln
Memorial, Washington, DC, as sign of reconciliation and healing of wounds that
divided US during Vietnam War.  Group persuaded Senator Charles McC Mathias to
indtroduce bill authorizing memorial and has persuaded 53 Senators to co-sponsor
measure along with 62 Representatives.  Non-Congressional figures who have
backed plan noted (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              47 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 25, 1980, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 55 words

Underground railroad is developing in Vietnam that delivers Vietnamese refugees
through Cambodia to Thai camps.  Recounts experiences of 1 Vietnamese family,
living until April 1970 in Cambodia, who were uprooted, returned to Vietnam, and
in 1979 began to make their way back across border to Cambodia and into Thailand
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 56-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              48 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                          February 28, 1980, Thursday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 2

LENGTH: 143 words

US Defense Secretary Brown says Carter Administration will seek additional funds
to increase military spending over the $142.7 billion already proposed for
fiscal '81, testimony, Senate Budget Committee.  Portrait.  Does not specify how
much more he will seek.  Senator Muskie urges fiscal restraint but Brown holds
US military spending is less, in real terms, than it was befor Vietnam War,
while Soviet spending has doubled in same period.  Brown and Joint Chiefs of
Staff Chairman, General Jones, testify US allies should do more to provide for
common defense, say Carter Administration has emphasized projection of
conventional rather than nuclear power in Persian Gulf area.  Report Defense
Department, despite failures, seeks efficiency in procurement of weapons and
equipment.  See laser beams for antiballistic-missile defense are far in future
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 59-80

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              49 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 29, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 97 words

Ieng Sary, one of leaders of deposed Cambodian regime, concedes that Communists
committed errors in revolutionizing country after 1975 victory, interview.
Alternately defends and apologizes for Pol Pot Government policies, which caused
deaths of untold number of Cambodians.  Western officials estimate as many as 3
million Cambodians have died since takeover.  Ieng denies charges that regime
practiced policy of mass extermination.  Says decision to empty cities after
victory was made out of fear that Vietnam would infiltrate cities and kill
Cambodian leaders.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 60

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              50 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           February 29, 1980, Friday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 114 words

Former Cambodian Deputy Prime Min Ieng Sary, in interview, concedes that
Communists committed errors in revolutionizing country following '75 victory.
Asserts Government should not have separated families into work brigades or
abolished private property and use of currency.  Adds Government should have
allowed schools to function normally and permitted freedom of worship.  Denies
that Pol Pot regime practiced policy of mass extermination of population groups,
but admits 'abuses' occurred as result of regime's inexperience in governing.
Asserts decision to evacuate cities was prompted by fear that Vietnam would
infiltrate cities and kill Government leaders.  Sary photo (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Interview 60

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              51 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 1, 1980, Saturday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 9, Column 2

LENGTH: 69 words

Experts at Defense Department and in arms industry say it will be at least 2
years before there are any significant increases in US military arms production
unless a national emergency occurs or tougher system of production priorities is
instituted.  Note industrial base that servied country from l940 to end of
Vietnam war has shrunk to point where it could not cope with heavy influx of
military orders (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Analysis 60

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              52 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 1, 1980, Saturday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 2, Column 3

LENGTH: 123 words

Cambodian Prime Minister Khieu Samphan and Deputy Prime Minister Ieng Sary of
deposed Pol Pot regime appeal to Western countries to forget past and support
Cambodia in struggle against Vietnam, interview.  Say that since removal of Pol
Pot, regime has changed policies and is now acceptable partner for Cambodians
and other Southeast Asian and Western countries.  Khieu Samphan insists that
Vietnam is carrying out war for territorial conquest and to exterminate
Cambodians.  Says more than 2 million Cambodians have fallen victim to
Vietnamese since invasion of December 1978.  Links invasion to domino theory of
Soviet expansion.  Concedes that Pol Pot was removed as Prime Minister because
of his negative image abroad.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 60-80

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              53 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 2, 1980, Sunday

BYLINE: BY BILL KURTIS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18

LENGTH: 156 words

Bill Kurtis article on plight of half-American, half-Vietnamese children
abandoned by American GI fathers in Vietnam after war.  Says there are estimated
8,000 Vietnamese-American children in and around Ho Chi Minh City.  Some are war
babies, but US State Department officials confirm they have received entry-visa
petitions for more than 600 children of American citizens who were left behind
in confusion of American departure.  Vietnamese Government has been
uncooperative in responding.  Some American diplomats speculate children may
become 'hostages' in Vietnamese negotiations for normalization of relations with
US.  Children and their mothers, ostracized by society, are forced to make
living by working in black-market economy.  Children are not allowed to attend
school.  Kurtis, describing visit to Ho Chi Minh City, recalls that he was given
close to 100 letters by Vietnamese trying to find relatives in US.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 61-80

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              54 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1980, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY EDWARD B FISKE

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 92 words

Teaching of 'values,' wihch became popular several years ago in wake of moral
unrest surrounding Vietnam and Watergate, is still making slow but steady
inroads into American elementary and secondary schools.  Hundreds of teachers a
year take courses at Harvard Univ and Carnegie-Mellon Univ and elsewhere in
values education, and Edwin Fenton of Carnegie-Mellon, leading proponent of
trend, estimates that as many as 10,000 American teachers have attended at last
a 1-day workshop on topics such as 'values clarification' and 'moral reasoning'
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              55 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 4, 1980, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY CAREY WINFREY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 3

LENGTH: 36 words

Article on Veterans Ensemble Theater Co and its current staging of In Pursuit of
Liberty.  Company is composed primarily of Vietnam veterans.  Founder Tom Bird
comments.  Bird and other troupe members illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 63-80

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              56 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 5, 1980, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM WILSON

SECTION: Page 27, Column 3

LENGTH: 53 words

William Wilson article scores CIA efforts to exempt itself from Freedom of
Information Act requests.  Notes questionable agency activity that would never
have come to light without books that were written by former agents.  They
involve activities in Angola and Vietnam and testing of LSD on unwitting victim
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 64

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              57 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 7, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 2

LENGTH: 44 words

China calls on Vietnam to postpone further peace talks between countries until
fall 1980.  Chinese Foreign Ministry statement says negotiations have shown no
progress and are unlikely to lead to breakthrough in light of Vietnamese
occupation of Cambodia (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 66-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              58 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 8, 1980, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ROBIN HERMAN

SECTION: Page 24, Column 5

LENGTH: 57 words

Calif Gov Brown nominates Francis Ford Coppola for appointment to State Arts
Council.  If Senate approves nomination, Coppola will serve 2 years on council,
which dispenses grants to promote arts.  Senate rejected Brown's original
choice, Jane Fonda, because of actress's antiwar activities during Vietnam War.
Sen Ruben Ayala comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 67-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              59 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 8, 1980, Saturday

BYLINE: BY ROBIN HERMAN

SECTION: Page 24, Column 5

LENGTH: 57 words

Calif Gov Brown nominates Francis Ford Coppola for appointment to State Arts
Council.  If Senate approves nomination, Coppola will serve 2 years on council,
which dispenses grants to promote arts.  Senate rejected Brown's original
choice, Jane Fonda, because of actress's antiwar activities during Vietnam War.
Sen Ruben Ayala comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 67-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              60 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1980, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY DAVID CHURA

SECTION: Page 19, Column 4

LENGTH: 19 words

David Chura article reminisces on death of high school friend who was killed
during Vietnam war.  Drawings (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 70

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              61 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1980, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY TOM WICKER

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 125 words

Tom Wicker scores Supreme Court ruling against Frank Snepp, former CIA agent who
wrote book about CIA's activities in Vietnam without obtaining agency's prior
clearance.  Says ruling will encourage other Government agencies to enforce
secrecy oaths.  Notes pending CIA charter includes section exempting agency from
Freedom of Information Act requests for information.  Says that act is also
being infringed on by another Supreme Court ruling, in the case of stenographic
notes of Henry Kissinger's telephone calls as State Secretary which Kissinger
removed from State Dept custody, and which court ruled do not fall under act
because dept no longer has them.  Says this will encourage others to remove
Government records from official custody (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 70

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              62 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 11, 1980, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY TOM WICKER

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 125 words

Tom Wicker scores Supreme Court ruling against Frank Snepp, former CIA agent who
wrote book about CIA's activities in Vietnam without obtaining agency's prior
clearance.  Says ruling will encourage other Government agencies to enforce
secrecy oaths.  Notes pending CIA charter includes section exempting agency from
Freedom of Information Act requests for information.  Says that act is also
being infringed on by another Supreme Court ruling, in the case of stenographic
notes of Henry Kissinger's telephone calls as State Secretary which Kissinger
removed from State Dept custody, and which court ruled do not fall under act
because dept no longer has them.  Says this will encourage others to remove
Government records from official custody (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 70

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              63 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 12, 1980, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Lawyers for Pfc Robert R Garwood asks military judge at court martial, Camp
Lejuene, NC, for Govt funds to help in his defense against charges of desertion
and collaboration with enemy in Vietnam.  Garwood and military attorney illus
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 71-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              64 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 13, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 3

LENGTH: 127 words

Colonel Robert E Switzer, judge in court-martial case against Marine PFC Robert
Russell Garwood, rejects request by Garwood lawyers for access to collection of
anti-American statements made by US prisoners of war in Vietnam.  Says he is not
convinced that material is relevant to Garwood's defense against charges of
desertion and collaboration with enemy during Vietnam war.  Denies defense
request for access to confidential State Department documents concerning
Garwood's return to US.  Grants lawyers access to confidential reports on
consultations Garwood had with military doctors.  Garwood lawyers plan to seek
dismissal of charges on ground of selective prosecution because no other former
POW has been tried on charges stemming from Vietnam war (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 72-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              65 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 13, 1980, Thursday

BYLINE: BY WINSTON WILLIAMS

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 137 words

2d in series of articles, Inflation: What Keeps It Going?. Growing number of
economists contend that inflation has been fueled by sweeping changes in
economic policy, by stop-and-go monetary policy, on-and-off spending programs
and prospects of wage and price controls.  Say that economic policy,
particularly monetary policy, should be steady over a period of years to have a
deflationary effect.  Most economists trace beginning of current inflation to
mid-1960s and financing of Vietnam war and Pres Lyndon Johnson's Great Society
programs.  Multiplicity of causes for inflation of 1970s traced.Among
economists' views quoted are those of Prof Phillip Cagan and Alfred Smith (chief
economist of North Carolina National Bank).  Table listing changes in Consumer
Price Index and its components in latest 12 mos (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Survey-Series 72

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              66 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 15, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 46 words

EPA to impose permanent ban on most uses of 2,4,5-T and Silvex, defoliants
containing same dioxin found in Agent Orange used by American troops in Vietnam,
which has been linked to cancer, nerve disorders and birth defects.  Effort is
being contested by Dow Chemical Co (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 74-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              67 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 15, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 4

LENGTH: 56 words

Hong Kong Government reports that despite US Government trade embargo with
Vietnam, American goods, particularly pesticides and cigarettes, are being
shipped in increasing volume to Vietnam.  Census and Statistics Department says
exports of US goods from Hong Kong to Vietnam rose to $1.8 Million in 1979 from
$366,000 in 1978 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 74-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              68 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 16, 1980, Sunday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 2

LENGTH: 60 words

Vietnam rejects UN Human Rights Commission resolution accusing Hanoi of
violating human rights in Cambodia.  Western-sponsored resolution condemns
'invasion and occupation of certain regions of Cambodia by foreign forces and
the resulting violation of human rights'.  Hanoi radio broadcast says resolution
made no mention of brutality by Pol Pot regime (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 75-8-

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              69 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 18, 1980, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY BILL KURTIS

SECTION: Page 23, Column 2

LENGTH: 46 words

Bill Kurtis article on efforts of Veterans to win Govt compensation for
illnesses, which they charge have resulted from exposure to herbicide Agent
Orange during Vietnam War.  Describes his visit to Vietnam to inspect damage to
land and people caused by defoliant.  Photo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              70 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 18, 1980, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY BILL KURTIS

SECTION: Page 23, Column 2

LENGTH: 46 words

Bill Kurtis article on efforts of Veterans to win Govt compensation for
illnesses, which they charge have resulted from exposure to herbicide Agent
Orange during Vietnam War.  Describes his visit to Vietnam to inspect damage to
land and people caused by defoliant.  Photo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 77

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              71 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 18, 1980, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Page 19, Column 1

LENGTH: 118 words

Vietnam veterans score medical tests at Veterans Adm Clinic, Northport (NY),
aimed at diagnosing effects of their exposure to Agent Orange defoliant.  Say
clinic offers only routine tests, none of which can confirm exposure.  Are
concerned that exposure effects may last rest of their lives and be passed along
to children.  Govt insists evidence is lacking that herbicide, which contains
cancer-causing chemical Dioxin, ever harmed troops.  Has refused to conduct
chromosome analyses, sperm counts or bipopsies on fat tissue, which veterans
believe could single out herbicide as cause of some of their illnesses.
Northport chief of staff Dr Francis E Conrad comments.  Veteran Gene Capodieci
illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 77-80

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              72 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           March 19, 1980, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY KAREN DE WIT

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 109 words

Representatives David E Bonior and Thomas A Daschle, veterans of Vietnam war and
chairman and vice chairman respectively of Vietnam Veterans in Congress, release
copies of alleged Veterans Administration memo describing carcinogenic and
genetics-altering aspects of herbicides Agent Orange and Agent Blue, defoliants
used by US in Vietnam.  Send copy of memo and letter to Veterans Administration
chief Max Cleland, charging memo directly contradicts all earlier testimony
given Congress by VA representatives and Defense Department officials who denied
any evidence linking herbicides with health problems.  VA spokesman says Cleland
will reply (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 78-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              73 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

Attorneys for Pfc Robert R Garwood ask Marine Corps to let him go back to
Vietnam to gather evidence and find Viet Cong witnesses for his defense.
Garwood, who is charged with desertion and collaboration with enemy, also argues
that Marine Corps cannot prosecute him because his term of enlistment expired
while he was in Vietnam.  Motions are presented at resumption of Garwood's
court-martial after 2-week recess.  Defense attorney Capt Joseph Composto
comments (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 86-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              74 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

Attorneys for Pfc Robert R Garwood ask Marine Corps to let him go back to
Vietnam to gather evidence and find Viet Cong witnesses for his defense.
Garwood, who is charged with desertion and collaboration with enemy, also argues
that Marine Corps cannot prosecute him because his term of enlistment expired
while he was in Vietnam.  Motions are presented at resumption of Garwood's
court-martial after 2-week recess.  Defense attorney Capt Joseph Composto
comments (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 86-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              75 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

Attorneys for Pfc Robert R Garwood ask Marine Corps to let him go back to
Vietnam to gather evidence and find Viet Cong witnesses for his defense.
Garwood, who is charged with desertion and collaboration with enemy, also argues
that Marine Corps cannot prosecute him because his term of enlistment expired
while he was in Vietnam.  Motions are presented at resumption of Garwood's
court-martial after 2-week recess.  Defense attorney Capt Joseph Composto
comments (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 86-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              76 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 27, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 21, Column 1

LENGTH: 79 words

Attorneys for Pfc Robert R Garwood ask Marine Corps to let him go back to
Vietnam to gather evidence and find Viet Cong witnesses for his defense.
Garwood, who is charged with desertion and collaboration with enemy, also argues
that Marine Corps cannot prosecute him because his term of enlistment expired
while he was in Vietnam.  Motions are presented at resumption of Garwood's
court-martial after 2-week recess.  Defense attorney Capt Joseph Composto
comments (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 86-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              77 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 29, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 40 words

Military judge Colonel Robert E Switzer denies 5 motions to dismiss
court-martial of PFC Robert Russell Garwood.  Rejects motion that Government
sponsor fact-finding trip to Vietnam by Garwood attorneys.  Recesses case until
April 15 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 88-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              78 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            March 29, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 6

LENGTH: 40 words

Military judge Colonel Robert E Switzer denies 5 motions to dismiss
court-martial of PFC Robert Russell Garwood.  Rejects motion that Government
sponsor fact-finding trip to Vietnam by Garwood attorneys.  Recesses case until
April 15 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 88-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              79 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 30, 1980, Sunday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 2

LENGTH: 17 words

Ton Duc Tang, President of Vietnam since '69 and world's oldest Communist
leader, died at age 91 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 89-3-

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              80 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 30, 1980, Sunday

SECTION: Page 36, Column 2

LENGTH: 17 words

Ton Duc Tang, President of Vietnam since '69 and world's oldest Communist
leader, died at age 91 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 89-3-

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              81 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 31, 1980, Monday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

President Ton Duc Thang of Vietnam, who held largely ceremonial office since
death of Ho Chi Minh in '69, died March 30 at age 91.  Biography.  Portrait (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 90

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              82 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             March 31, 1980, Monday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 27 words

President Ton Duc Thang of Vietnam, who held largely ceremonial office since
death of Ho Chi Minh in '69, died March 30 at age 91.  Biography.  Portrait (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Obituary 90

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              83 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

US Assistant State Secretary Richard C Holbrooke says US supports idea of new
Geneva conference to deal with problems of 600,000 Indochinese refugees, speech,
Council on Foreign Relations, NYC.  Calls for reduction of Soviety military role
in Vietnam and withdrawal of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia.  Supports call by
Thailand for conference to coordinate better ways of distributing food to
refugees (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 93-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              84 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 68 words

US Assistant State Secretary Richard C Holbrooke says US supports idea of new
Geneva conference to deal with problems of 600,000 Indochinese refugees, speech,
Council on Foreign Relations, NYC.  Calls for reduction of Soviety military role
in Vietnam and withdrawal of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia.  Supports call by
Thailand for conference to coordinate better ways of distributing food to
refugees (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 93-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              85 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 3, 1980, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 10, Column 1

LENGTH: 73 words

Military analysis of People's Republic of China finds Chinese army's weapons
technically well behind NATO and USSR.  Observers note substantial amount of
equipment was lost in '79 invasion of northern Vietnam and Chinese have done
little to buy arms abroad because of chronic shortage of funds.  Report Chinese
army's qualitative inferiority to Soviet forces in Asia has not been reduced in
any important respect in last 4 years (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 93-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              86 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 82 words

Late US Supreme Court Justice William O Douglas donated land in Nova Scotia to
be developed into retreat for scholars around world to write and do other
creative work, according to Douglas's will, which was filed in Yakima County
(Washington) Courthouse in March.  Preference would be given to scholars from
Iran, Vietnam, Russia, China and Mongolia.  Will shows that Douglas left his
wife Cathy manuscript of book entitled 'Forever,' which Douglas said he wrote
'especially for her' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 94-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              87 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 4, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 82 words

Late US Supreme Court Justice William O Douglas donated land in Nova Scotia to
be developed into retreat for scholars around world to write and do other
creative work, according to Douglas's will, which was filed in Yakima County
(Washington) Courthouse in March.  Preference would be given to scholars from
Iran, Vietnam, Russia, China and Mongolia.  Will shows that Douglas left his
wife Cathy manuscript of book entitled 'Forever,' which Douglas said he wrote
'especially for her' (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 94-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              88 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 5, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Reprs Thomas A Daschle and David E Bonior release 5 research studies, 4 from
Sweden and 1 from West German, that found probable link between cancer and
components of Agent Orange, defoliant used during Vietnam War.  Hold studies
refute Veterans Administration statements denying link (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 95-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              89 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 5, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 49 words

Reprs Thomas A Daschle and David E Bonior release 5 research studies, 4 from
Sweden and 1 from West German, that found probable link between cancer and
components of Agent Orange, defoliant used during Vietnam War.  Hold studies
refute Veterans Administration statements denying link (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 95-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              90 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 9, 1980, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JUDITH CUMMINGS and ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 38 words

Admiral James B Stockdale, Citadel president who was one of highest ranking
prisoners of war in Vietnam, says he is thinking of resigning if long-entrenched
practice of hazing 'plebes,' or freshmen, is not liberalized (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 99-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              91 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 9, 1980, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY ALBIN KREBS and JUDITH CUMMINGS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 7, Column 3

LENGTH: 38 words

Admiral James B Stockdale, Citadel president who was one of highest ranking
prisoners of war in Vietnam, says he is thinking of resigning if long-entrenched
practice of hazing 'plebes,' or freshmen, is not liberalized (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 99-80

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              92 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1980, Friday

BYLINE: BY HOWELL RAINES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 79 words

Republican Presidential aspirant Ronald Reagan defends himself against press
reports that he consistently makes inaccurate statements in campaign speeches,
news conference, Pittsburgh.  Affirms support for Olmppic boycott.  Says
misinformation he received from top-level military officials led to misstatement
that Vietnam veterans do not get benefits under GI Bill.  Has been criticized by
George Bush for being 'wishy-washy' on Olympics issue.  Reagan photograph (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 101-8

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              93 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 11, 1980, Friday

BYLINE: BY HOWELL RAINES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 79 words

Republican Presidential aspirant Ronald Reagan defends himself against press
reports that he consistently makes inaccurate statements in campaign speeches,
news conference, Pittsburgh.  Affirms support for Olmppic boycott.  Says
misinformation he received from top-level military officials led to misstatement
that Vietnam veterans do not get benefits under GI Bill.  Has been criticized by
George Bush for being 'wishy-washy' on Olympics issue.  Reagan photograph (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 101-8

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              94 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 12, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Pakistan plans to close its embassy in Hanoi, citing statement by Prime Min Pham
Van Dong of Vietnam that described disputed state of Kashmir as part of India.
Kashmir has been major issue between India and Pakistan, with both claiming
territory.  Foreign Ministry spokesman contends Dong's statements were made in
bid to buy india's recognition of new Cambodian Government (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 102-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              95 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 12, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 30, Column 1

LENGTH: 64 words

Pakistan plans to close its embassy in Hanoi, citing statement by Prime Min Pham
Van Dong of Vietnam that described disputed state of Kashmir as part of India.
Kashmir has been major issue between India and Pakistan, with both claiming
territory.  Foreign Ministry spokesman contends Dong's statements were made in
bid to buy india's recognition of new Cambodian Government (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 102-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              96 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 12, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 2

LENGTH: 34 words

Military judge Colonel Robert E Switzer grants Marine Corps PFC Robert Garwood
5-week delay in court-martial on charges of desertion and collaborating with
enemy in Vietnam.  Trail will begin May 22 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 102-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              97 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 13, 1980, Sunday

BYLINE: BY TESSA MELVIN

SECTION: Section 22; Page 8, Column 5

LENGTH: 39 words

Article on efforts of Tri-Village Refugee Committee, Hastings-on-Hudson, NY, to
reunite ethnic Chinese 'boat family' from Vietnam in US and find them housing,
jobs and funds to resettle.  Group co-chairman Jon Edwards comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 103-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              98 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 13, 1980, Sunday

BYLINE: BY DOUGLAS E KNEELAND

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 130 words

Article on Republican Presidential aspirant Ronald Reagan's stand on issues
notes challenges to recent statements is putting him on defensive in quest for
nomination.  Campaign aides and advisers see problem arising from Reagan's
misstatement of facts and from his use of unchecked information, gathered from
various sources.  Also cite Reagan's replies to audiences in question-and-answer
sessions.  Article notes public attention is focusing more on Reagan's
statements, than on his strategy or tactics, since his nomination seems
virtually assured.  Some of Reagan's recent gaffes, notably regarding rights of
Vietnam veterans under G I Bill, costs of Federal welfare assistance, tax-cuts
in former Kennedy Adm and employment in auto industry cited.  Reagan portrait
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 103-8

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              99 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 14, 1980, Monday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 1

LENGTH: 158 words

G Gordon Liddy, lone figure to keep silent on his participation in Watergate
affair, writes book giving detailed account of break-in and its aftermath, and
about peripheral activities he performed at behest of various Nixon Adm and
Nixon campaign officials.  Excerpts from book published in Time magazine include
Liddy's assertion that he was prepared to submit to his own assassination
because of failed break-in.  That he was ready to poison co-conspirator H Howard
Hunt for cooperating with prosecutors, but did not because his 'supervisors' did
not order him to.  That he discussed killing Jack Anderson, newspaper columnist,
because Anderson had supposedly compromised American agent abroad in 1 of his
columns.  That he sought way to discredit Dr Daniel J Ellsberg for disclosing
Pentagon Papers study of Vietnam War.  Liddy notes that because of statute of
limitations, nobody can be implicated by his book, which is entitled 'Will' (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 104-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              100 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 14, 1980, Monday

SECTION: Page 4, Column 5

LENGTH: 68 words

South Korean diplomats Rhee Dai Young, minister counselor in South Korean
Embassy, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, and An Wee Wan and Suk Byung Ho, who were
left behind in capital when Americans evacuated city, are released and returned
to South Korea.  Diplomats have been imprisoned in Ho Chi Minh City since 1975.
Sweden had been acting as intermediary between Vietnamese and South Korean
Governments (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 104-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              101 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 14, 1980, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 197 words

Vietnamese officials, who have established strong hold on Cambodia, reportedly
say Cambodia's weakness is causing Vietnam concern.  Concern is twofold: Vietnam
is worried over possibility of another famine and has only limited confidence in
competence of Heng Samrin Government.  Officials, who declined to be identified,
say they share anxiety of international relief aides that Heng Samrin does not
sense need to distribute relief food provided by USSR, Vietnam and international
community.  Vietnam has been criticized in UN and by relief officials for being
partly to blame for restricting relief efforts and for allowing warehouses to
fill up with goods while Cambodians are starving.  Vietnamese official says
Cambodian ministers are receiving as much as 22 pounds of meat monthly and eat
better than Vietnamese counterparts.  Vietnamese say they realize Cambodians
have no natural affection for Vietnamese and would not welcome heavy, long-term
Vietnamese presence.  Vietnamese attitudes lend credence to reports that Heng
Samrin might be replaced by Pen Sovan as chief of Government.  Prospect
unsettles Cambodians, who believe Pen Sovan is too pro-Vietnamese.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 104-8

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              102 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 14, 1980, Monday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Page 1, Column 4

LENGTH: 197 words

Vietnamese officials, who have established strong hold on Cambodia, reportedly
say Cambodia's weakness is causing Vietnam concern.  Concern is twofold: Vietnam
is worried over possibility of another famine and has only limited confidence in
competence of Heng Samrin Government.  Officials, who declined to be identified,
say they share anxiety of international relief aides that Heng Samrin does not
sense need to distribute relief food provided by USSR, Vietnam and international
community.  Vietnam has been criticized in UN and by relief officials for being
partly to blame for restricting relief efforts and for allowing warehouses to
fill up with goods while Cambodians are starving.  Vietnamese official says
Cambodian ministers are receiving as much as 22 pounds of meat monthly and eat
better than Vietnamese counterparts.  Vietnamese say they realize Cambodians
have no natural affection for Vietnamese and would not welcome heavy, long-term
Vietnamese presence.  Vietnamese attitudes lend credence to reports that Heng
Samrin might be replaced by Pen Sovan as chief of Government.  Prospect
unsettles Cambodians, who believe Pen Sovan is too pro-Vietnamese.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 104-8

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              103 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 15, 1980, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 14, Column 4

LENGTH: 72 words

US District Court, Washington, DC, awards $500,000 in damages to 6-year-old
Michael Moses Schneider, who survived Saigon crash of plane flying Vietnamese
orphans to new countries in closing days of Vietnam war.  Schneider is living
with adoptive American parents in Denver, Colo.  Lawyers said boy has permanent
brain damage from April 4, 1975 crash.  Damages will be paid by Lockheed
Aircraft Corporation and US Government (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 105-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              104 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 20, 1980, Sunday

SECTION: Page 13, Column 2

LENGTH: 43 words

South Korean Information Minister Lee Kyoo Hyun issues statement indicating
country would like to re-establish diplomatic relations with Vietnam.  Statement
follows repatriation by Hanoi of 3 senior South Korean diplomats detained in
Saigon since 1975 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 110-7

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              105 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 26, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 2

LENGTH: 63 words

Article compares abortive US rescue mission in Iran with other raids to free
hostages.  Cites Israeli raid that freed 103 hostages at Entebbe, Uganda, in
'76, West German operation that saved 86 people at Mogadishu, Somalia, in '77
and US attempt to free 61 American prisoners in North Vietnam in '70.  Armed
Forces Journal International editor Benjamin Schemmer comments (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 116-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              106 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             April 27, 1980, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 79 words

Article on mixed reactions by Vietnamese over their political control of
Cambodia.  Cambodians express concern over duration of Vietnam's stay and its
long-term role in country.  Expressions are marked by sense of impotence and
hope that other powers will defend Cambodia.  Vietnamese cite their own national
security as reason for invasion of Cambodia.  Difficulties Vietnam faces in
light of famine situation in Cambodia noted.  Cambodian President Heng Samrin
illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 117-8

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              107 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            April 29, 1980, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 20, Column 3

LENGTH: 33 words

1,200 antinuclear protesters stage biggest demonstration at Pentagon since days
of Vietnam War.  More than 300 are arrested.  Rally was sponsored by Coalition
for a Non-Nuclear World.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 119-8

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              108 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           April 30, 1980, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY PETER KOVLER

SECTION: Page 31, Column 1

LENGTH: 21 words

Peter Kovler article reflects on effects of Vietnam war 5 years after fall to
Communists and American withdrawal.  Illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 12

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              109 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 2, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Page 18, Column 5

LENGTH: 34 words

Vietnam Veterans of America establishes telephone number for veterans to secure
information on getting physical examinations and disability payments stemming
from exposure to Agent Orange defoliant (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 122-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              110 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1980, Sunday

SECTION: Page 52, Column 4

LENGTH: 47 words

Rockefeller Foundation announces 40 winners of its annual fellowships in
humanities.  Winners will receive awards of $10,000 to $20,000 to support
studies ranging from research into roots of Iranian revolution to history of
debate in America over Vietnam.  Recipients listed (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 124-1

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              111 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 4, 1980, Sunday

BYLINE: BY MOLLY IVINS

SECTION: Page 22, Column 1

LENGTH: 151 words

Comment on controversy over Soldier of Fortune, magazine published by Robert K
Brown, which bills itself as 'journal of professional adventurers'.  Controversy
involves magazine's classified advertising section, which many people regard as
information central for mercenary soldiers.  Repr Patricia Schroeder has asked
Justice Department to investigate magazine for possible violations of Federal
statutes that prohibit recruiting mercenaries or serving as one.  Brown
maintains that printing ads from people who say they are looking for dangerous
work does not constitute recruiting.  Daniel Gearhart, Vietnam veteran who was
executed as mercenary in Angola in July '76, got his job by placing ad in
magazine.  According to reporters who covered recent war in Rhodesia, majority
of 400 to 500 American mercenaries fighting for white minority Government found
their way there same way.  Brown illus (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 124-8

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              112 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 5, 1980, Monday

SECTION: Page 10, Column 4

LENGTH: 37 words

Members of families of American hostages in Iran discuss their experiences with
former Vietnam prisoner of war Navy Capt William Stratton and his wife,
Washington, DC, meeting arranged with help of State Department (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 125-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              113 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 7, 1980, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY BERNARD D NOSSITER

SECTION: Page 6, Column 1

LENGTH: 115 words

Unpublished UN reports indicate that 4,000 people still flee Vietnam each month
in small boats, and they continue to be subjected to murder, rape and robbery in
Gulf of Siam.  Poul Hartling, UN High Commissioner for Refugees, has become so
alarmed over what he calls indescribable acts of moral and physical degradation
that he has appealed for help to Secretary General Kurt Waldheim.  Waldheim is
known to believe that problem is largely one for Thai and Malaysian Governments
to solve, since most of assaults take place inside their territorial waters.
Aides from UN refugees agency have also urged US to use its influence in Bangkok
to persuade Thailand to crack down on pirate (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 127-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              114 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 8, 1980, Thursday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Page 16, Column 1

LENGTH: 163 words

National coalition of Vietnam veterans sues to block Veterans Administration's
proposed health study of defoliant Agent Orange because of lack of trust in
agency's ability to perform unbiased study.  National Veterans Law Center
attorney Lewis M Milford charges Veterans Adm approach to study places undue
emphasis on cost rather than quality of research and will needlessly exclude
most informed scientists from participating.  Action is backed by Harvard Univ
associate professor of occupational health Dr David H Wegman, who alleges Adm
has failed to provide essential information to develop scientifically valid
epidemiological study design.  National Research Council voices reservations
about proposed study of defoliant by Air Force, charging there are weaknesses in
study's design and suggesting that Air Force might be biased.  Veterans Adm Admr
Max Cleland denies study will be biased.  Says suit by coalition only delay
answers to questions veterans are seeking (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 128-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              115 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 10, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 24, Column 5

LENGTH: 46 words

Marine Corps Pfc Robert R Garwood says he needs psychiatric help because of long
time he spent behind enemy lines in Vietnam and his pending court-martial.
Garwood is being charged with desertion and collaboration with enemy when he
returned from Hanoi in March '79 (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 130-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              116 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 11, 1980, Sunday

BYLINE: BY RICHARD J MEISLIN

SECTION: Page 28, Column 4

LENGTH: 38 words

NYS Health Committee chairman James R Tallon Jr calls for state to conduct a
2-year, $225,000 investigation of Agent Orange, a chemical used to defoliate
areas of Vietnam, to determine needs of veterans exposed to chemical (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 131-6

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              117 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 13, 1980, Tuesday

BYLINE: BY ROBERT REINHOLD

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 5

LENGTH: 163 words

Article on attempts by Pentagon to repair ties with university scientists by
increasing spending for basic research, with encouragement from White House.
Defense support for academic science has swelled by 70% in 3 years, while
backing from other Federal agencies has scarcely matched inflation.  Officials
assert that new research is needed to restore American technological base that
eroded during Vietnam war era and to bolster long-term national security.  MIT
biologists Alexander Rich and Professor Jonathan King, Texas University
associate vice president Ross Shipman, Deputy Under Secretary of Defense Arden L
Bement Jr, linguist Noam Chomsky, Bement's research director George Gamota,
physicist Herman Feshbach, mathematician Irving E Segal, and former Pentagon
research chief Herbert York comment.  Roles President Carter, science adviser
Frank Press and Defense Secretary Harold Brown have played in promoting research
spending noted.  Brown and Press illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 133-8

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              118 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 14, 1980, Wednesday

SECTION: Page 27, Column 4

LENGTH: 66 words

Article by Transnational Institute, Amsterdam, fellow Anthony Barnett on
documents from Cambodia's Pol Pot regime archives at interrogation center, Phnom
Penh, documenting torture of political prisoners by regime officials.  Holds
that nations do not need to endorse current regime or support presence of
Vietnamese troops in country to grant that Vietnam had legitimate grounds for
acting (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 13

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              119 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            May 14, 1980, Wednesday

BYLINE: BY JAMES BARRETT RESTON

SECTION: Page 27, Column 1

LENGTH: 59 words

James Reston on liberal Democrats dislike of Pres Carter.  Queries whether
enough of them will desert him in general election to cause election of Ronald
Reagan.  Compares situation in '68 election when liberals broke with Hubert
Humphrey over his support of Pres Johnson's defense of Vietnam war and Richard
Nixon won popular vote by less than 1% (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: Editorial_Comment 13

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              120 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1980, Friday

BYLINE: BY JILL SMOLOWE and JUDITH CUMMINGS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Marine Colonel Donald Gilbert Cook's widow to be presented Medal of Honor more
than 12 years after Cook's death in Vietcong prison during Vietnam war.  Naval
Secretary Edward Hidalgo to make presentation at Pentagon's Hall of Heroes (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 136-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              121 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 16, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Page 16, Column 6

LENGTH: 42 words

Attorneys for Marine Corps Pfc Robert R Garwood, charged with desertion and
collaboration with enemy in Vietnam, asks military judge Col R E Switzer to
provide marine with additional legal aid and Government funds to pay for private
medical help (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 136-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              122 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 18, 1980, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 6; Page 76

LENGTH: 123 words

Henry Kamm article on scene in Cambodia, particularly Phnom Pehn, more than year
after Vietnamese Army 'liberated' country by overthrowing Pol Pot regime.
Describes famine that has accompanied liberation.  Holds ultimate paradox is
that Western world continues to lend legitimacy and sustanance to Pol Pot
Government, which today governs no more than some jungle enclaves.  Notes key to
Cambodians' acceptance of Vietnamese occupation force is dread of return of Pol
Pot regime.  Notes key roles that Vietnamese officials hold in Cambodian
every-day affairs and inefficiency with which Cambodian officials conduct their
own offices.  Holds US, Vietnam and Soviet Union cannot escape responsibility
for Cambodian affairs.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 138-8

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              123 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 18, 1980, Sunday

BYLINE: BY HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 6; Page 76

LENGTH: 123 words

Henry Kamm article on scene in Cambodia, particularly Phnom Penh, more than year
after Vietnamese Army 'liberated' country by overthrowing Pol Pot regime.
Describes famine that has accompanied liberation.  Holds ultimate paradox is
that Western world continues to lend legitimacy and sustanance to Pol Pot
Government, which today governs no more than some jungle enclaves.  Notes key to
Cambodians' acceptance of Vietnamese occupation force is dread of return of Pol
Pot regime.  Notes key roles that Vietnamese officials hold in Cambodian
every-day affairs and inefficiency with which Cambodian officials conduct their
own offices.  Holds US, Vietnam and Soviet Union cannot escape responsibility
for Cambodian affairs.  Illus (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 138-8

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              124 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 28, Column 6

LENGTH: 33 words

House approves bill to establish memorial in Washington, DC, to honor 57,000
American servicemen who died in Vietnam war.  Memorial is to be financed by
Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund Inc (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 142-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              125 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1980, Thursday

SECTION: Page 23, Column 6

LENGTH: 51 words

Comment on new 'storefront' counseling centers set up by Veterans Administration
that have proven successful in wide variety of circumstances in helping Vietnam
war veterans overcome chronic adjustment problems.  Program is due to expire in
Oct '81, but Congress may extend parts of it in some form (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 142-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              126 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 22, 1980, Thursday

BYLINE: BY DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Page 7, Column 1

LENGTH: 138 words

Intelligence and academic specialists say China's overall strategic situation
has worsened over past year despite apparently successful launching of
intercontinental ballistic missile.  Say China's only course is to call for
united front with NATO.  Sources within alliance say China faces prospect of
military encirclement.  Increasing Soviet support for Vietnam and establishment
of Soviet military presence on China's southern flank through use of naval and
air facilities in Cam Ranh Bay and Danang cited.  USSR's strengtnening of ground
forces along 4,000-mile border with China, buildup of forces on islands in
southern Kuriles and reinforcement of Pacific fleet noted.  China's military
response appears to be following Maoist dictum that defense needs could be met
by nuclear strike force and vast people's army (M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 142-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              127 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 24, 1980, Saturday

SECTION: Page 8, Column 6

LENGTH: 44 words

Military judge Colonel R E Switzer denies motions to require Government to pay
for private psychiatric consultations and paralegal help for Marine Corps PFC
Robert Garwood in court-martial on charges of desertion and collaboration with
enemy while in Vietnam (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 144-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              128 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 27, 1980, Tuesday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11, Column 1

LENGTH: 40 words

Repr John B Anderson calls for reversal of 'half a generation of neglect',
speech, Dallas, proposing comprehensive legislation to aid Vietnam veterans,
including extension of eductational benefits and aid for Agent Orange victims
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 147-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              129 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 27, 1980, Tuesday

SECTION: Section 2; Page 9, Column 6

LENGTH: 32 words

200 Vietnam veterans attend 1st national Memorial Day service for Americans
killed in Vietnam war, Washington, DC, Mall.  Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund
president Jan C Scruggs comments (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 147-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              130 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 27, 1980, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 7, Column 6

LENGTH: 14 words

Vietnam accuses China of carrying out incursions across their joint frontier
(S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 147-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              131 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                             May 27, 1980, Tuesday

SECTION: Page 3, Column 4

LENGTH: 133 words

US Deputy State Secretary Warren M Christopher denounces refusal of Vietnam and
USSR to participate in UN conference, Geneva, on humanitarian aid to Cambodia.
Says participants to conference, called by Thailand to speed aid to Cambodia,
could not ignore 'broader reality' of overall refugee problem.  Says US is ready
to provide $29.6 Million in food and funds over next 4 months in addition to $85
million already pledged.  USSR and Vietnam refused to attend conference, saying
session was politically motivated.  Vietnamese-backed Heng Samrin government and
ousted Pol Pot regime were not invited to send representatives.  Christopher
calls for removal of restrictions on relief workers so that aid can be
distributed.  Endorses proposed creation of UN fund for Cambodian relief.  Illus
(M).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 147-8

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              132 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                              May 30, 1980, Friday

SECTION: Page 2, Column 6

LENGTH: 36 words

1st Americans to visit South Vietnam as tourists since it was merged with North
Vietnam leave on May 29 after week of supervised sightseeing.  10-member groupp
incluees 6 Americans, reporters and photographers (S).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 150-8

              Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                              133 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOSTON: THE 'IN' PLACE FOR COLLEGE STUDENTS

BYLINE: By Howard Husock; Howard Husock is a reporter for Boston's WGBH-TV who
recently won the Robert F. Kennedy Award for broadcast journalism.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 23, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7344 words


The first thing we noticed about Harvard Square was not Harvard. That may have
been the last thing. The first was probably a poster, maybe one offering draft
counseling, perhaps one promoting some blues singer whose name we'd seen
mentioned in The Village Voice but who had never played in Cleveland. It was the
spring of 1968, and Harvard Square seemed like a sea of posters, each one
promising immediate delivery of items not even for sale in South Euclid, Ohio.

Five suburban high-school seniors in a '64 Ford, we had arrived, after an
all-night drive, in search of the youth Mecca, East Coast branch. We weren't
disappointed. Harvard Square, it seemed, had more bookstores, record stores and
antiwar leaflets than the entirety of Ohio. Even more important, youth seemed to
set the tone for all of Boston and Cambridge, at least all of it we managed to
see. You did not even have to worry about trusting anyone over 30 - there seemed
to be no one that old on the streets. The shopping malls of home simply could
not compare. Three of us would attend college in Boston, and none of us would
ever again live in Cleveland or its suburbs.

Twelve years later, the social currents that drew us East have, of course,
dissipated in the mainstream of American life. Most of the shrines of the 1960's
youth culture would be recognizable today only with the aid of historic markers.
Harvard Square, too, has changed.  High-school seniors from Ohio who could
afford the gas today would find their cars barred from Massachusetts Avenue by
the construction of a new subway. Head shops have been overtaken by running-shoe
outlets, and the whole grains and herbal teas once sold only in backstreet food
coopera tives are now displayed in the gleaming atriums of recycled commercial
buildings. Coffeehouses feature croissants, not folk singers.

Still, one returning to Harvard Square after a decade's absence might think, at
first glance, that only the posters have changed: from antiwar to antinuke, from
Joan Baez to ''high-energy jazz.'' And there would be something essentially
right about such a first impression. The causes and styles have changed, but
Harvard Square's most important attribute - its lure for the young - has not.
''The Square,'' as it is always called, remains the psychological center of a
student metropolis that has not only weathered the 70's but shows no sign of
losing its popularity.

More than just another college town, Boston is the closest thing to America's
national college city - a city that changes to reflect students' tastes and, in
turn, changes its legions of quadrennial residents, who include many of the
brightest, most ambitious and most privileged students in the country. Boston
serves both as a magnet for youth and as window through which can be glimpsed
the present state of student culture and its values - particularly those of the
young upper-middle class who flock there.  Sheer numbers tell something of the
story. The more than 1,600 seniors who will receive their Harvard diplomas this
Thursday are among an estimated 157,000 full-or part-time students enrolled in
43 colleges and universities in Boston and Cambridge alone. If one includes all
of metropolitan Boston, the number swells to 216,000 students attending 68
institutions. Roughly one out of every 16 private-college students in the United
States - some 164,000 - attends school in the Boston area.

They are an autumn army that arrives via U-Haul and the Eastern shuttle. Some 60
percent of the Boston area's college students come from out of state, the
majority of these from the East but, in the case of internationally prestigious
institutions such as Har-vard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
from virtually every state as well as from around the world. There are 200
Mormons at Harvard and M.I.T., mainly from Utah and Idaho. The son of the former
Nicaraguan strongman Gen. Anastasio Somoza attends Boston University. But New
Yorkers form the biggest bloc, representing, for instance, a quarter of Boston
University's undergraduates. New York Senatorial candidate Elizabeth Holtzman
advertises for campaign workers in The Harvard Crimson, and an out-of-town
student is more likely to meet a hometown acquaintance from Great Neck in
Harvard Square than a Bostonian is likely to encounter another native.

Students, in fact, may have supplanted the Brahmin bluenose as the typical
Bostonian in the national imagination. When friends, both nearly 30, took a
vacation out West recently and told a Montana resident they lived in Boston,
they were asked if they were ''on break.'' Cloth book bags and nylon parkas
outnumber briefcases and London Fogs in Boston and Cambridge. One can eat almost
anywhere without a tie. Large sections of the metropolitan area have become de
facto student ghettos. Sunny spring days mean imported beer drunk on the stoops
of aging brick buildings whose apartments command premium rates because of
student demand. (Such demand, and the difficulties it creates for
Boston-Cambridge's permanent residents, resulted in the passage of rent-control
laws in the early 1970's.)

There are so many colleges in metropolitan Boston that the flavor of no single
institution predominates. The melting pot ranges from the country-club,
finishing-school atmosphere of Brookline's Pine Manor College, set on a guarded,
79-acre suburban campus, to the cinder-block buildings of Northeastern
University, the giant workstudy school in the shadow of Boston public housing
projects. The area is home to schools known for attracting both New York Jews
(Brandeis and Boston Universities) and New York Roman Catholics (Boston
College). Its collegiate style varies from the prim in loco parentis of Boston
College (where a Jesuit disciplinarian limits the amount of beer at the school's
well-known ''Animal House''-style parties) to the casually coed dorms of
Harvard.

All of this makes it tempting to conclude that so many students are in Boston
simply because so many schools are there. In fact, officials at most
universities feel the reverse is true. ''My sense,'' says Anthony Pallett,
executive director of admissions and financial aid at Boston University, ''is
that there are some schools here that exist only by virtue of their location,
only because students want to come here. Put almost any of the Boston colleges
in Indiana and they might not survive.''

Pallett was well aware of Boston's appeal when he was admissions director at the
University of Chicago, where he served for seven years before coming to B.U.
Students, he recalls, would routinely turn down offers of acceptance from the
University of Chicago, writing return-mail postcards to the effect, ''If only
you were in Boston.''

Pallett and other admissions officials trace the roots of Boston-Cambridge's
popularity to the mid-1960's, when the baby boom struck higher education. A
generation of affluent, middle-class students with the means to leave home did
so, and many of the offspring of parents who had attended the likes of Brooklyn
College or Temple University - if they had gone to college at all -chose Boston.
Some were simply responding to the prestigious pull of Harvard and M.I.T., but
the impact was not confined to these campuses.

''There were who-knows-how-many students who may have wanted to come to Boston
because of Harvard,'' says Robert Dentler, a former B.U. dean who is now
educational manager for the Cambridge-based Abt Associates. ''When they couldn't
get in, a lot of them still wanted to be near Harvard Square.''

The rising tide of enrollment swept over the city's multitude of less
prestigious and even obscure schools -Tufts, with its foreignpolicy specialty,
Emerson, with its emphasis on communications arts. Boston University, once a
streetcar school that rented space around the city, grew from 18,000 students in
1960 to 25,000 by the mid-70's, and built a series of high-rise dormitories to
house its new clientele.

Today, even as the spurt of students slows nationally and educators are
predicting a precipitous decline in enrollment, the number of applications to
Boston-area schools continues to climb. For instance, at Tufts, a suburban
school whose recruiters like to emphasize its bus link to Harvard Square,
applications for the 1,000 places in its freshman class rose from 6,251 in 1976
to 9,153 in 1979. At Brandeis, which runs its own shuttle bus to Harvard and
B.U., applications were up 30 percent over the same period. ''Boston schools,''
says Michael C. Behnke, dean of admissions at Tufts, ''are bucking the national
trend.''

Moreover, the educational establishment feels Boston's countertrend will
continue. A report by the Washington-based American Council on Education noted
an expected decline in the pool of 18-year-olds from 4.2 million in 1975 to 3.6
million by 1985. The report predicted significant drops in student enrollment in
New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Connecticut. In contrast, the study
projected a 2.7 percent rise in enrollment in Massachusetts colleges.

Such sustained popularity involves much more than spillover from Harvard and
M.I.T., although these two Cambridge institutions unquestionably anchor the
area's college community. Much of the explanation, according to both students
and administrators, lies with the city of Boston itself. Observers point to
everything from its compactness, its Victorian architecture and its cheap if
rocky public transit, to the city's special ability to serve the pragmatic,
''preprofessional'' demands of current students - just as it served as an energy
center for students' political impulses a decade ago.  Times have changed, but
the student grapevine still whispers, ''Boston.'' Many students, Easterners
particularly, say they chose the city before they chose a school. ''Boston,''
says Nancy Gill, a Boston College senior from Greenwich, Conn., ''just seemed to
be the place to go for most people in my high-school class.'' Ninety students in
her class, she says, applied to B.C. alone.

''We highlight the city as we recruit,'' says William Fitzsimmons, director of
admissions at Harvard and Radcliffe. ''It's not that hard a sell, though. Almost
everyone seems to know someone who went to school in Boston. I think the
conventional wisdom is that this is the premier college city.''

Although Harvard undoubtedly has intrinsic appeal, many students there say that
the school's setting was still crucial to their decision. ''For me, it was a
choice between Harvard and Stanford,'' says Gigi Cohen, an applied-mathematics
major from Glencoe, Ill., who will graduate this week. ''Stanford's a great
school, but I didn't want to live some place that was half an hour from the
nearest restaurant.'' (Harvard students, it should be noted, are within walking
distance not only of passable French cuisine but also of eateries specializing
in everything from bratwurst to Cincinnatistyle chili.)

A large part of Boston's attraction -perhaps its most basic appeal - is the
general perception that it offers the urban liveliness lacking on small-town or
rural campuses and yet is a relatively safe environment. Unlike Yale, the
University of Chicago and Columbia, for instance, all of which uneasily abut
poor, black ghettos, nearly all of Boston-Cambridge's colleges are contiguous to
low-crime, middleclass areas.

''I had never lived in a big city before,'' says Barbara Klein, a Harvard senior
from Shavertown, Pa. ''Boston drew me because it seemed calmer, not as dangerous
as New York. But it still has excitement and culture. I can go hear good jazz or
see ballet.''

''There are very few cities where I would feel safe as a woman living alone,''
says Katherine Tepley, a Wellesley senior from Palisades, N.Y., who commutes to
campus from an apartment in Cambridge. ''Here I feel I'm not only less likely to
be hassled, I'm likely to meet feminists on the street.''

To those who choose to remain within it, Boston offers a capacious cocoon, a
separate peace in which students are likely to encounter mainly other students
as they enjoy recreation the more confined campuses don't provide. It is
recreation that most of Boston's academic immigrants can afford. The student
population is overwhelmingly upper-middle-class. Tuition costs in the nation's
private-education capital virtually assure that: Harvard's tuition and room and
board will top $9,000 next year, and B.U.'s $8,000.

''Our prime markets,'' says Tufts's Michael Behnke, ''are the upper-middle-class
suburbs, those of New York, Philadelphia, Washington and Boston itself. Our
chief diversity in the student body comes from working-class kids from the
Boston area who are here on scholarship as gestures of good will toward the
community.''

The average Boston student has a good deal of pocket money. A report compiled
this April for the Association of Independent Colleges and Universities in
Massachusetts, intended to reassure the state legislature of the economic
benefits of tax-exempt private schools, estimated that Boston students spend an
average of $1,260 a year on entertainment, books, auto repair and beverages.
(Anheuser-Busch thought highly enough of Boston's ''beverage'' consumption to
test-market its Wurzburger import there.)

''There are,'' says Nancy McIsaac, a B.U. junior from Colonia, N.J., ''an awful
lot of people - women especially - who come up here from the New York area with
their Bloomingdale's credit card and live very well.'' (There is a
Bloomingdale's branch in suburban Newton.)

At worst, Boston's extended student district is a playground for affluent youth
who never even suspect the existence of tough, working-class neighbor-hoods.
Harvard's famed sociologist David Riesman says that, for many students, the city
serves merely as a backdrop of local color. ''Many of them get outside the
student areas,'' he observes, ''only to go to ethnic restaurants when their
parents are visiting.''

But Boston is also a city that historically has pricked the social conscience of
many well-heeled undergraduates. Walter Lippmann, for instance, embraced
socialism as a Harvard student after being shocked by a visit to the Chelsea
slums. And Boston continues to attract waves of students from relatively
sheltered backgrounds who are eager for a dose of the ''real world.'' Many of
the sons and daughters of par-ents who adopted suburbia as the ideal place for
rearing children come to the Boston area to experience some of the realities
their parents hoped to spare them. Observes B.C.'s Nancy Gill, ''You can go for
days without seeing a black face in Greenwich. I didn't want to go to school in
that same kind of sheltered environment. On the other hand, I found New York too
intimidating.''

Significant numbers of students go out of their way to escape the shelter Boston
campuses provide - and find themselves much changed by the experience. Harvard
senior David DeSimone, a government major, grew up in a white working-class town
near Pittsburgh and attended an all-white prep school. For three years now, he
has worked in a tutoring program at a high school in Boston's Roxbury ghetto,
participating in a ''university-pairing'' project, established by the Federal
courts as an extension of the city's school-desegregation plan. Twenty-eight
local colleges and universities lend their resources and expertise to the city's
public schools.

DeSimone gets up early to take an aging elevated train to the heart of the
city's black community, walking past pawnshops and bars, greeting people on his
way to Roxbury High School. ''When I first went to Roxbury,'' he recalls, ''I
assumed that the streets would be hostile, that people might jump out at you.
Now I feel comfortable there. I walk down the street and see people I know,
people who are actually more willing to stop and talk than people in Harvard
Square. The friendships I've made there are among the most important I've made
during school.''

Boston can provide affluent students with a crash course in classconsciousness.
Out-of-state students at Harvard or less prestigious schools are often resented
by local working-class residents. Observes Michael Burton, a freshman at the
University of Massachusetts at Boston who grew up in a local public-housing
project, ''A lot of kids I know see out-of-state students just as rich kids
driving up here in Porsches or Firebirds.'' Paul Widerman, a Harvard sophomore
from Huntington, L.I., who attends wrestling classes at a downtown gym, says he
has learned to avoid telling people he meets casually there where he attends
college.

But for the most part, students are oblivious to such antagonism.  Robert
Dentler of Abt Associates says, ''I think students get the feeling Boston is
some kind of Toonerville, that they can venture forth and get some real
experiences, but that nothing lethal is likely to happen to them.''

If Boston's oversized student enclave can be a shelter, it also harbors genuine
intellectual ferment. There is relatively extensive contact among students from
the panoply of campuses. Some of this is formal. Cross-registration programs
allow Wellesley students to take courses at M.I.T., Brandeis students at B.U.,
Tufts students at the New England Conservatory of Music.

But the interchange students value most is often informal. Cindy Kumin, for
instance, a Brandeis senior, spent last summer working at an ice-cream parlor in
Cambridge - which, along with adjoining Somerville, may be the national capital
of independent, homemade ice-cream establishments. ''The employees were almost
all students,'' she recalls. ''There were people from Brandeis, M.I.T. and
Wellesley. It made a summer job an intellectual experience. On our breaks, we'd
have discussions about 'Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance.' ''

On a sunny afternoon, you can sip espresso at the outdoor tables of Cambridge's
Algiers Coffeehouse and overhear the earnest conversations of third-world
students attending the Harvard Business School. At midnight, you can venture out
to get the newest issue of The Economist and find a crowd of students from
several campuses browsing the racks at Harvard Square's Reading International.

Boston-area dormitories can resound with intense discussion. At a Harvard dorm,
the conversation may turn to the pros and cons of the ''black tables'' where
black students cluster by themselves in the school's dining halls. At a
cooperative house of Wellesley women in a working-class Italian neighborhood in
Somerville, there is debate over whether ''NOW-style career women'' are
legitimate feminists. At a university-run apartment on the Boston College
campus, the topic may be the differences between Catholic and Jewish family
life.

But the hard edge of student debate during the 60's, the feeling that issues
were life-and-death matters - as the Vietnam War certainly was for students who
faced the draft - has been softened, making for more tolerance of different
views. There is greater political diversity on Boston-Cambridge campuses today,
and students say they value it. ''One of the things I like most about Harvard,''
says Michael Kralik, a junior from suburban Cleveland, ''is the chance to meet
obviously intelligent people who can argue convincingly for Ronald Reagan's
economic policies. As a result of my experience here, I think I'm much less
likely to think there are obvious answers to problems.''

The student left, however, remains active. The antinuclear Clamshell Alliance,
whose local office is on the third floor of a dilapidated Cambridge building,
estimates that half of the troops for its regular ''occupations'' of New
Hampshire's Seabrook Nuclear Power Plant are students. Clamshell organizers
confide that they schedule such demonstrations to coincide with the times during
the school year when the workload is lightest.

The same city that supported one of the nation's most active draft-resistance
movements in the late 1960's has responded similarly to the possibility of
renewed conscription. The Boston Area Coalition Against Registration and the
Draft has drawn thousands to rallies where students can still hear some of the
guru-professors of the late 60's, such as the B.U. political science professor
Howard Zinn and the M.I.T. linguistics professor Noam Chomsky.

Many of the left-leaning professors popular in the 60's remain so today. Robert
Coles, the Harvard social psychiatrist who writes widely on the disadvantaged,
fills lecture halls. So does Benedict S. Alper, the B.C. criminologist who is a
leading advocate of deinstitutionalizing prisoners.

But the celebrity of such professors no longer necessarily reflects widespread
left-wing sentiment on campuses. At Boston University, for instance, the
conventional freshman wisdom is to take professor Murray Levin's
political-science course, but not because of his radical views. ''Most of the
people in the class probably don't agree with him,'' says a B.U. junior, Richard
Rasmus, who is an economics major, ''but the thinking is that you should test
your values and get shook up a little.''

By and large, it seems that the time-honored abilities to teach, challenge and
project are bigger drawing cards than a professor's political persuasion. At
Harvard, the conservative criminal-justice expert

James Q. Wilson has a full house for his American government classes, as does
the establishment economist Otto Eckstein for his course in the principles of
economics.

A similar attraction may well explain why John Anderson's campaign buttons far
outnumber those of his Presidential rivals on Boston and Cambridge campuses. In
contrast to Eugene McCarthy and George McGovern, whose issue-based campaigns
appealed to the previous generation of students, Anderson enjoys a popularity
not unlike that of a wise old prof who is respected because he speaks candidly
and does not put listeners to sleep. Many students show little familiarity with
Anderson's specific policy positions.

The sense a campus visitor had a decade ago of encountering a distinct social
and political subculture is diminished today. In 1980, many college dormitories
seem less like liberated zones of youth culture than like smaller versions of
middle-class householdsto-be. In Harvard's South House, for example, an
ivy-covered brick building on the Radcliffe quadrangle, one sees more posters
promoting energy conservation than draft resistance. Vivaldi is on the turntable
and Monet posters on the walls of a typical suite. Here and on other Boston-area
campuses, the majority of students have forsaken the Army jackets and denims of
the late 60's for the casual recreational look -hiking boots in winter, jogging
shoes in summer. (According to the Harvard Coop department store, books about
running and physical fitness are the most consistent student favorites.) There
is, however, an increase in formality and stylishness. Tweed is definitely
resurgent in Harvard Square, while designer jeans predominate at B.U.

It is clear, however, that the 1960's still cast a long shadow on campuses as
the 1980's begin. Some students are impatient with comparisons to their
predecessors. To many others, the 60's appear romantic in retrospect. An M.I.T.
junior, Genia Long, from suburban Chicago, observes that ''people are saying all
the time that this must have been an exciting place 10 years ago, and that they
wish they'd gone to school then.'' An observance of the anniversary of the 1969
disruptions at M.I.T., when students protested the school's research links with
the Defense Department, drew large turnouts for workshop discussions. One often
has the feeling that today's students are following an agenda determined in
other places and other times, that the dynamics they are playing out were set in
motion by the generation that preceded them. What were once thought to be
radical innovations have in many cases become institutionalized. The battle
against sexual restrictions, for example, is almost ancient history on most
large Boston campuses. South House is casually coed.  ''It takes about a week to
get used to seeing men in the shower,'' says senior Gigi Cohen. ''Then you
forget about it.''

This is not to say that pockets of more traditional mating behavior do not
persist. Wellesley, for instance, still holds semiformal affairs to which a
women's residence invites the men from a Harvard dorm. And some Harvard men are
still known for the sexual aphorism ''Pine Manor to bed, Wellesley to wed.''

In contrast to the 1960's vision of creating entirely new institutions,
Boston-area students today seem generally to accept the prospect of dealing with
society's problems - and making their own careers -through established channels.
It is as if they were approaching a buffet table laden with career choices,
pondering them thoughtfully and then choosing - rather than staging a sit-in and
declaring that, from now on, they'll do the cooking. A South House poster urging
equal funding for women's athletics bears the slogan ''Support Title IX.'' This
is not the language of radical reformers, but of liberal bureaucrats in the
making.

A pragmatic shift toward what Yale's former president Kingman Brewster has
called ''grim preprofessionalism'' is acknowledged even by students with
left-of-center leanings. Seth Jaffe, a long-haired and bearded M.I.T. junior
from Millburn, N.J., worked as an intern last summer in the Washington office of
the Environmental Protection Agency. ''I realized,'' he says, ''that I was
working for someone whose job I might very well have in 10 years.''

A recently completed study by Harvard's Office of Career Services of students'
vocational plans during the 70's found a steady increase in the proportion of
those intending to seek employment immediately upon graduation - from 33.8
percent in 1972 to 51.6 percent in 1979.  And the proportion of those seeking
jobs in private business rose steadily, too - from 2.5 percent to 12.6 percent
over the same period. Among the fields students are choosing most often today
are, in order of preference, business, medicine, law, government and politics,
communications, science and technology. Among those they are choosing less
frequently are social service, teaching and voluntary service such as the Peace
Corps. The majors selected by Harvard's class of 1979 reflected these changing
career goals. Some 12 percent of the class majored in economics and another 10
percent in government, while only 5 percent chose to concentrate in psychology
and 2 percent in anthropology.

Clearly, the trend toward preprofessionalism is partly due to the specter of
recession, and to what students perceive to be declining economic opportunities.
Richard Rasmus, a B.U. junior who holds a part-time job at a Cambridge
restaurant, says, ''A lot of seniors are very aware of the recession right now.
The problems are there, right in front of your face. You work next to people who
have degrees and see that they're waiting on tables like you.''

Students make no bones about their careers' being their primary scholastic
focus. When told, for instance, that the student strikes sparked by the 1970
Kent State shootings forced the cancellation of final exams in many schools,
Harvard's Michael Kralik responded, only half in jest, ''If exams were canceled
now, students would demand them.''

The shift in student thinking has made Boston an even more desirable locale to
attend college. More and more, Boston-Cambridge is becoming a laboratory in
which students can experiment in fields they hope to pursue professionally.
Their ''dry runs'' are professional internships, which are often recognized for
college credit and increasingly required for degrees. Since 1972, Massachusetts
has run a state student internship office, designed primarily to match students
with intern jobs in state government, and Karen Gottschalk, the office's
director, says that the internship concept has possibilities in the private
sector as well. Every school year, she estimates, some 5,000 students undertake
an internship of one kind or another in the Boston area.

Students are to be found staffing the Boston City Council, the State Attorney
General's Consumer Protection Division and the newsrooms of the city's four
major television stations. A Boston College senior, Nancy Gill, for instance,
spent this semester as a television news assistant.  ''By the middle of
sophomore year,'' she says, ''I was really ready to see people other than
students.'' She previously worked as a student teacher in Boston schools and as
a counselor at a halfway house for former offenders.

''Students realize,'' Karen Gottschalk says, ''that they can no longer be
competitive in the job market with just a degree. They're looking for
experience, for a foot in the door and maybe a substantive letter of
recommendation.'' She adds that the opportunities for internships, not only in
government but also in business, have served as ''a buffer against declining
enrollments, especially for the smaller schools.'' Tiny Simmons College, a
women's school in the city's Fenway section, is able to offer a department of
management with internship programs at Procter & Gamble, Polaroid and Gillette.

''The students I see are exception-ally future-oriented,'' says Barbara Rubel,
who until recently coordinated internships for Tufts's community-affairs
department. ''When I was in school 10 years ago, that just wasn't so. How could
it be, when we were watching draft lotteries on television?''

The difference between today's career-oriented students and the rebels of the
1960's extends even to the books they read. Novels about adolescent identity
crises, once so popular, are largely passe. ''I don't know anyone reading
Hermann Hesse,'' says Harvard junior Michael Kralik of the German mystic so
popular in the 60's. According to Kralik, ''Most people read in their areas of
academic interest.'' The best-selling hard-cover nonfiction book at the Harvard
Coop today is ''Energy Future,'' the prescription for curing our energy ills
that was edited by the Harvard Business School's Prof. Robert Stobaugh and
Daniel Yergin, a lecturer at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government.

''I think about jobs every day,'' says Genia Long of Oak Park, Ill., a junior in
M.I.T.'s new public-policy concentration. She is confident of obtaining
employment but concerned about which first job will be best for her career. Like
students at most of Boston-Cambridge's private institutions, Genia Long is
basically optimistic about her place in the world. Although cognizant of
economic adversity and competition for jobs, most students fully expect that
society will accommodate their aspirations, if not those of poor black
teenagers. In Genia Long's room hangs a photograph of her colleagues last
summer, when she served on a Vice-Presidential commission studying the problems
of youth unemployment. She clearly expects to help deal with the problem rather
than suffer from it.  The internship boom can be seen as an egalitarian trend,
providing students from a range of schools with the opportunities for making
connections that used to be reserved for those attending the city's most
prestigious universities. There is no doubt, however, that Harvard and M.I.T.
still offer significant advantages to those who are able to get in (at Harvard,
about 15 percent of those who apply). The chief benefit may be what the Harvard
sociologist David Riesman calls the ''switchboard effect,'' whereby professors
link students to prominent people in their fields of interest. The extent to
which both schools serve, in part, as extensions of the upper levels of
government in particular is made clear to students. An M.I.T. junior, Seth
Jaffe, says, ''The first day of my class on health and public policy, the
professor said that anyone who wanted a summer job with E.P.A. in Washington
should hand in a resume and he would take care of it.''

Trends at Harvard and M.I.T. over the last decade have enhanced these schools'
access to power. Since 1969, M.I.T. has institutionalized the process of linking
students with professors, even outside the classroom. The school's Undergraduate
Research Opportunities Program now matches 2,500 students with professors
conducting independent research projects. Thirty-four students, for instance,
are currently testing a new underwater structure designed to simulate
construction conditions in space, a project in which NASA has already expressed
interest. Margaret MacVicar, founder and director of the research opportunities
program, calls it ''the most significant change at the institute in decades.''
Nor is NASA is the only Federal agency with close ties to the institute. This
spring, the Pentagon strengthened its links to M.I.T., increasing its grants for
basic research useful to the military. The school's relationship with the
Department of Defense had been strained during the antiwar era.

Harvard's increasingly popular Institute of Politics, which occupies a stylish
new building, typifies one of the chief fringe benefits of a Harvard education -
the opportunity to meet informally with the influential. Government majors
wearing their first pinstripe suits can share bad cafeteria food with decision
makers at small conference-room tables. One evening this April, seminars were
being taught by the Carter Administration's domestic-policy adviser Stuart
Eizenstat and New York City Council president Carol Bellamy.  Significantly,
after Eizenstat outlined the President's energy program, not one student
challenged him - a far cry from the rowdy demonstration that greeted Secretary
of Defense Robert McNamara when he came to Cambridge to justify the Johnson
Administration's Vietnam policy.

At M.I.T., the four-year-old Women's Independent Living Group, a cooperative
that houses 46 of the school's increasing number of female undergraduates, shows
signs of serving some of the same functions exclusive men's clubs funded by
influential alumni have traditionally played at Harvard. Run by an independent
board of women graduates, the residence has the potential for helping to form
what some women are calling a ''good-old-girl network.'' Notes Genia Long, ''One
of the members of the board is an executive with Arthur D. Little (the Cambridge
consulting firm), and there's some chance I could end up working there as a
result. And I'm sure that, as I get older, I will look favorably on the women
who have lived here after me.''

Such connections can inspire jealousy on other campuses. ''There are definitely
things about Harvard that I envy every time I walk around Harvard Yard,'' says
B.U.'s Richard Rasmus. ''It seems like they have a whole apparatus there for
introducing you to the right people, bringing you along. At B.U., you don't feel
at all as if you're being pampered, even though the tuition is high. You're in
the middle of the city, and pretty much on your own. You have to content
yourself with believing that you can be better off by virtue of having been
exposed to more things, and by knowing that people don't necessarily look out
for you.'' Although Harvard and M.I.T. still represent an elite, it is an elite
whose composition has been changing dramatically. Women and members of racial
minorities are not yet fully represented in the nation's board rooms and the
upper levels of government, but more and more of them are attending the schools
that have traditionally stocked such positions of power. M.I.T., once described
by its recruiters as ''slightly coeducational,'' now counts women as a quarter
of its undergraduates. Roughly 20 percent of Harvard undergraduates are
minorities - counting blacks, Hispanics and Asians. Perhaps even more
significantly, two-thirds of Harvard students now come from public schools.
Twenty-five years ago, half had attended private schools.

It is clear that admission to Harvard, M.I.T. and other Boston schools is no
longer exclusively determined by one's social background. These schools are
becoming instruments of a middle-class meritocracy. To be sure, it is a
meritocracy with limited seating, but the seating is open nonetheless. (At
Harvard, 65 percent of the undergraduates receive some sort of financial aid.)
Boston and Cambridge are a crucible in which a new American elite, comprising
both sexes and several races, is being forged.

Joining this elite can exact its price. According to David Riesman, ''The
noncosmopolitan student can have a hard time here.  Chicano girls from the
Southwest, Mormons, working-class whites - many of these are the first members
of their families going to college, and they come to Boston because they
associate it with educational quality. A lot of them are shocked by the sexual
morality they find, by drug use and drinking that might be mild by middleclass
standards.''

Harvard junior Michael Kralik, from a Hungarian family in Cleveland, feels these
pressures. ''Here you are a minority,'' he says. ''Everyone is. Your ethnic
values can't be reinforced. You inevitably change. I may listen to Bela Bartok,
but I can't help hearing Donna Summer.'' A member of the first generation of his
family to attend college, Kralik feels that a gulf divides his present from his
past. ''When you go home and see old friends from high school who haven't gone
away to school, you feel a little strange,'' he says. ''In some ways, you feel
bad about it, as if you've put yourself above them. I think Harvard does that to
you - emphasizes your ambition as an individual. You don't meet too many people
here who are talking about being family men or putting down roots in a
community.''

This emphasis on ambition is widely perceived at Harvard. ''They really groom
you for leadership here,'' says junior Steven Bakalar, an economics major from
Brookline, Mass. ''If you take economics, you end up feeling that you're bound
to be an executive. You meet a lot of what are called 'prepresidents' here,
people willing to climb right over you.''

Many students at Harvard, as well as at most of the other colleges in the area,
say that the city has been as important a catalyst for personal change as the
classroom. Particularly for those who were raised in affluent suburbs, Boston
has made cities in general seem slightly less fearsome. Gigi Cohen, who will
take a managementconsultant job in Chicago after her graduation from Harvard
this week, says that now that she has lived in an urban setting, she is more
likely to settle in Chicago proper than in one of its suburbs.

Other students feel that their four years in Boston have resulted in more
profound changes. ''I think Boston has pushed me toward a career in some sort of
public service,'' says Boston College senior Nancy Gill. ''It has made me much
more aware of my own privilege and the privileged kinds of lives most B.C.
students live.''

While living in Boston has been a consciousness-raising experience for some
students, others regard it as a competitive advantage. ''I think I'm more
self-reliant, more hard-nosed, because of going to B.U.,'' says junior Richard
Rasmus. ''Had I gone to a more insulated school - say, the University of
Illinois at Champaign-Urbana, where a lot of my friends went - I think the
realities of the job market would be much more of a shock to me.''

Among the most common impulses of Boston college students is a desire to remain
in the city after graduation. B.U. admissions director Anthony Pallett says, ''I
am constantly hearing students say they would like to stay in Boston, if only
they could get a job.''

Thousands do, in fact, stay. Some join the ranks of what might be called the
city's lumpen intelligentsia - college graduates driving cabs or working in
bookstores. Many others filter into the city's growing pool of young
professionals, finding work in government or the booming high-technology
minicomputer industry. ''Working in management for a Massachusetts high-tech
firm is the current dream of the average M.I.T. student,'' says M.I.T. junior
Seth Jaffe.

But there is also a widespread feeling among older students that, while Boston
is useful as an introductory course or proving ground, it is not, finally, the
proper arena for the truly ambitious. ''I love the city,'' says Richard Rasmus,
who served as a student intern in the Consumer Protection Division of the State
Attorney General's Office. ''It's taught me a million things. I learned how
government works, how inefficient it can be. I learned how to deal with crazy
phone calls. I learned how to deal with a subway system. But, on some level, I
feel I'm ready to graduate to New York or Washington.''

Ultimately, the very attributes that the average student immigrant finds so
congenial - Boston's youthfulness, its compactness - can make the area feel
confining. Marc Baum, a Harvard senior from Evanston, Ill., calls the city
''provincial. Those who stay here are avoiding the real world. This is an unreal
environment of liberals and young professionals.''

Thus an import-export cycle is completed, the offspring of the middle-class
departing wiser, in some ways, and certainly more sophisticated as a result of
their tenure. They may leave with idyllic memories, improved job prospects or
simply an acquired taste for foreign films and croissants. But, as surely as
there will be joggers along the Charles, next fall there will be eager
replacements, freshmen convinced that the ultimate college town is worth the
price of admission.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BATTLE OVER THE NEW U.S. TANK

BYLINE: By Phil Patton; Phil Patton, who is no relation to the famous general,
is a freelance writer.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5377 words


From the Patton Museum of Cavalry and Armor, where, along with other revered
relics, the general's ivory-handled revolvers are displayed, the road through
the 100,000-acre Fort Knox Army base in Kentucky winds past parklike swards
where picnic tables and childrens' swings exaggerate the awesome bulk of the
battle tanks preserved among them: a British turretless World War I tank, a
captured German panzer tank, Shermans, Pattons, rocket-firing Sheridans - the
''Temple of Armor's'' stationary legacy.

The road ends at ''the Bottoms,'' the camp's muddy testing ground, where, most
days now, the Army's newest ''main battle tank'' can be seen working out. The
XM-1, or Abrams tank -named after former Army Chief of Staff Gen. Creighton W.
Abrams - is the first new tank to be produced in this country in more than 20
years. It has a revolutionary turbine engine that, according to the Army, gives
it unprecendented acceleration and agility. It can go from zero to 20 miles per
hour in six seconds and cruise at 45 m.p.h. -twice as fast as the currently
deployed M-60 tank, which went into production in 1960 and will continue to be
built at least through 1982. The XM-1's other improvements over the M-60 include
a laser range finder on its main gun, a sheath of new, special armor and safety
features to protect the crew.

By 1988, the Army expects to have purchased 7,058 XM-1's at an average cost of
$1.5 million each. If current production schedules hold, the first XM-1 will be
deployed in Europe by the mid-1980's.  The Army calls the XM-1 the
''centerpiece'' of the United States' effort to upgrade its conventional weapons
- an effort that has assumed even greater urgency in the aftermath of
Afghanistan.  Despite the growing convicton that the United States must expand
and modernize its conventional military forces, the XM-1 has drawn severe
criticism from members of Congress and defense specialists.  These critics
contend that the Chrysler-built XM-1 is mechanically unreliable - test models
threw their tracks, choked on dust and failed to meet range specifications -and
that its major defects have not been corrected. Some critics contend that the
United States cannot afford to build enough XM-1's to offset the Warsaw Pact's
five-to-one numerical advantage in tanks (50,000 to 10,000) over NATO; and,
since the United States' biggest transport plane, the C-5A, can carry only one
of the 60-ton XM-1's, the new tank cannot be airlifted as part of a Rapid
Deployment Force. Some of the XM-1's detractors even argue that all tanks have
been made obsolete by the development of sophisticated antitank weapons.

One of the XM-1's defenders, Dr. Percy A. Pierre, Assistant Secretary of the
Army for research, development and acquisitions, refutes the charge that the
tank is obsolete. Even in an age of cruise missiles and ''smart'' bombs, Dr.
Pierre says, ''the tank is still the only way of projecting massive power, of
seizing and holding territory.'' Gen. Edward C. Meyer, Army Chief of Staff,
calls the XM-1 the best tank in the world, ''better than anything the Russians
have in service or on the drawing board.''

But a report released early this year by the General Accounting Office (G.A.O.),
the investigative agency for Congress, stated that ''the XM-1's reliability is
uncertain... Until readiness is demonstrated, the Congress should limit the
tank's further procurement to a low rate.'' Congressional defense experts and
members of Congress like Representative Jack Edwards, Republican of Alabama,
contend that the XM-1's turbine engine is unproven and that it consumes too much
fuel. Last year, Congressional critics of the XM-1 succeeded, over the Army's
opposition, in having funds added to the budget for a ''backup'' diesel engine.
''It's a sad commentary on our whole development system that we have to have
backups, but we do,'' said one Congressman who supported the ''backup'' engine.

Despite the lingering doubts, Secretary of Defense Harold Brown in mid-March
authorized full production of 352 turbine-equipped XM-1's for 1980. Brown cited
the report of an independent panel of defense specialists who found that
''significant progress has been made in improving the reliability and durability
of the tank.'' The same report also noted the need for further improvements.

Thus, the U.S. Army's new main battle tank makes its debut amid controversy over
the way this country designs, develops and produces new weapons. ''We have a
high-technology obsession,'' a Senate defense aide charges. ''It's the old
question of quantity versus quality. The Soviets have opted for quantity and
we've opted for quality. But for all we spend, things too often end up
overdesigned and just don't work.'' As chairman of the investigations
subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee, Representative Samuel S.
Stratton, Democrat of New York, has had an opportunity to study weapons
procurement for many years. His panel has recently looked into such questions as
the breakdown of the helicopters in the Iranian rescue mission, engine failures
in Air Force fighters and bugs in computer warning systems. ''The problems with
the XM-1,'' Representative Stratton says, ''are the same problems we've had for
years with the military: wasting time and wasting money to get the last 10
percent of performance instead of getting the things out into the field.'' The
XM-1 had its origins in the effort during the 1960's and 70's to develop a
standard tank for use by NATO forces in Europe. The first product of that
effort, the MBT-70 tank, was developed jointly by the United States, Britain and
West Germany. A curious machine whose rocket-firing gun tube on the turret is
tucked close to the hull, the MBT-70 is one of the tanks enshrined on the lawn
of Fort Knox. When it was completed in 1969, Congress found the MBT-70 too
expensive, and too sophisticated to be dependable, and voted to kill the
project. The other countries also refused to accept the MBT-70 as a common NATO
tank.

The U.S. Army, which, in the words of one Congressional aide, ''has always had
to be dragged kicking and screaming toward NATO standardization,'' next proposed
a United States tank to serve as NATO's standard. This was the XM-1, which
materialized in February 1976 as two different prototypes, one built by the
General Motors Corporation and one by the Chrysler Corporation. The G.M. model,
like previous tanks, had a diesel (internal combustion) engine. The Chrysler
model had an AVCO Lycoming turbine (rotary) engine of the type used in aircraft
but never before in a tank. The turbine engine, which uses diesel fuel, has
fewer moving parts than the diesel and is more powerful.

Although sources in the Army and in Congress say that the Army had originally
chosen the tried-and-true technology of the G.M. diesel, a deal reached by the
United States with West Germany reversed this decision. The United States agreed
to adopt a German 120-millimeter gun for the XM-1, while the Germans said they
would use an Americanmade engine in their Leopard II tank. This compromise,
according to the Army, provided ''systems interoperability'' instead of a common
NATO tank. ''The turbine won out because of that deal,'' says a Congressional
aide familiar with the XM-1's development.  ''With Mercedes, the Germans were
damn well not going to buy a diesel from anybody else, so it had to be the
turbine.''

On Nov. 12, 1976, Secretary of the Army Martin R. Hoffmann announced that
Chrysler had been awarded the contract for the XM-1.  (By the time Chrysler came
to Congress in 1979 for bail-out money, the contract had become worth even more
than the anticipated $9 billion price tag: It enabled Chrysler to argue before
Congressional hearings that it was a key defense contractor, like Rolls-Royce in
Britain, and, therefore, deserving of aid.)

In the end, however, even the limited American-German agreement fell apart - but
after Chrysler had already secured the XM-1 contract. The Germans refused to buy
the turbine engine, opting for a Mercedes diesel. The United States delayed
adoption of the 120-millimeter gun until 1984, so it could be manufactured in
this country, and decided to use a 105-millimeter gun on the early XM-1's. Thus,
the only significant measure of NATO standardization finally achieved - the
120-millimeter gun - will destroy standardization within the United States tank
force after 1983, by requiring the Army to use two different types of
ammunition: 105-millimeter for the first XM-1's and 120-millimeter for the later
models.

Early this year, the first two XM-1 production models rolled off the assembly
line at the Lima, Ohio, tank factory operated by Chrysler and owned by the
Government. On Feb. 28, at a ''roll-out'' ceremony much like the launching of a
ship, Mrs. Julia Abrams, the widow of General Abrams, cracked a bottle of
champagne across the gun barrel of the first production model, christening the
XM-1 the ''Abrams tank.'' A few minutes later, while showing off for the crowd,
one of the new tanks got stuck in reverse.  The decision to name the new tank
after General Abrams was part of the Army's continuing promotional effort for
the XM-1, but it is also indicative of the way armor views itself. A
tough-talking, cigarchomping armored general, Creighton Abrams commanded United
States forces in Vietnam from 1968 to 1972. His tenure as Army Chief of Staff
from 1972 until his death in 1974 reflected the ''armor mafia's'' ascendancy in
the Army of the last decade. General Abrams's career had been fueled by his
status as the hero of the last major tank engagement the United States Army
fought -the relief of the trapped 101st Airborne Division in the Battle of the
Bulge.  Abrams's 37th Tank Battalion spearheaded the drive to Bastogne that
freed the 101st and ended the Germans' last chance to defeat the Allies in
Europe. For his feat, the young colonel was personally commended by the saint of
armor himself, Gen. George S. Patton Jr.  The relief effort suggests the way
armor still likes to see itself: as the descendant of the United States cavalry,
riding to the rescue.

To promote the new tank, the Army has urged critics of the XM-1 to ''talk to the
soldiers'' about the tank's performance. General Meyer said at the roll-out
ceremony that ''the soldiers out there who have used the tank are satisfied with
it and therefore I am satisfied.''

Staff Sgt. Steven J. Gomez is one of those soldiers. You can tell Sergeant Gomez
is a ''tanker'' by the small, plastic container that dangles from his epaulet.
It holds a pair of yellow earplugs. (But most of the men at Fort Knox rarely
wear them, and, as a result, gunfire has made many of them hard of hearing.)
Sergeant Gomez's unit - H Company, Second Squadron, Sixth Armored Cavalry,
Lightning Brigade - is the first to be equipped with XM-1's. The shoulder patch
of the Sixth is a rearing black unicorn; the Lightning Brigade's motto is
''Forge the Thunderbolt.''

For about a year and a half, Sergeant Gomez and the other three crew members of
his tank, ''pilot vehicle six,'' have taken Congressmen, bureaucrats and members
of the press for ''joy rides'' at Fort Knox. In late March, I went to Fort Knox
to take a turn.

In a great wave of heat and with the high whine of an airplane engine revving
up, Sergeant Gomez and his men started the engine and set off down a gravel
road. They scored hits with their first four rounds, a feat that would have been
difficult in the present M-60 tank (which cannot fire accurately unless it comes
to a halt). Then they backed up, or ''retrograded,'' the tank at 27 miles per
hour, double the M-60's speed in reverse, and fired again, scoring another hit.

For my ride in the XM-1, I donned a football-style tanker's helmet with
microphone, climbed through a hatch in the top of the turret and plugged into
the intercom through which the crew communicates. The turret extends down into
the body of the tank. It is a white, steel compartment packed with a jumble of
equipment: warning lights and gauges, a voice scrambler, the automatic Halon
fire extinguisher that puts out fires in a matter of seconds, and a hot plate on
which the crew can boil water to warm their rations. The crewmen sit on folding
straight-backed seats that look like typists' chairs. The compartment is not
particularly cramped, but the 24 hours or more that tankers sometimes spend
there might be a bit hard for the novice to take. Inside, the quiet hum of the
engine is overwhelmed by the noisy clanking of the tracks.

''Survivability'' of the personnel in the event of a hit by an enemy shell was a
high priority in the XM-1's design, and tankers feel that the new tank is far
safer than the M-60. ''In the M-60, for instance,'' Sergeant Gomez said, ''the
ammo was arranged all around you. Here it is behind armor.'' He pointed to two
sliding doors of aluminum armor plate behind which the ammunition is stored,
wine-cellar fashion. The ammunition case is fitted with a ''blow-off panel,''
designed to give way upward in the event of a hit, venting the blast away from
the crew. This feature, too, is an innovation.  Survivability also depends on
the Chobham-type armor with which the vehicle is sheathed. Chobham armor was
developed by the British, and the American version is, according to the Army,
''an order of magnitude'' stronger than the armor on previous tanks. Although
its exact composition is classified, the armor is known to include an internal
mesh laminate, like the material used in bulletproof vests, covered with steel
and titanium. The armor is most effective when struck at angles, so the
structure of the XM-1's hull and turret is angular rather than curved as in
previous tanks. The XM-1 presents a low target - its ''silhouette'' is just 93
inches, as compared with 128 inches for the M-60.

For ''first-hit capability'' - speed and accuracy in firing - the XM-1 relies on
a digital computer for fire control and a rangefinding laser, the first ever on
a tank. Sergeant Gomez put me in the gunner's seat to show off the system.
Holding airplane-style controls that the tankers call ''cadillacs'' (after their
maker, the Cadillac Gage Company), I rested my fore-head against the padded
gunner's sight. The tank has two viewers, a three-power ''reticle'' and a
10-power one. At Sergeant Gomez's order, I switched to the 10-power. Instantly,
the landscape leapt into sharp focus, with clumps of grass a mile away clear and
distinct. A rheostat in the optical system dims or brightens the image for
maximum visibility.

In the sight, as I aimed the gun, bright red cross hairs attended by a flock of
aligning marks bounced toward a wooden target down the range. Sergeant Gomez,
looking through the tank commander's sight, which is identical to the gunner's,
confirmed that the target was lined up. ''Lase the weapon,'' he ordered. The
laser, which calculates the distance to the target and feeds the information
into the computer, is activated by a trigger. Automatically, the gun's elevation
is adjusted to hit its target. I squeezed another trigger.  If the wooden target
had been an enemy tank, we would have just destroyed it a mile away.

There is also a backup sighting system, in case the laser goes on the blink.
''We train equally hard on both of them,'' Sergeant Gomez said. ''The manual one
is not as accurate, but it works. The laser is a lot quicker. The thing is, you
want to get the first round off in a battle, because the one that gets the first
round off is the one that's going to live.''

The XM-1 also has a ''thermal imaging system'' for night fighting.  With the
M-60, tankers must use a searchlight or an invisible but traceable infrared beam
to see at night. The thermal system uses naturally available sources of heat to
create a black-and-white picture in the sight, something like a photographic
negative.

The tank's driver sits on a reclining chair, facing a motorcyclestyle set of
handles with twin throttles. With the hatch open, his head sticks out. With the
tank ''buttoned down,'' the driver eases backward to a nearly prone position and
looks through two thick windows, a few inches high. The windows are equipped
with miniature windshield wipers to carry away mud or dust.

''It's a dream to drive,'' Pfc. Marshall E. Johnson, the driver, said. ''They
say it will go 45, which is twice the speed of the M-60, but you can hit 60 in
it. In the M-60, if you left the ground you were sure to come down with a couple
of broken torsion bars. In the XM-1, you don't even feel the landing.''

As I stood in the commander's hatch, with the tank bouncing crosscountry, the
only roughness to the ride was a steady vibration on the soles. The new
suspension system not only provides ''creature comfort,'' but also makes firing
on the move more accurate and cuts down on battle fatigue. Soviet tanks, by
contrast, are lighter, lower to the ground, rough-riding and more cramped - so
much so that Soviet tankers must be no taller than 5 feet 5 inches.

The XM-1 is much simpler to drive and fire than the M-60, and the Army hopes it
will help to improve tank crews' performance. A study released by the Army late
last year, for example, revealed that 25 percent of American tank crews in
Europe could not aim and fire their guns properly - evidence that reinforces the
persistent complaint that the American volunteer army has been unable to attract
and keep quality personnel.  In mid-April, a few weeks after my visit to Fort
Knox, I saw Sergeant Gomez again, this time in Washington, D.C. The
investigations subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee had called
Maj. Gen. Donald M. Babers, the XM-1 program manager, and Army Vice Chief of
Staff Gen. John W. Vessey Jr. for questioning on the XM-1. The Congressmen
showed less interest in survivability, lasers or thermal imaging than in the
simple fact that the XM-1 was breaking down more often than it should and using
too much fuel. In keeping with their ''ask the tankers'' promotional strategy,
the generals had brought Sergeant Gomez and another tank sergeant from Fort Knox
to testify.

Representative Stratton began the hearing by blasting the generals for
''deliberate defiance of Congress'' in not proceeding quickly enough with a
backup diesel engine. He recalled previous tank boondoggles - the MBT-70, for
example, and the Sheridan light tank, ''a billion dollar boo-boo'' - and charged
that ''in the past, Congress has been bamboozled by Pentagon civilians and the
Army. You can't blame us for being skeptical.''

Representative Stratton called on Walton H. Sheley Jr., G.A.O.  deputy director
for procurement and systems acquisition, who repeated the criticisms included in
his office's earlier report on the tank.  ''The turbine engine is six months to
two years from maturity,'' Mr.  Sheley said. ''The engine's demonstrated
durability is well below the design objective. We have been troubled for some
time about the rush to produce the tank before an adequate demonstration that it
will meet the requirements established by the Army.'' Mr. Sheley called once
again for accelerating the backup diesel engine program.

The Army's presentation produced mixed success, seeming to soothe the worries of
some of the panel members. Rather than the generals' assurances that things
would be fixed and that a diesel engine would be developed in case it was
needed, it was Sergeant Gomez's testimony about the XM-1's superiority over the
M-60 that impressed many of the Congressmen. Representative Stratton, however,
remained unconvinced. ''The soldiers,'' he said after the hearings, ''were very
impressive P.R. stuff, typical Army, but we're looking at longer range
problems.''

Some of the XM-1's problems are due to the fact that it was developed on what
the Army calls a ''compressed schedule'' of eight years, as compared with an
average of 10 to 12 years for most weapons programs. This was accomplished by
beginning production of the tank before it was completely tested - a scheme
called ''test-fixtest'' that was devised by the Pentagon's research and
development head, Dr. William J. Perry, in order to get weapons into the field
more quickly. But the G.A.O. charges that this procedure is likely to result in
a number of tanks that are expensive mistakes, requiring costly
''retrofitting.''

In several cases, ''fixes'' have produced further problems. The wheel plate that
was added to prevent the tank's tracks from coming off, as they did frequently
in early testing, offends veteran tankers at Fort Knox, who have nicknamed it
''the paddle wheel'' or ''the training wheel''; more importantly, the plate and
the accompanying tightening of the tank tracks have increased the XM-1's fuel
consumption by as much as 10 percent, according to G.A.O. estimates.  Some of
the other 280 modifications have produced difficulties as well.

The Army determines the reliability of the tank's systems by calculating its
''mean miles between failures'' (M.M.B.F.), the average distance the tank will
go before breaking down. Despite G.A.O. charges that the test results were
''adjusted,'' the Army's M.M.B.F. figures have been falling below requirements.
The XM-1 is eventually supposed to go 320 miles between breakdowns, a goal even
the Army admits will not be achieved before late next year. Earlier testing
resulted in an M.M.B.F. figure of 145. More recently, the Army has claimed 306,
a figure the G.A.O. contends ''may not be a true indicator of the tank's
performance in an operational environment'' - partly be-cause of the adjusted
test figures, but also because of the differences between testing conditions and
actual operating conditions.

Fuel consumption may be an even greater problem in the long run than mechanical
breakdowns. The XM-1, which carries 538 gallons of diesel fuel, uses about twice
as much fuel while idling as the M-60, or around 10 gallons per hour. The
turbine engine uses at least 20 percent more fuel than a diesel engine would. A
higher rate of fuel consumption is important because it reduces cruising and
fighting range. For a ''typical mission profile,'' the XM-1 is supposed to have
a cruising range of 275 miles, according to Army specifications. But a report on
testing at the Aberdeen Proving Ground in Maryland - made available to some
Congressmen but not to the public - reveals that the XM-1 demonstrated a
cruising range of only 141 miles. The report also showed that the XM-1 can fight
for only 10 hours without refueling instead of the 24 hours publicly claimed by
the Army.

To correct the fuel problem, additional fuel capacity was added to the XM-1 in
the course of testing. But, while the front fuel tanks are protected by the
Chobham-type armor, the auxiliary tanks in the back are covered only with
conventional armor. A Congressional aide familiar with the tank says, ''If those
102 gallons in the sponsons (the bulges on the rear of the tank) get hit, it's
going to be pretty hot.'' Dr. Pierre replies that the diesel fuel the XM-1 uses
''is not especially easy to ignite.'' He also says that the Army is considering
such measures as an auxiliary engine for use during idling.

The XM-1's tendency to guzzle fuel is particularly worrisome, since energy
supplies are among the factors aggravating current international tensions. Any
future conventional war may be over fuel supplies. Gen. Sir John Hackett, in his
best-selling scenario of a European war between the United States and the Soviet
Union in 1985, ''The Third World War,'' envisions a battle in which fuel
supplies are exhausted at a terrific rate and fuel must be carried to the front
in armored tankers. The example of the 1973 Middle East war, in which one corps
of the Egyptian army ran out of fuel, supports such concerns. Fuel-hungry tanks
inspire nightmares of American forces in Europe cut off from outside sources of
fuel, the way Field Marshal Erwin Rommel was cut off in the great tank battles
of North Africa.  Most military historians agree that lack of fuel, not Allied
generals, defeated Rommel.

The Army hopes that upcoming battalion-scale tests of the XM-1, beginning in
September at Fort Hood, Tex., and including fuel, maintenance and other support
units, will demonstrate the fitness of its tank. Congressional critics, one of
whom fears the XM-1 will prove to be ''a logistical disaster,'' will be watching
the test results, too.  In the Museum of Cavalry and Armor at Fort Knox, not far
from General Patton's ivory-handled revolvers, is a display of North Vietnamese
weapons. One of these is the infamous RPG-7, the crude, Soviet-built rocket
launcher that in Vietnam demonstrated the ability of cheap infantry weapons to
destroy expensive tanks. The RPG-7 and more sophisticated relatives have led
some weapons experts to proclaim the obsolescence of the tank. Soviet antitank
missiles code-named Sagger, guided by a wire that connects them to a launching
station, proved effective in the 1973 Middle East war, which brought more tanks
into battle than ever before. In a single afternoon of that war, the Israelis
lost over 100 tanks, most of them to Sagger missiles along the Suez Canal.

Reports of the tank's demise, however, may be premature. For instance, Eric C.
Ludvigsen, an arms expert for the Association of the U.S. Army (a private group
that provides information about the Army), has offered persuasive evidence that
80 percent of the tank losses suffered by both sides in the Middle East war were
caused by other tanks, rather than by rockets or aircraft.  American tankers
feel that the XM-1's Chobham-type armor gives it the edge over antitank weapons.
Dr. Pierre and General Meyer agree.  Dr. Pierre has stated flatly that the XM-1
is ''impervious to any known Soviet antitank missile in service or
development.'' A Fort Knox tanker who had dodged an RPG-7 round in Vietnam told
me, ''I would be happy to let you stand 50 feet in front of me while I was in an
XM-1 and fire one of those things.''

But the fact that the United States is emphasizing the development of its own
improved versions of such weapons suggests that the XM-1 will eventually become
vulnerable to them. The next generation of ''precision guided munitions'' are
being counted on by defense planners like Dr. Perry to offset the five-to-one
numerical edge in tanks that the Warsaw Pact enjoys over NATO. By the late
1980's, antitank missiles will be guided by laser, heat and radio waves rather
than by wire. The shooter will no longer have to keep the launcher aimed at the
target until the missile reaches it, but will be able to ''fire and forget,'' as
a Pentagon catch phrase has it.

The most advanced of the new American antitank systems is called Assault
Breaker. It is a complex system of electronic tracking and targeting equipment
linked to missiles that release hundreds of miniature tank-killing projectiles
over armor formations. These projectiles home in electronically, using a
''millimeter wave detection system.'' Assault Breaker is scheduled to become
operational sometime in the late 1980's.

An Army expert expressed doubt that any weapon would ever be effective enough to
make the tank obsolete. ''Infantry types always have an idea for the ultimate
antitank weapon. That stuff Perry is pushing is more of the same.'' Like the
XM-1, the new Soviet T-80 tank has armor that is invulnerable to most such
weapons, and the old armor saw, ''the best antitank weapon is another tank,'' is
still heard around Fort Knox.

Col. Frank L. Day, the training and logistics chief for the XM-1 program, says,
however, that the Army ''does not rely on any single system to kill tanks.''
Even General Abrams, a classical-music buff, compared the cacophony of the
modern battlefield to ''a symphony'' in which each instrument of war plays its
part. Current plans, Colonel Day says, call for using tanks against tanks, but
also Maverick missiles fired from planes, and TOW missiles fired from
helicopters and ground vehicles. Computer-generated scenarios based on expected
''kill ratios'' are worked out to find the most effective ''mix'' of these
weapons, Colonel Day says. ''We don't talk about who won,'' he adds. ''That
depends on the conditions. It's a matter of managing different systems, where
you put your money, so to speak, to get the maximum return on investment.''
Pressed on the difference 7,058 XM-1's make in the 1988 version of these
computer projections, Colonel Day will only say that ''without the XM-1, we're
in big trouble. With it, we have a fighting chance.''

''The Third World War'' cites the XM-1 as a factor in turning the tide and
giving the West a slim margin of victory. Dr. Pierre, who has not read the book,
seems less optimistic, but adds, ''I'm happy to compare pieces of equipment, but
you're not going to get me to say we'll lose the war. There are many other
factors.''

Some specialists argue that only increased numbers of tanks, not merely better
tanks, can meet the Soviet military challenge in Europe, where the Warsaw Pact
deploys 50,000 tanks against NATO's 10,000. ''All other things being equal,'' a
Senate defense aide comments, ''a tank must be five times as good to fight five
times the number of enemy tanks.'' With the new Soviet T-80 tank likely to be
comparable to the XM-1, not even the XM-1's most enthusiastic fans would argue
that it could win. Even with 7,058 XM-1's, the Soviet production rate of 2,000
tanks a year, compared to our production rate of under 500 a year, will mean
that the numerical gap will actually have widened by the end of the 1980's.

Although the Army keeps referring to other weapons that will blunt the force of
those 50,000 tanks, the statistics give tankers bad dreams. At Fort Knox, a tank
lieutenant described to me a nightmare he had just had. He was in a tank on the
European front, he said, when four enemy tanks appeared and came after him. In
rapid succession, he was able to kill three of the tanks. ''Then,'' he
continued, ''the last one appeared right in front of me. We both fired at the
same time. I saw his tank explode as I watched a round come right at me, slowly,
slowly, the way things do in dreams. I woke up then.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of XM-1 tank photo of West German Leopold II tank
photo of Creighton Abrams

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MAKINGS OF A CLASSICAL TRAGEDY

BYLINE: By RONALD STEEL; Ronald Steel is the author of ''Pax Americana'' and the
forthcoming ''Walter Lippmann and American Century.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2312 words


THE RISE AND FALL OF THE SHAH By Amin Saikal.  279 pp. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press. $14.50.

FACES IN A MIRROR Memoirs from Exile.  By Ashraf Pahlavi.  Illustrated. 238 pp.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. $12.95.

THE FALL OF THE SHAH By Fereydoun Hoveyda.  Translated by Roger Liddell.  221
pp. New York: Wyndham Books. $9.95.

THE story of the rise and fall of the Shah of Iran has two morals: one for
dramatists and one for statesmen. The one for dramatists grows out of the old
story of the king who, through greed, ambition and vanity, manages to undermine
his own throne. The one for statesmen is about how a great global power, in
trying to maintain client regimes, helps erode their popular support and thus
defeats its own purposes. The first is a moral that is too late for Mohammed
Reza Pahlavi to profit from. The second is one that the United States has yet to
learn.

The story of the Shah is a fascinating one for Americans. Aside from the usual
elements of corruption and megalomania that are endemic to feudal regimes, it
also is a tale of the rise and fall of mighty empires. Not just the Persian one,
but those of Britain and America as well; a tale of England and Russia carving
up Iran between them, of the Americans plunging into Britain's ''sphere of
influence'' in the Middle East and claiming it for their own, of Soviet
commissars reasserting imperial claims dating back to the czars, of a monarch
seeking the restored glory of his kingdom but confusing it with his own personal
glory.

The Shah was used by others, first by the British, then by the Americans. He
made himself useful to them and was rewarded in return: with wealth, protection
and even the restoration of his throne when it was snatched from him by his
people. He used them too, of course, persuading his protectors that he alone
could provide what they wanted: oil, military bases, ''presence.'' In doing so,
however, he became not only rich, which his people took for granted, but
tyrannical, which they came to find unendurable. Instead of viewing him as a
protector, they saw him as a puppet manipulated by foreigners. That was his
final undoing.

Somewhere in the saga of the Shah are the makings of a Greek, or at least a
Roman, tragedy. Not because it was royal, blood-soaked and tyrannical - although
it was all of that - but because it was selfdefeating. If anyone ever brought
ruin upon himself, it was Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, King of Kings. He also had a
good deal of help, which is what makes his story of particular interest to
Americans.

These three books tell that story in very different ways, each providing pieces
of a complex mosaic. Amin Saikal's ''The Rise and Fall of the Shah'' has a title
geared to the headlines, but is a sober, scholarly study that has been in
process for several years. A political scientist of Afghan origin, Mr. Saikal
examines the place of Iran in world politics, the reign of the Pahlavis and the
effects of the Shah's dependence on Washington. His language is calm, his
argument rigidly analytical, and his conclusions unsettling for those who
believe that the United States has been an innocent bystander in Iran's
tribulations. The reader seeking to understand contemporary Iran could not find
a better place to begin.

The books by the two Iranians are of quite another order: gossipy, opinionated,
bitter and self-justifying. Both are, within their own grounds, quite
fascinating. Ashraf Pahlavi is, of course, the Shah's twin sister, the
much-pilloried Dragon Lady of the late regime, addicted, it is said, to losing
vast fortunes at casinos, and adept at manipulating her brother. Whatever her
failings, she is a chatty, absorbing and undeniably wicked storyteller. I would
face the prospect of meeting her with trepidation, but she is obviously a woman
of substance, and her memoir, ''Faces in a Mirror,'' is strangely touching, at
least when she strays from politics to her own complex and clearly unhappy life.

Fereydoun Hoveyda has also written a family apology. His brother, Amir Abbas,
was last seen in the pages of our newspapers with several bullet holes in his
head, the victim of the Ayatollah's retributory council. He was executed because
he served as the Shah's prime minister for a dozen years, until 1977, and
because he had the patriotism and the courage not to flee Iran when it was still
possible for him to get away. The younger Hoveyda also served the Shah as
ambassador to the United Nations, though he is mostly a litterateur who spent
the better part of two decades in Paris. There is something rather grotesque in
his attempt to portray his family as victims of the Shah's greed and ambition.
Nobody, after all, forced them to serve. But he is entertainingly malicious, and
his tale of ''The Fall of the Shah,'' self-serving though it is, offers an
interesting glimpse into the mentality of those who profited from the Shah's
rule, even while complaining sotto voce of its corruption and megalomania. Mr.
Hoveyda is admirably served by a spirited translation by Roger Liddell.

The Pahlavis, as Mr. Saikal reminds us, came to power, like most dynasties, by
the sword. Not in Sumerian times, as the Shah's more grandiose rhetoric would
lead one to assume, but in the 1920's when his father, an ambitious army
officer, led a band of 2,000 Cossacks and chased out the crumbling Qajars. Reza
Shah had three ambitions: to exercise absolute personal authority, to modernize
his country along the lines Kemal Ataturk had embarked upon in Turkey, and to
free Iran, then still called Persia, from foreign domination. He succeeded
totally at the first, partially at the second and not at all at the third.

Tyrant though he was - ''I can't remember a time when I wasn't afraid of him,''
Ashraf Pahlavi writes of her father -he was undeniably an Iranian patriot who
put the needs of his people above the wishes of the great powers that tried to
bend him to their purposes. Naturally they got rid of him. In 1941 Britain and
Russia, declaring Iran to be vital to their war effort, occupied the country and
banished Reza Shah from his own country. He had made the mistake of trying to
play them off against the Germans. In his place the British put his 21-year-old
son, the shy, Swiss-educated Mohammed Reza.

Enter ''our'' Shah. Or our Shah as he soon came to seem to most Iranians - which
was a big part of his problem. And, as the holding of the American hostages in
Teheran has made clear, our problem too.  For the Shah has been perceived as the
tool of foreign powers. It was the British who put him on his throne, and the
Americans who restored it to him in 1953 when he was chased out of the country
by Iranian nationalists. Washington not only brought him back, but as reward
took away half of Britain's oil concession and gave it to American companies.
These companies, as Mr. Saikal recounts in a fascinating analysis of Iran's oil
politics, were induced to play their part in marketing Iran's oil when the
Justice Department - under secret orders from the White House - was ordered to
drop an antitrust suit against them.

From that time on the Shah became America's baby. He owed his throne to the
C.I.A. -which had successfully prevented the flamboyant premier, Mohammed
Mossadeq, from successfully nationalizing Iran's oil wealth - and his continued
survival to American economic and military aid. And Washington, as Mr. Saikal
points out, ''was only too happy to follow up its initial support for the
restoration of the Shah's throne, seek the transformation of Iran into an
anti-Communist state, and secure an American share in the Iranian oil
industry.'' To consolidate the rule of this new ally, the Americans trained and
outfitted the Shah's armed forces - which were put under his personal command
and became the mainstay of his regime - and, with the help of the Israelis, set
up Savak which became a combination C.I.A.-F.B.I.- Gestapo. Everyone got what he
wanted: Washington secure oil supplies and an ally on the Soviet frontier; the
Shah the means to consolidate his rule.

In the early 1960's the Kennedy Administration, eager to shore up the Shah's
domestic support, urged economic reforms. The monarch responded with what he
called his White Revolution. It was a clever move. By breaking up the vast
estates he liquidated the power of the major landlords and won the support of
the peasantry. At the same time he launched an industrialization program, gave
women the franchise and wooed the middle class through economic expansion. He
did not loosen his control over political expression, however, and offered
opponents of his absolute rule no alternative than to go into clandestine
opposition. In 1975 he banished all political parties but his own.

Repressive though his regime was, he was able to buy off most of the opposition
with fat contracts and salaries. This was particularly true after the great 1973
oil bonanza, when the Shah, as OPEC's leading price hawk, played a key role in
quadrupling the price of oil on the world market. Was this not a peculiar role
for an American puppet, if that is what he was, to play? On the surface, yes.
But the Shah had the secret support of both President Richard M. Nixon and
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger. Why? Because they had a job for the Shah. He
would be America's surrogate in the Middle East, keeping watch on the Gulf and
on ''radical'' regimes such as those in Iraq and Syria, protecting weak friends
like Saudi Arabia, and posing a powerful counterweight to the Soviets. This was
part of the so-called Nixon Doctrine - a plan by which the United States would
presumably avoid future Vietnams by relying on regional helpers to hold back
radicals and Communists. Thus President Nixon gave the Shah the key to the
American military arsenal, telling him he could have any nonnuclear weapon he
wanted. As his arsenal grew, so did the Shah's need for dollars. Where to get
the money? From oil. Thus Washington secretly gave the Shah the green light to
boost oil prices in order to pay for the weapons that would allow him to play
his assigned part in the Nixon Doctrine.

President Jimmy Carter merely carried on the Nixon formula, praising the Shah's
Iran as a ''very stabilizing force in the world at large'' and renewing his key
to the American arsenal. Thus did the Shah's obsessive military buildup boost
the price Americans paid for oil, and with a wink from Washington. It also
served to undermine his reform program, intensified opposition to his harsh
rule, and fed criticism that he was serving as an American puppet. As opposition
increased, so did Savak's repression. Lacking political safety valves, the
system finally exploded.

The Shah was hoist by his own petard. A sincere nationalist, he was also an
insatiable autocrat and imperial dreamer. There was a basic conflict between
what he wanted for himself and what he sought for Iran. He had created, as Mr.
Saikal notes, ''a fundamental dilemma that he could not resolve without
eventually either abandoning his absolute power, or else reverting to a strictly
centralized development policy more compatible with the needs of his throne.''
Instead he squandered his nation's nonrenewable oil wealth on military gadgetry,
reveled in his assigned role as America's gendarme in the Middle East, and so
cut himself off from the people he ostensibly served that their most fervent
ambition is to tear him apart limb by limb.

If the Shah defeated himself, so did American policy-makers.  Instead of working
with a government that had the support of its own people - like that of Mossadeq
in the early 1950's -they imposed the Shah upon the Iranians, trained his army
and his torturers, kept him in power with economic and military transfusions,
encouraged his insatiable appetite and blindly stuck with him even as he, along
with America's own position in Iran, was collapsing.

It is pharisaical to blame the Shah alone. As Ashraf Pahlavi writes with
considerable justice, ''If the Shah was, as the press had suggested, so cruel
and despotic a king, then the last eight American Presidents should take their
place beside him and share this socalled culpability, for it is a matter of
record that America's leaders have publicly praised and supported the Shah's
regime for almost four decades.'' Indeed they have, and one of the virtues of
these three books is to make us realize that bills eventually come due.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoons

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SEDUCTIVE SETTING

BYLINE: By DARRYL PINCKNEY; Darryl Pinckney's articles and reviews have appeared
in The New Republic and The New York Review of Books.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1341 words


THE BOOK OF JAMAICA By Russell Banks.  326 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
$10.95.

THE HARDER THEY COME By Michael Thelwell.  399 pp. New York: Grove Press.
Cloth, $12.50. Paper, $7.95.

JAMAICA is the seductive setting of these two novels - a Jamaica stricken with
change, with moral contamination; suffering from an eroded sense of identity,
from a complicated modernity. There is something backward in the exertions of
development; Kingston is Babylon, dangerous and desperate; even the tropical
heat becomes a metaphor for menacing, conspiratorial forces. Though the books
share a setting, their perceptions are quite different and there are no
similarities of style or tone. Russell Banks's ''The Book of Jamaica'' spans
only a brief time and is set mostly along the northern coast of the island;
Michael Thelwell's ''The Harder They Come'' is a chronicle of generations and is
set primarily in the Kingston ghetto.

Unlike Mr. Thelwell, Russell Banks is not a Jamaican, and being an outsider is
the subject of his novel. His unnamed narrator develops an obsession for
Jamaican culture. A 35-year-old New Hampshire college teacher, he is
extravagantly sincere, alert to cultural differences, and filled with racial
guilt. He travels to Jamaica first in 1975 to finish a novel and, on two
subsequent visits, becomes more interested in the people than his work and is
haunted by tales of Errol Flynn as a symbol of the decadent visitor. He is given
to lengthy meditations on alienation and isolation and is preoccupied by the
difference between his experiences and those of his new friends.

Once he acknowledges ''the impossibility of innocence,'' his mission as ''an
observer with clouded vision at best'' is ''to break down the limits of a
particular point of view.'' In the beginning, he finds daunting mysteries and
complexities at every turn: ''A white American, I was blind, and lost.'' What he
lacks in intuition and skepticism he makes up for with a self-lacerating
sensitivity of which he is quite proud. He can admit to being afraid of blacks;
he can resolve not to associate with the white philistines who are hysterically
fearful for their property.

Well-educated and intelligent people often demonstrate a disastrous lack of
imagination that affords them little gift for real experience. The narrator
seems burdened by his references: ''This is not a brave thing to be doing, I
thought. Why, then, am I so afraid?  I would have liked to have been Gauguin in
Tahiti, all awash with open-eyed enthusiasm for the newly revealed alternative
to bourgeois France, or Forster in India, skeptical, shrewdly compassionate,
confident that what one did not know at the moment was really not worth knowing
at the moment, or Dinesen in Africa, tender and secure in the tower of her
absent self.'' He stockpiles impressions, some of which seem inspired by
marijuana: ''Jamaican taste in music ... was perfect taste to me - impeccable
and serious, knowledgeable and refined. Sometimes a whole culture has perfect
taste ... so that a wholly ordinary person, even children, can make aesthetic
distinctions usually thought to be the exclusive prerogative of only the most
elaborately educated members of the society.'' He notes his ''fear ... of people
whose ancestors fought generations of a just war against my ancestors. Will
Americans traveling in Vietnam two hundred years from now feel as I do today?''
His task is to translate these images and educate his feelings; to re-create
himself as a social being and make radical his inner life.

Much retold history of Jamaica and of slavery emerges from the narrator's
curiosity. He is particularly interested in the Maroons, an autonomous people
descended from the Ashanti, who successfully resisted the British. As he becomes
involved with these people, his story moves from the first person to the second
-''You are becoming your own stranger'' - and finally to the third person, in
which he becomes ''Johnny,'' the name traditionally given a trusted white. The
change in point of view corresponds to ''Johnny's'' immersion in the rhythm of
life around him, and illustrates a change in consciousness that will lead him to
a dramatic choice.

The hero of Michael Thelwell's novel, Rhygin (which means spirited, passionate,
aggressive, in the Jamaican idiom) is the legendary shantytown outlaw of
Kingston who is also the hero of the movie ''The Harder They Come.'' Though Mr.
Thelwell was inspired by the film, his book is not a ''novelization''; he has
sought to enlarge the story, inventing a rural childhood - roots - and supplying
a more detailed account of Rhygin's career.

Even as a child Rhygin has a daring, rebellious temperament, and his fate is to
find expression for it. His stubborn ambition is to leave subsistence farming
behind and go to the city to become a reggae singer. His secure, serene village
will inevitably stand in contrast to the violence of Kingston - the wisdom of
the old ways lost to the corruption and brutality of progress. But there's not a
little sentimentality in this.

Instead of finding his fortune in the city, Rhygin finds con men, homelessness,
his defeated, dying mother, starvation and despair - ''Welcome to Babylon,
Breddah!'' In Mr. Thelwell's Kingston, everyone is damaged: the rich are
paranoid, officials are sadistic, but the poor are merely desperate and
therefore exonerated. ''Presshah gonna drop on you.'' Eventually Rhygin becomes
involved in the ganja trade -marijuana - and begins his rapid transformation
from luckless dreamer and sharp dude to righteous bandit and symbol of defiance
for the downtrodden of shantytown.

Mr. Thelwell is most convincing when depicting daily life (the market, a bus
ride, gang rivalry at the movies); much of this depends on the richness of his
characters' language - the rolling, resonant, hypnotic patois. This is the
extraordinary feature of an otherwise extremely conventional work; the action is
predictable and most of the characters are stock types. Mr. Thelwell is more
interested in the mythic qualities of his hero, and he has succumbed to a
temptation that is widespread in the portrayal of third-world men in fiction and
on film: the super stud, as if every black hero, in order to be authentic, had
to possess total sexual confidence, even before puberty. It is a weird
compensation for powerlessness.

Though Mr. Banks's novel is concerned with an outsider's perceptions, his
eagerness to strike the right tone makes his work less sentimental and
patronizing than Mr. Thelwell's obvious, mechanistic novel. Mr. Banks's
speculations are more intriguing than Mr. Thelwell's realistic saga: Mr. Banks's
Rastafarian cultists are not pacifists, his mountain dwellers are not ennobled
by hardship.  Rhygin and Johnny almost live in different countries: Rhygin has
no place to go, while Johnny has his one-way ticket out. Both books make harsh
judgments against petty officials and the ''higher-ups'' in the society; both
present bleak pictures of the current situation, with the possibility of
violence everywhere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE BATTLE OF THE NEWSLETTERS

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 1, Column 2; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1378 words


WASHINGTON

States News Service

REPRESENTATIVE James J. Florio, Democrat of Camden, had just been elected
chairman of a House subcommittee on transportation and commerce, and he decided
that voters in the First Congressional District should know about his
achievement.

And so the spring 1979 edition of his Washington Report - the newsletter he
regularly sends to his constituents - carried the headline:

FLORIO NAMED SUBCOMMITTEE CHAIRMAN

Just before the 1978 Congressional elections, Representative William J. Hughes,
Democrat of Ocean City, sent to voters in the Second Congressional District a
four-page newsletter that included 12 articles lauding his positions and
accomplishments.

It is all part of the Congressional newsletter game, a game, using public funds,
that virtually every member of the House and Senate plays.

In 1980, an election year, newsletters are particularly popular on Capitol Hill,
and more than $50 million has been appropriated by Congress to pay for printing
and mailing them.

Members of Congress are supposed to use their newsletters to tell the folks back
home about ''official business.'' But that phrase is not clearly defined by the
House and Senate rules on mailing, and so official business often means whatever
a lawmaker thinks will impress the voters.

For Bill Bradley, New Jersey's freshman Democratic Senator, it meant a long
message in his January 1980 newsletter that concluded: ''Above all, during this
first year, I have taken pride in New Jersey ...''

Mr. Bradley also took time to tell voters about his work on energy and economic
issues, and he provided graphic descriptions about how the Senate operates.

Perhaps because he is new at his job, Mr. Bradley included in his letter
starry-eyed reflections on life as a Senator.

''Imagine joining a couple of veteran Senators at lunch when they are
reminiscing about the McCarthy era, civil-rights legislation or the early
debates over the Gulf of Tonkin resolution and U.S. policy in Vietnam,'' Mr.
Bradley wrote in a gee-whiz style.

Every good newsletter includes photographs of the lawmaker in action. Mr.
Bradley's included a picture of him and Newark fire officials inspecting a house
in Newark that had been destroyed by arson, and another of him as ''he analyzed
the vote'' on the windfall oil-profits tax bill with four veteran Senators.

Mr. Bradley's maiden newsletter really was no different from the hundreds of
others produced on Capitol Hill every year. It is all perfectly ethical, and
legislators insist their newsletters are a legitimate, even important, way to
keep the electorate informed.

''It's a very fine line,'' commented Mark Brown, Representative Hughes's press
secretary. ''Sure, newsletters sometimes promote a Congressman, but they also
tell people about things they couldn't find out otherwise. It is a good source
of information, and I think the public likes them.''

But, critics ask, should taxpayer money be used for what essentially amounts to
promotional material?  Common Cause, the public lobbying group, does not think
so. More than six years ago, it filed suit to rescind the Congressional franking
privilege.

A frank is a reproduction of the lawmaker's signature. Attached to a piece of
mail, it acts as a stamp, and the United States Postal Service automatically
delivers that piece of mail. (Newsletters are perhaps the most popular type of
franked mail, but letters, press releases, booklets and questionnaires also can
be franked.)

Common Cause argues that the franking privilege violates the First Amendment
rights of challengers in a Congressional election. The group says that franking
gives incumbents thousands of dollars in free printing and postage and denies a
challenger the same access to voters.

House and Senate officials have vigorously fought the Common Cause suit. Both
houses refused to provide details on how individual members used the franking
privilege until ordered to do so by a judge in Federal District Court.

Ken Guido Jr., general counsel of Common Cause, now says that he is prepared to
submit a detailed summary of facts on the case, much of it gleaned from those
Congressional records. Among the facts cited by Common Cause are:

- Prior to his election, one Senator (not named) sent $483,000 in franked
mailings, while his challenger spent $256,000 of his own funds.

- Through the use of computers supplied by Congress, legislators have been able
to target their franked mail to particular voters.  According to Common Cause,
these computerized techniques allow a legislator to mail literature on a single
issue that appeals to a special-interest group.

- Although rules forbid sending franked mail to voters based on their party
affiliation, legislators have been able to circumvent this. Common Cause says
that computerized mailing lists can be doctored so that party affiliation is
replaced by a different code, such as VIP. While franked mail cannot be used to
solicit money or seek a vote, these computer lists can target franked material
to potential contributors or influential party leaders.

Also, by inspecting Postal Service records, Common Cause says it can show that
mass mailings, such as newsletters, increase dramatically during election years.

In September 1973, a nonelection year, House members mailed 10 million pieces of
franked mail, In March 1974, an election year, the figure was 22 million.

Similarly, in September 1976, the amount of franked mail reached 35 million
pieces; six months later, after the election, it dropped to 15 million.

During the 1978 election, the trend continued, as 40 million pieces were mailed
that March, then dipped to 28 million by September. The reason for the drop, Mr.
Guido explained, was that a new rule prohibits the mailing of franked literature
within 60 days of a primary or general election.

Mr. Guido maintains that this and other reforms are cosmetic and do not abolish
the advantage that franking provides an incumbent.  ''Franking still gives
incumbents the opportunity to promote themselves,'' he said. ''We have found
that an incumbent, by hiring a direct-mail expert, can use a newsletter as part
of the 'soft sell' aspect of a campaign. Then it can be followed up by direct
appeals for money or votes through campaign funds.''

Of course, franking can be used for things other than newsletters.
Representative James J. Howard, Democrat of Spring Lake Heights, likes to use
postcards to tell his Third District constituents when his mobile office will
visit their neighborhood. And Mr. Howard also was able to mail a newsletter that
said he was trying to fight inflation, working to reopen Sandy Hook Park and
pushing for better Conrail service, among other things

Representative Edwin B. Forsythe, Republican of Moorestown, recently mailed his
latest newsletter, which is called Communicator.  It takes a more homey approach
than most by reminding young people that they can apply for nominations to the
United States service academies and by informing constituents that the
Representative can arrange tours of ''various Washington attractions'' for them.

Mr. Forsythe also listed major issues important to New Jersey that Congress had
dealt with over the previous year. And he offered tips to members of the public
trying to deal with the Federal bureaucracy.

Representative Andrew Maguire, Democrat of Ridgewood, sends his Seventh District
constituents an attractive, professionally designed newsletter that includes a
fair share of pictures of Mr. Maguire smiling and shaking hands with various
officials and voters.

Yet he also included in one newsletter ''An Auto Buyer's Guide to Energy
Efficiency,'' which listed estimated mile-per-gallon figures for various car
models.

States News Service

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of newsletters

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BY WILLIAM SAFIRE;
ESSAY TURNING WHOSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 876 words

DATELINE: TIDE WASHINGTON


The conventional wisdom - that Jimmy Carter may be an inept President, but is a
great political campaigner - deserves closer inspection. The ineptness is
spreading.

He has made two forays out of the Rose Garden. In the first, a series of verbal
gaffes kept his press secretary busy explaining what Mr. Carter meant to say.
This may be dismissed as a sign of rustiness after so long away from the
campaign trail, though it must have pained Ed Muskie, 66, to have been referred
to as a ''senior citizen.'' (''He meant 'senior adviser','' explained Joseph L.
Powell, the official interpreter.)

Campaigning in Ohio last week, however, Mr. Carter made five stump speeches that
give us a preliminary indication of his new campaign style. It is apparently
based on H.L. Mencken's adage, ''Nobody ever went broke underestimating the
intelligence of the American voter.''

The overall theme is ''turning the tide.'' No matter that inflation has tripled
at home and that America is viewed as a pitiful, unhelpful giant abroad - the
worst, the President says, is over. He expects gratitude for promising to turn
his own tide of disasters.

His second recurring theme is, ''Ours is a great country.'' When accentuated on
the stump, such wearing of the bunting suggests that criticism of an
administration is a form of ''running down America,'' a rhetorical technique
borrowed from Mr. Nixon. Mr. Carter's patriotic exhortation: ''Our country has
never failed when we were united and when we had a clear vision of the challenge
to meet that challenge.'' (?)

On inflation, he goes on the offensive: ''Interest rates are now moving down
rapidly ... beginning in the summer, the inflation rate is going to go down,
too.'' Rather than admit that he had to accept recession-inducing high interest
rates to avert a panic after his incredible February budget message, he treats
interest rates as just another of inflation's costs, which he is trying to bring
down - and he calls that ''talking sense'' in the Stevensonian tradition.

On recession - the real cause of the reduction of interest rates - Mr. Carter's
strategy has been to treat it as the little slump that isn't there. ''Short and
mild'' was his first assurance. ''This is a time of inconvenience,'' he told
Ohioans, chastizing them for kicking: '' ... people complain about temporary
inconveniences, they're concerned about being disturbed just temporarily ...
these kinds of things are inevitable.'' (A million people were thrown out of
work last month; two million more will be ''inconvenienced'' before the year is
out.)

On defense, Mr. Carter talks very tough: ''We have turned the tide in military
strength,'' he insisted, even as his own Joint Chiefs of Staff were telling
Congress that the current Carter budget was inadequate.

Borrowing George Wallace's old ''Stand Up for America'' rhetoric, Mr. Carter
promised ''to stand up for security, to stand up for our people, and to stand up
for our unchanging principles.'' This hawkin-a-dove's-budget then acknowledged
the col-lapse of American world leadership by promising to ''stand alone if
neces-sary.''

One sign of weakness in these first stump speeches is the need to constantly
reassert truthfulness. ''We will always give it to you straight ... we have
always told the truth.'' This is to buttress the weakest part of the Carter
record: the Carter ''defense policy'' is Mr. Carter's defense of a policy that
has weakened the United States.

Part of this political defense strategy is to repeat frequently that defense
budgets were cut under Nixon and Ford, and raised under Carter. It is a fact
that defense spending dropped when the war in Vietnam was ended and a large
American army was mustered out, but Mr. Carter is using that fact to build a
falsehood - that he, in contrast to his predecessors, strengthened American
defenses.

Mr. Carter knows when he makes that claim that the Nixon and Ford defense
proposals were slashed by a Democratic Congress led by Senators Mondale and
Muskie. He is aware that he cut President Ford's 1979-1983 budget proposals by
$57 billion. But he keeps plugging his misleading fact, knowing that ''a truth
that's told with bad intent / beats all the lies you can invent.''

His opening campaign arguments will not fly. Voters remember his cancellation of
the B-1 bomber, his delay of the cruise missile, his pride in arms limitation
until the scales fell from his eyes after Afghanistan. The President cannot
change his spots by changing his television spots.

On the stump, he is simultaneously for more defense spending, more
''compassionate'' spending, and a balanced budget - which is talking nonsense.
He is against inflation, against high interest rates, and against the
inconveniences that bring inflation under control - more nonsense. That is why
he must insist he is ''talking sense.''

Back to the drawing board, Rafshoon. In 1976, the Carter campaign turned a
two-to-one lead into a squeaker. This time, that cushion is not there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN SEEKS TO STRESS ARMS ISSUE WITHOUT SEEMING 'TRIGGER HAPPY'

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1141 words

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS, May 31


Here, as in most cities, Ronald Reagan's voice thickened with emotion as he came
to the point in his standard speech where he describes what he calls the
strongest yearning of his life: ''That is to say to the world there will be no
more Taiwans. There will be no more Vietnams. There will be no more betrayal of
friends and allies by the United States Government.''

The Republican Presidential candidate and his aides recoil at the suggestion
that this is a call to arms. Campaigning in Ohio, New Jersey and California this
week, Mr. Reagan insisted that his goals were not ''warlike'' or ''hostile'' and
that he was not ''triggerhappy.''

Such remarks point up two important aspects of Mr. Reagan's candidacy that have
come into sharp focus over the last week, as the former California Governor,
assured of his party's Presidential nomination, prepared for a battle in the
general election campaign with his presumed Democratic opponent, President
Carter.

First, Mr. Reagan has clearly decided that the centerpiece of his foreign policy
will be military preparedness, or what an aide called ''the strategic high
ground of rebuilding our national military security.'' The policy calls for the
United States to resume its role as a global protector of its allies, and Mr.
Reagan plans, according to an aide, to fashion the preparedness issue into ''a
tin can tied around Carter's tail.''

Expecting Fierce Attack

Second, the Reagan campaign expects Mr. Carter and his surrogates to wage a
fierce counterattack that will attempt to depict the Republican as a restless,
militaristic ideologue who might blunder into war. That is the reason Mr. Reagan
frequently defends his judgment, and the reason Mr. Reagan's aides seize every
opportunity to describe the Californian as a calm, pragmatic apostle of ''peace
through strength.''

This emphasis is intended to protect Mr. Reagan against charges of warmongering
that, the candidate and his staff believe, were used so effectively against
another conservative Republican in 1964. ''I don't think Barry Goldwater was
defeated because he was a conservative,'' Mr. Reagan said Wednesday in an
interview, but because his opponents ''succeeded in creating an image of him as
a dangerous radical.''

In offering himself as the candidate of military strength, while also guarding
himself against charges of recklessness, Mr. Reagan has developed a rhetoric of
implied force that is at once fervent in its call for increased military power
and vague as to how he, as President, would use that power.

In a typical speech, Mr. Reagan asserts that ''what this Administration has done
to the domestic economy is infinitesimal to what has been done on the
international scene to this country of which we were once so proud.'' Then,
invoking the specter of an America so weak that its President must surrender by
telephone to the Soviet Union, Mr. Reagan calls for a ''crash program,'' to
rebuild the nation's military arsenal and to strengthen the professional Army to
a point where it would initimidate the Soviet Union.

Carter Faulted on Iran

Within this framework, Mr. Reagan criticizes Mr. Carter's military response to
the Iranian crisis as soft and slow, and he ridicules the President's ''standing
for'' Soviet troops in Cuba and Afghanistan.  As with his statement on the
protection of allies, the implication is that Mr. Reagan, as President, would
not hesitate to use military force as soon as diplomatic remedies fail, as he
puts it.

But very rarely does Mr. Reagan venture a proposal as specific as his mention a
few weeks ago of a blockade of Cuba. According to Jim Brady, the issues adviser
who travels with Mr. Reagan, this reflects a tactical decision that the
Californian should always avoid precise answers on the military actions he would
order as President.

''I can't envisage a scenario where you'' - that is, the candidate - ''would be
specific,'' Mr. Brady said. In the fall campaign, he continued, when Mr. Reagan
is asked how he would handle a given military situation, his likely answer will
be, ''I am not privy to the day-to-day intelligence information that a President
would have, and it's very hard to respond to a hypothetical situation.''

Mr. Reagan took that approach when he was asked yesterday to elaborate on his
no-more-Vietnams pledge by describing the circumstances in which he would use
combat troops or naval or air strikes to defend an ally. ''Well, it's a little
bit like a Governor with the National Guard,'' he said. ''You use whatever force
is necessary to achieve the purpose, and I would like to feel that there
wouldn't be a need for using armed force if we made it apparent that we have the
will if necessary to do that.''

'I Am Not Trigger-Happy'

Then, asserting that he would use force only to protect national security, Mr.
Reagan added, ''But I am not trigger-happy and not one who is going to rush out
and wave a blood-soaked sword and yell, 'Onward, men,' and I don't think it's
necessary.''

Representative John H. Rousselot, a hawkish conservative who campaigned with Mr.
Reagan recently, has said that it is important for his fellow Californian to
convince voters that he is ''not going to be a wild President.''

This week, Mr. Reagan was careful to say that the military buildup he advocated
was essentially defensive in nature. ''Now, does this make us warlike or
hawklike?'' he asked in Columbus, Ohio. ''Not at all. The simple truth is the
primary goal must be world peace, and it happens that we're the only nation on
earth that can preserve the peace.'' To fill that role, he concluded, ''we have
to be so strong that no other nation on earth will dare violate the peace.''

Vision of a Mighty Power

Almost invariably, Mr. Reagan's voice grows coarse with feeling in this passage
of the speech. Often, he drops the last reference to peace and proposes a
national defense so strong ''that no nation in the world will dare lift a hand
against us.''

This kind of proposal ranks only slightly behind the economy in pulling voters
to Mr. Reagan, according to key grass-roots political workers. Citing polls,
they say that the voters trust Mr. Reagan too much to worry about what military
orders he might give.

And State Representative Donna Pope, the Reagan co-chairman in Ohio, says
concern that Mr. Reagan may be overly fond of military solutions is receding
rather than growing. ''Oh, once in a while you hear a college student use the
term trigger-happy,'' she said, ''but that's about it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ronald Reagan and his wife

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WEST BECOMING POLITICALLY¬ MAVERICK REGION1>

BYLINE: By E.J. DIONNE

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1114 words

DATELINE: NOYO HARBOR, Calif., May 26


With the sun well on its way to disappearing under the edge of the Pacific
Ocean, a half-dozen fishing boats started lining up to enter this tiny cove. Dan
Freitas, captain of the Intrepid, was one of the first to arrive, and he and his
crew had enjoyed a good afternoon: They had shoveled more than five tons of rock
cod out of the hold.

Mr. Freitas, a bearded man in his early 40's, has been in the fishing business
for more than two decades. He smiles easily and is not given to worrying; the
worries he does have center mainly on the falling prices of fish, on the threat
that big fishing operations pose to himself and his friends, and on toughened
environmental regulations, some of which he concedes to be useful.

When his thoughts turn to politics, the politics of fishing generally comes
first, though his experiences as a soldier in the Vietnam War led him to believe
that America had not been tough enough in its dealings with foreign nations. ''I
would have pushed the button on Hanoi,'' Mr. Freitas said.

He also talked about the thousands of countercultural refugees of the cities who
have poured into Mendocino County, and the bulging welfare rolls he believes
they fostered.

''There's a little bit of concern around here about the country is so lenient
with those people,'' Mr. Freitas said. But then his smile returned and he said
he had accepted the migration of the young and the hip. ''There was nothing we
could do about it anyway,'' he remarked.

''It's just live and let live around here,'' added Tom Ghio, a competitor of Mr.
Freitas's who was nonetheless helping him hoist in the biblically multiplying
baskets of fish.

Matters are rarely that simple in Mendocino County, or anywhere else, but the
two fishermen of Noyo spoke for a series of values that are rapidly transforming
the American West into the nation's politically maverick region, a role once
played by the South.

Less than three decades ago racial politics, straight Democratic voting and
cultural conservatism made the South the nation's odd region out.

Since then, the South has increasingly integrated itself into American political
life, while the West, spurred by fiscal conservatism and a tendency, tempered by
tolerance, to hold strong opinions on all matters, has found itself more and
more at philosophical odds with the rest of the nation.

The polls taken since the beginning of this Presidential election year have
reflected this shift.

At Odds With Others

In recent New York Times/CBS News polls, for example, Westerners split with the
rest of the country in being substantially more opposed to national health
insurance and wage-price controls, more likely to blame government programs for
inflation and more supportive of a smaller government providing fewer services.

This conservatism on government spending was complemented by a certain degree of
social liberalism, with respondents in the West reporting themselves to be
especially strongly in favor of the proposed equal rights amendment, opposed to
nuclear power and more inclined than the rest of the nation to believe that the
Government was not doing enough for black Americans.

It is also in the West where the differences between the two parties show up
most strongly: Western Democrats tend to be to the left of Democrats nationwide,
while Republicans tend to be to the right of their fellow party members.

Finally, reflecting the economic buoyancy of their region, Westerners
interviewed for a Times/CBS poll in April reported themselves, by a number of
different measures, to be somewhat less affected by and worried about the state
of the nation's economy than are other Americans.

The politics of all of this is a matter of considerable interest to Assemblyman
Douglas Bosco, a Democrat whose district stretches hundreds of miles from the
vineyards of Sonoma County to fishing villages like Noyo, the resorts along the
Russian River, redwood forests all across northern California and blue-collar
cities like Eureka.

''Almost every conceivable form of controversy arises in this district,'' Mr.
Bosco said with a touch of pride.  He sees his constituency as being both
strong-willed and tolerant.  ''I think Westerners are in general more strident.
They're more doctrinaire,'' he said, noting that his countercultural
constituents in and around Mendocino and his blue-collar constituents in Eureka
cleaved to strongly held, and often contradictory, values.

At the same time, he said, these groups have learned to get along, even if they
do not like each other. This includes, he said, more public tolerance for the
proliferating marijuana trade, which is, according to agriculture officials, the
second most important cash crop in Mendocino County, bringing in an estimated
$90 million a year.

''There's an attitude that right now we're in a recession and marijuana is one
of the only things bringing in a little money,'' said the 33-year-old Mr. Bosco.
''And you know, a lot of the older people feel the same way.''

Also dividing his constituents, and Westerners generally, are environmental
questions. Mr. Bosco said he was constantly brokering the conflicting claims of
environmentalists, who want tougher regulations to protect the sea and the land,
and the fishing and logging interests, who chafe under the rules already on the
books.

What unites all sides is the certainty they feel in their values.  ''It is
probably fair to say that a larger proportion of those in California are living
their lives as they see fit, however that may be, than almost anywhere else in
the country,'' said Jeff Riggenbach, executive editor of the San Francisco-based
Libertarian Review. He added that these values were generally ''discovered and
implemented in the absence of any authority.'

From a different point on the political spectrum, Paul R. Haerle, a San
Francisco lawyer who is a former Republican state chairman, said he found that
Westerners ''have no doubt about the triumph of right over wrong.''

''Issues with a capital 'I' matter very much to them,'' he said.  In
Presidential politics, this confluence of attitudes put the West out of step
with the rest of the country in 1976, when every state west of the Mississippi
except Texas and Hawaii supported President Ford in his effort against Jimmy
Carter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Public Affairs Director Appointed by Citicorp

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 429 words


Citibank, the largest bank in New York, and Citicorp, its holding company, have
named Will Sparks as vice president in charge of public affairs and head of the
public relations department. Mr. Sparks, 55, a former speech writer for
President Lyndon B. Johnson and for the International Telephone and Telegraph
Corporation, has been a Citibank employee for the past four years.

Mr. Sparks's appointment was one of three major changes made last month without
public announcement in the bank's communications operation, which employs about
50 professionals. George E. Burns, 51, a speech writer at Citibank, was named to
the new post of deputy director of public affairs and is expected to become a
vice president soon. And John J. Maloney, 51, a Citibank public relations
executive since 1977, was appointed vice president and director of press
information, succeeding Lamson B. Smith, who retired at the age of 65.

Mr. Sparks succeeded Donald J. Colen, 63, who, according to an internal bank
announcement, ''was granted an administrative leave'' until his retirement in
1982. Mr. Colen, the long-time head of Citibank's public affairs, will become a
public relations and editorial consultant and undertake special assignments for
the bank.

Mr. Sparks, a writer of the ''Wide Wide World'' television program on the
National Broadcasting Company network durng the 1950's, became an assistant to
the Secretary of Defense in 1964 and took his assistant's title over to the
White House three years later. Working for President Johnson, he was the chief
speech writer, handled Congressional affairs and was known as the ''keeper of
the king's seal'' because he drafted the multitude of ceremonial letters and
proclamations issued by the President of the United States.

Returning to the private sector in 1968, Mr. Sparks spent a year and a half
working on merger and acquisition deals at the defunct Wall Street house of
George Robinson & Company. In 1970, he joined I.T.T. as a speech writer for
Harold S. Geneen, its former chairman.  Since joining Citibank, Mr. Sparks has
been vice president for special projects.

While declining to give details about possible changes in the bank's public
affairs programs, Mr. Sparks said that he was currently formulating his plans.
''I lived through Vietnam with McNamara and Lyndon Johnson,'' he said. ''When I
was at I.T.T., the Dita Beard thing broke. I've been well trained.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: TEHERAN, Iran, June 2


An Iranian-sponsored conference on United States ''intervention in Iran'' opened
here today with a 10-member American group led by former Attorney General Ramsey
Clark attending in defiance of President Carter's ban on travel to this country.

The four-day international meeting, ordered by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini after
the unsuccessful American attempt to rescue the 53 hostages in April, brought
together several hundred nongovernmental delegates from what were described as
''anti-imperialist'' organizations in about 50 countries. The purpose is to hear
reports prepared by Iranian officials on American policy in Iran.

The Iranian Government is paying for the American group's transportation,
lodging and food, delegation members said.  (In Washington, the White House said
that ''criminal and civil'' penalties were available to punish Mr. Clark and the
others for their ''violation'' of the President's order. The Justice Department,
which had warned earlier that those violating the travel ban could receive ''up
to 10 years in prison and fines of up to $50,000,'' said it would investigate
''the circumstances of this travel to determine whether action'' against the
group was warranted. Page A12.)

'Dialogue Is Essential'

''Our reason for coming here,'' Mr. Clark told reporters today, ''is the belief
that dialogue between all people is essential for understanding and respect.''

He said he was ''hopeful'' that, in some way, the conference might help obtain
the release of the hostages.  However, Foreign Minister Sadegh Ghotbzadeh, one
of the officials presiding at the conference, said that the gathering had no
relation to the hostages. He said it was not the ''trial'' of American policy
that had been mentioned in connection with several earlier plans for obtaining
the release of the Americans held hostage since Nov. 4 to back demands for the
return of the deposed Shah and his wealth.

Document on U.S. Officer Cited

Today's opening session was marked by the reading of what was described as a
top-secret document depicting an American officer pressing the Iranian military
just before the Iranian revolution of February 1979 to take a more activist role
and to stage a coup if necessary.

The document was said to be a message from Gen. Robert Huyser, the American
officer sent here by President Carter just after Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi left
Teheran for Egypt on Jan. 16, 1979.

It was addressed to Gen. Alexander M. Haig, then the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization commander and the superior of General Huyser, the deputy commander.
After describing efforts to shore up the Prime Ministership of Shahpur Bakhtiar,
the last head of Government appointed by the Shah, the message read at the
conference said, referring to the Iranian general staff:

''If that fails, then my guidance to them is we must go to a straight military
takeover.'' The original American reports of the Huyser mission had said that it
was intended to discourage the Iranian general staff from staging a coup against
Prime Minister Bakhtiar. However, reports from Washington last month said that
the general had been ordered to develop contingency plans for a coup should the
Bakhtiar Government be threatened by revolutionary forces. Such plans reportedly
became unworkable because of the rapid disintegration of the Iranian military
just before the revolution.

(In Washington, officials, asked to comment on the document read at the news
conference, declined to comment.) Mr. Clark said at his news conference that he
and his group were ''very anxious as Americans to achieve a reconciliation with
Iran.'' ''Of course,'' he went on, '' we believe the hostages are not
responsible for the 30 years of American wrongful intervention and cannot be
held responsible.''

Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh was asked by an Iranian reporter if he didn't think
that ''Ramsey Clark's attendance was a plot.'' ''This gentleman is a very well
known figure in the States and very respected,'' he said. ''He was one of the
opponents of the Vietnam War and he was one of the first Americans to announce
his support of our revolution.''

Actually, as Attorney General under President Johnson, Mr. Clark had ordered the
prosecution of one of the other members of the American delegation here, Dr.
John Gerassi, a freelance journalist, for traveling to North Vietnam during the
war in defiance of a Government travel ban.

This afternoon the conference - which included large blocs of delegates who kept
their heads entirely swathed in red-checked Arab scarves except for narrow
eyeslits - listened to reports and speeches attacking what was described as some
27 years of American interference in Iran.

The Iranian Government documents included a large packet of files from Savak,
the Shah's secret police, designed to show their relationship with the American
Central Intelligence Agency.  However, the documents also showed that Savak was
spying on the C.I.A. agents working out of the American Embassy.

----

Haig Disputes Document

WASHINGTON, June 2 (Reuters) -Alexander M. Haig, former NATO commander, today
disputed the authenticity of a document released in Teheran about alleged plans
for a possible takeover by Iran's armed forces after the overthrow of the Shah.

Mr. Haig, reached in East Hartford, Conn., said: ''I can't conceive of that
being right.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF RAMSEY CLARK (PAGE A12)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 939 words


By John Leonard
CHINA MEN. By Maxine Hong Kingston.  308 pages. Knopf. $10.95.

MAXINE HONG KINGSTON says: ''I want to talk to Cantonese, who have always been
revolutionaries, non-conformists, people with fabulous imaginations, people who
invented the Gold Mountain. I want to discern what it is that makes people go
West and become Americans. I want to compare China, a country I made up, with
what country is really out there.''

She talks to the Cantonese in dreams. She listens to the ghosts of her
great-grandfathers, her grandfathers, her father and her uncles - the
''sojourners'' who went to find work on the Gold Mountain, America, and
sometimes never returned - whether they appear in legend and myth or in the
stables by the railroad tracks in Stockton, Calif. She hides in the cellar in
Stockton, thinking about ''useless things like wishes, wands, hibernation.''
Where are the magicians, the beautiful ladies, the knights, the warrior poets?
She is clear on one point: ''Ocean people are different from land people. The
ocean never stops saying and asking into ears, which don't sleep like eyes.''

An Imaginative Voyage

It is as if Mrs. Kingston, like the hero of the epic elegy ''Li Sao,'' set sail
in her imagination in ''A Winged Dragonboat made of jade and ivory and entwined
with leaves.'' She rows ''with cedar oars'' and flies ''orchids for flags,''
harnessed to the whirlwind, with lightning as her gold whip. She cannot go home:
''No go-between anywhere.'' She is ''an orphan who traveled everywhere because
one place was denied.''

''China Men'' contemplates exile; it seeks to explain exile by recovering
history from deceit. It is quite as wonderful as ''The Woman Warrior,'' but
angrier. Who built the transcontinental railroad, and then faced lynching? Who
hacked through the thickets to create the fields for the sugarcane plantations
of Hawaii? Who made Alaska safe for oil pipelines? Whose scholars were reduced
to running laundries and dodging Immigration Service officials? Whose language
was stolen, flattened, mechanized? Mrs. Kingston's mother, so memorable from
''The Woman Warrior'' resents English: ''The words had no crags, windows, or
hooks to grasp.'' The anger in ''China Men'' causes some seams, some scars, in
its narrative that were not apparent in ''The Woman Warrior.'' She stops to tell
us, year by year, of discriminatory legislation against the Chinese in this
country; her indignation is a hook in her throat; she is properly outraged at
the blue-eyed ''white demons''; the past wasn't pretty; we miss, for a beat, her
brilliant music. But the anger is in the service of amplitude. No more lies, she
is saying, even if her grandfathers lied to themselves about the gold mountain.

And the anger and violence are mixed with humor and beauty, nagging passion,
sadness like scrimshaw on a whale's tooth. A mother, in China, writes to her
son, who is trying to be an American. ''We used to pretend our rocker was a boat
like a peapod, and we were peas at sea. Remember? Remember? But now you send
paper boats into my dreams. Sail back to me.'' In another letter, she says, ''I
haven't eaten meat for so long, I might as well have been a nun who's taken a
vegetable vow.''

Mrs. Kingston's father is a bitter man. Once upon a time, at the Imperial
examinations, with a brush on a scroll, he built ''each word from top to bottom,
left to right, water strokes, dots for flames, tailing gondonolas for the boat
words, never going back for repairs.'' Now, at the laundry, he is cheated by
gypsies, fears deportation and sees a son go off to fight for the white demons
in Vietnam. And yet he also buries wine bottles, ''upside down in the garden;
their bottoms made a path of sea-color circles'' and he tells the children
stories. There is, for instance, the story about the two feuding poets: ''One
killed the other's plant by watering it with hot water.'' By the end of ''China
Men'' Mrs. Kingston seems to understand her father's bitterness and to realize
that males, too, ''feel pain,'' and to decide to watch ''the young men who
listen.''

''China Men'' is framed, on the one hand, by a wedding and a funeral, and, on
the other, by the birth of boys. The wedding and the funeral are surprisingly
similar, with a burning of paper horses and a throwing away of paper money. Both
births are witnessed at a window by the older children; the first is of Mrs.
Kingston's father, the second of her brother who will go to Vietnam. In between
is sheer magic: poetry, parable, nightmare, the terror and exhileration of
physical labor, the songs of survival, the voices of the dead, the feel of wood
and blood, the smell of flowers and wounds. History meets sensuality.

Incomparable Style

It is, frankly, impossible to do justice to Mrs. Kingston's style.  If more
writers could manage it, our literature would be richer.  Ghosts, black cranes,
dreams, iron, myth, work, dragon seeds, straw hats, gold mountains and Parker
pens commingle, like jade and ivory and leaves. Of her mother on her wedding
night, she writes: ''She is dressed in the old style (no matter what year this
is, China is old enough for there to have been an old style). She wears the
combs with the long prongs. Her eyebrows are moth's wings joined at the center
and her eyes are like the bronze bells with brights and deeps.''

Fiction, memoir, dream, epic or elegy - whatever Maxine Hong Kingston is
writing, it is certainly art. Four years ago in this space I said ''The Woman
Warrior'' was the best book I'd read in years. ''China Men'' is, at the very
least, the best book I've read in the four years since.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF MAXINE HONG KINGSTON

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

John Tudor Walsh

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 873 words


Appointee of Southern Baptist Home Mission Board as chaplain at Princeton
University ... One of seven-member ''fact-finding group'' that visited Iran from
Dec. 23 to Jan. 3 at invitation of Iranians ... Group spent an hour Christmas
day with Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, suggested international tribunal to
investigate ''misuse of power during the Shah's regime'' and possible American
involvement ... Born March 21, 1946, in Poplar Bluff, Mo. ... Degrees from
Southeast Missouri State College in 1969, San Francisco State College in 1973,
Pacific School of Religion in Berkeley in 1975 ... Summer missionary in
Singapore and Malaysia 1966 ... Pastor in Painton, Mo., 1968-69, and Union City,
Calif., 1969-73 ... Missionary first in Boston, 1975-77.

Lennox S. Hinds

Associate professor of criminal justice at Rutgers University in New Brunswick
... Fellow of City College's Center for Legal Education to help minorities ...
Director of National Conference of Black Lawyers 1973-78 ... Petitioner to
United Nations in December 1978 alleging discrimination against blacks and
Indians in United States prisons and judicial system ... Observer at 1976 Angola
trials of American and British mercenaries ... Born March 26, 1940, in Trinidad
... Chemistry degree from City College ... Joined civil rights movement in
1960's ... Law degree from Rutgers in Newark in 1972 ... ...

George Wald

Corecipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology in 1967 for his work on the
chemical reactions that translate light stimulus into vision ... Taught in the
biology department at Harvard University 1934-77 ... An antiwar activist who
received national recognition in 1969 for a speech at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in which he called the Vietnam War ''the most shameful
episode in the whole of American history'' ... Has publicly protested nuclear
power plants, nuclear stockpiling and recombinant DNA genetic research ... Born
Nov. 18, 1906, in New York ... Received his Ph.D. from Columbia University in
1932 ... Was a Guggenheim Fellow 1953-64 ... Elected to the National Academy of
Sciences in 1950 ...

Paul M. Washington

A 59-year-old Episcopal minister and civil rights activist ... Has served since
1962 as the pastor and director of the Church of the Advocate in Philadelphia
... In 1975 was one of four clergymen censored by the Episcopal Church in
Philadelphia for ordaining women ... Born in 1921 in Charleston, S.C. ... An
active member of the black-power movement ... Has championed causes ranging from
prison reform to consumer rights ... Served as the correctional chaplain for
Episcopal Community Services in the Pennsylvania Diocese 1955-73 ...

Leonard Weinglass

A member of the Newark Law Collective in the 1960's ... Defended the Chicago
Seven and was member of defense team in Pentagon Papers trials ... Also defended
William Harris against charges of kidnapping Patricia Hearst ... Now, at 46, is
in private practice in Los Angeles ... Describes himself as ''anticapitalism,
anti-imperialism, antitotalitarianism but prodemocracy'' ... Son of a New Jersey
druggist ... Earned his law degree at Yale in 1958.

Mary Anderson

A 41-year-old visiting fellow and lecturer in economics at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology ... Worked for American Society of Friends in East
Africa and in Chicago ... Born in Frankfort, Ky, the daughter of a Presbyterian
minister ... Graduate of Holyoke College ... Mother of 11-year-old son.

Kay Camp

President of Women's International League for Peace and Freedom ... Ran as
Democrat for House of Representatives in 1972 ... Appointed by President Carter
to be special adviser to American delegation to United Nations Disarmament
Conference in 1978 ... Born 62 years ago in Mount Kisco, N.Y. ... Graduated from
Swarthmore College ... Lives in King of Prussia, Pa.

Charles Kimball

Southern Baptist minister and native of Oklahoma ... Graduate student at the
Center for the Study of World Religions at Harvard since 1975, specializing in
Islamic studies ... Became involved in American-Iranian relations after seizure
of hostages ... Stepped up activity after participating in prayer vigil for
hostages in December at Statue of Liberty ... Among clerics who went to Iran in
December ... Graduated from Oklahoma State University with a B.A. and received a
Master of Divinity degree from Southern Baptist Theological Seminary ...

John Gerassi

A professor of political science at Queens College and journalist ... Author of
many books, including studies of Fidel Castro, homosexuals, Latin America, Che
Guevara ... Now writing the authorized biography of Jean-Paul Sartre ... Radical
intellectual active in the antiwar movement ... In the late 1950's and early
60's was an editor at Newsweek, a critic at Time and a freelance correspondent
in Latin America ... In December 1966 toured North Vietnam as part of a
six-member fact-finding team for Bertand Russell International War Crimes
Tribunal ... Prosecution of the group for traveling to North Vietnam was ordered
by Attorney General Ramsey Clark but later dropped ... Has taught political
science at many universities on the East Coast, in California and in Europe ...
Born in Paris in 1931.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Americans attending a conference in Tehran

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
LAWYER ON A FORBIFDDEN JOURNEY: WILLIAM RAMSEY CLARK

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 705 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 3


He still wears thin Levi slacks and Hush Puppy shoes to parties on Manhattan's
East Side. In his flat Texas twang he recites lengthy poems by W.H. Auden while
entertaining visitors in his Greenwich

Village apartment. Once, at a political fund-raiser, he denounced ''the
political power of wealth'' before the established guests and then proceeded to
quote Jose Ortega y Gasset, Reinhold Niebuhr and Benito Juarez, causing one
bejewelled woman to emit a deep snore.

As Attorney General under President Lyndon B. Johnson, he prosecuted Dr.
Benjamin Spock and other antiwar activists, was involved in the Government
surveillance of political dissidents and strongly defended the President's
Vietnam War policies. But only months later he would praise radical dissenters.

To critics of William Ramsey Clark as well as his friends, his mission to Iran,
in defiance of President Carter's ban on travel there, seems, in its
unpredictability, perfectly predictable.

''More than anyone I know, his public life is formed by the dictates of his
conscience,'' said Alan Levine, one of Mr. Clark's partners in the New York law
firm of Clark, Wulf, Levine & Peratis.  ''It's his general feeling in all
matters that dialogue is the best path to the reasonable solutions of any
problem.''

Jail Sentence Possible

In leading a 10-member American group to Teheran to attend an Iranian-sponsored
conference on United States ''intervention in Iran,'' Mr. Mr. Clark could face
up to 10 years in prison and $50,000 in fines. These are possible penalties if
he is found guilty of violating the International Emergency Economic Powers Act,
a threeyear-old law that President Carter invoked April 17 to bar travel to
Iran.

Controversy has marked Mr. Clark's career since his appointment as Attorney
General on Feb. 28, 1967. He engineered the first substantial grant of Federal
funds - $63 million - to improve local police, courts and jails. He forbade all
wiretapping and virtually all eavesdropping by Federal agents, except in
security cases, opposed capital punishment, actively sought gun control and
stiffened enforcement of school and job desegregation.

The rangy Texan, who is 6 feet 3 inches tall, was singled out for criticism,
especially in the 1968 Presidential campaign by the Republican candidate,
Richard M. Nixon, for withholding support from bills aimed at broadening police
and interrogation powers.

Mr. Clark's critics, however, point out that his present somewhat radical image
is not altogether consistent with his performance as Attorney General. For
example, Mr. Clark ordered the prosecution of John Gerassi, a freelance
journalist, for traveling to North Vietnam during the war in defiance of a
Government travel ban. Mr. Gerassi is now accompanying Mr. Clark to Iran.

Mr. Clark, the son of the late Supreme Court Justice Tom C. Clark, was born in
Dallas on Dec. 18, 1927. After serving in the Marines, he attended the
University of Texas. He received his bachelor's degree in history in 1947, then
went to the University of Chicago where he took his law degree and a master's
degree in history.

Mr. Clark worked for a Dallas law firm for about 10 years before being appointed
by President Kennedy as Assistant Attorney General in charge of the Justice
Department's Land Division. In 1965, Mr. Clark was appointed Deputy Attorney
General by President Johnson, a family friend, and two years later was named to
head the Justice Department.

After Mr. Nixon's election in 1968, Mr. Clark and his wife, Georgia, settled in
a cooperative apartment on West 12th Street in New York City. They have two
children, Ronda, 28 years old, who is handicapped and attends a private school
near Philadelphia, and Thomas, 26, a law student at Golden Gate University in
San Francisco.

Mr. Clark has twice ventured into New York politics and has proved surprisingly
resilient. In 1974, he upset the choice of Democratic Party leaders and won the
Senate primary nomination to oppose Jacob K. Javits.

Two years later he ran again in the Democratic Senate primary, coming in third
behind Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Bella Abzug. New York appeals to him, he has
said, ''because this is where the people and the problems are.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CLARK WOULD TAKE PLACE OF HOSTAGES

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: TEHERAN, Iran, June 3


Former Attorney General Ramsey Clark, calling on the Iranian authorities today
to ''free these 53 little people,'' volunteered to take the place of any of the
American Embassy hostages if it would help end the crisis.

His voice sometimes catching with emotion, he said he was making the offer
because he was ''so sure that it is imperative that the hostages be released
now; that it is so important to the fulfillment of the Iranian revolution, which
it is damaging in a hundred ways; so important to the individual justice and
rights of the hostages, and it is so important to peace on earth.''

Mr. Clark, who is leading a group of 10 Americans at an Iraniansponsored
conference on ''American intervention'' here, in defiance of an American ban on
travel, made his appeal in a speech to the conference this afternoon.

'A Delicious Excuse to War'

The holding of the hostages, he said, ''provides the excuse for the power of
intervention, the power of imperialism -never doubt it - a delicious excuse to
war, to dominate, to intervene.''

There was no immediate response from the Islamic militants, who seized the
hostages in the American Embassy seven months ago and demanded that the deposed
Shah be returned here for trial. Last fall, when Mr. Clark attempted a mediation
mission, the militants denounced him as having served in the American Government
during the Vietnam War and said he was suspect because he had headed the Justice
Department.

The conference, which is being held to ''study and debate'' the role of the
United States in Iran, is sponsored by President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr and his
associates. This element of the revolutionary leadership has been eager to end
the hostage crisis, but has met with continued resistance and defiance both from
the militants and their allies in the Islamic fundamentalist clerical faction.

Offer Causes Consternation

Mr. Clark's offer caused some consternation among the other members of the
American delegation. The delegation, it was learned, had discussed volunteering
to serve as substitutes for the hostages as a gesture to convince the Iranians
that even their friends regarded the impasse as harmful, but voted against it.
Thus, sources in the delegation said, the other members were taken aback when
Mr. Clark made the offer.

The former Attorney General did not appear at a news conference tonight held by
the other members, who appeared to be reluctant to discuss their reactions to
Mr. Clark's offer in public.  ''I felt absolutely convinced that he was
sincere,'' said the Rev. Paul M.  Washington, director of the Church of the
Advocate in Philadelphia.  ''I don't know how that will help, but I am certain
he was sincere.''

During the course of the speeches throughout the day representatives of three
other delegations, from Yugoslavia, West Germany and Italy, also recommended
that the hostages be released.  The delegates, representing some 50 countries,
are members of various liberation fronts, humanitarian groups and generally
leftist political organizations.

2 Members to Meet Militants

Two members of the American delegation, the Rev. Charles Kimball, a Harvard
divinity student, and the Rev. John T. Walsh, the chaplain of Princeton
University, are to meet with the Islamic militants holding the United States
Embassy, it was learned. An exchange of mail for the hostages has also been
arranged through the delegation.

The American group is also planning to meet privately with what its members
would only describe as ''high-ranking'' Iranian officials.  Mr. Clark's address
was delivered with the style and pace of a political stump speech, in contrast
to the generally turgid denunciations of imperialism that filled most of the
day. It drew a round of applause from the other delegates and a flurry of
attention from reporters and photographers.

The speech was filled with praise for the Iranian revolution, which he called
''a miracle for the age''; for Persian culture in general - ''read their poets
... Hafiz and Shiraz, oh, that Shakespeare could have written like that''; and
was heavily larded with regret for America's role in the world - ''Vietnam, I
weep at Vietnam.'' He also charged that the abortive American commando raid to
rescue the hostages was an ''illegal'' violation of Iran's territory.

'Where Is Allen Dulles?'

''The seizure of the hostages here is understandable in human terms, God knows
it is understandable,'' Mr. Clark said, ''but it is not right. Of course it is
not right.

''For where is Allen Dulles? Where is Kermit Roosevelt? Where is Richard Helms
or Henry Kissinger or Richard Nixon?'' he went on, naming a series of Central
Intelligence Agency or other Government officials who have been involved in
Iran.

Mr. Clark argued that the continued holding of the hostages was leading to the
defeat of efforts to restrain the C.I.A., to an increase in the defense budget
and a belligerent attitude on the part of the American people. And, he said, it
was damaging the prospects of the Iranian revolution.

''Holding the hostages takes the focus off the Shah,'' he said.  ''The Shah is
the villain of the act. People are thinking about the hostages all over the
world while the Shah eats his caviar over in Egypt. That, I think, is a serious
mistake.''

Shortly after Mr. Clark's speech, another member of the American delegation,
John Gerassi, a professor at Queens College and an organizer of the Vietnam War
Crimes Tribunal, made a speech in which he paid tribute to a number of
liberation struggles and asserted that he was not offering to substitute for a
hostage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMIC AIKENISM WON'T DO;
Economic Aikenism Won't Do

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 595 words


Now that Jimmy Carter has apparently won re-nomination for President, he is
doing some fall campaigning by proclaiming a victory over inflation. ''We're
turning the economic tide,'' he has said, and ''building a brighter economic
future.'' The price indexes have indeed declined from the alarming heights of
March. But the President's economic strategy now is nothing more than the late
Senator Aiken's for Vietnam: simply announce a victory and quit.

No matter how described, the Administration's economic policy remains a failure.
The recession now under way was a last-ditch attempt to curb inflation by a
President (and Congress) who could think of no better way. It is a disruptive,
costly policy that will mean high unemployment and large losses of national
wealth.

Politically, this approach may be useful to Mr. Carter in November, when
inflation will have moderated further and the recession may have reached bottom.
But that conjunction will be temporary; it should be little solace for the
nation. In recent decades, recessions have never fundamentally improved the
economy.  The basic inflation rate after each slowdown has been worse than after
the one before. No one, understandably, has had the political stamina to let a
recession continue until inflation was wiped out altogether.

The outlook now is for more of the same. The United States shifted into
recession with consumer prices rising at an annual rate of about 15 percent, and
with the underlying inflation rate, measured by the rise in wages and movements
in productivity, running at about 10 percent. Now that the recession has become
severe, there are already hints that the Administration will seek a stimulative
tax cut by the end of summer.

Inflation would still be a serious problem then, but the will to fight it with
more recession will have waned.  It should be the duty of the Carter
Administration to find a better way out of inflation than careening so futilely
from recession to recession. A quick tax cut, or the promise of one to reassure
voters next fall, will merely start everyone on another roller-coaster ride.
Only a basic redesign of the economic track can promise a smoother ride.

Chronic problems afflict the American economy: savings are low, business
investment is anemic, labor productivity is declining.  These, plus the energy
drain, explain the persistence of slow growth and high inflation. The only way
out is to overhaul the tax system to encourage more saving and investment. That,
in turn, would stimulate productivity and retard inflation. A new tax strategy
should also be linked to a vigorous effort to hold down wage and price
increases; business tax incentives, for instance, might be conditioned on
moderation in wage settlements.

A fast tax cut this fall cannot promote these goals. In fact, they do not
require any tax cut at all. If budget balance remains desirable, savings and
investment could be encouraged simply by raising some taxes and lowering others
but leaving total revenue collections unchanged.

Designing such a rescue and selling it to the country and Congress, however,
require hard work and an admission of failure. Taking credit for temporary
improvements in the appearance of things is not the way to address the
fundamental problems that still threaten the nation's future.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICSA'S FRIENDS IN SOUTH KOREA

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 231 words


To the Editor:

The events which culminated in the capture of Kwangju by forces under the
control of the military clique in Seoul are, above all, a devastating commentary
on the role and character of U.S. policy.v.hile the Korean militarists were
savagely suppressing the struggle of Korean citizens to achieve a measure of
democratic rule, U.S.  policy makers were preaching ''restraint'' on ''both
sides.'' Even this ''impartial'' posturing, however, was tainted by the prompt
U.S. approval to grant the militarists additional troop reinforcements which are
under the command of the U.S. military authority in Korea.

And as the slaughter of Koreans in Kwangju reached its denouement, State
Department spokesperson Susan Pittman sought to maintain that posture of
detached innocence as she told reporters: ''It is difficult to see how a foreign
government can intervene helpfully in a situation such as that in Kwangju.''

Obviously, the lessons of Vietnam and Iran have not penetrated the perceptions
of U.S. policy planners, who persist in the futile exercise of shoring up ''free
world'' dictatorships.  HERBERT KRIEDMAN Lido Beach, L.I., May 27, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 5, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

QUEENS COLLEGE'S GRADUATES HEAR CUOMO WARNING AGAINST APATHY

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 373 words


Lieut. Gov. Mario Cuomo addressed the graduating class of Queens College
yesterday and urged its members to reverse a trend among citizens and play a
greater role in the nation's affairs.

''Unless there is reinvigoration of the people,'' Mr. Cuomo said, ''the very
rich will get richer, too many of the middle class will become poorer, and the
poor will become fixed in their desperation.'' The 56th commencement was held
outdoors on the college campus yesterday after ceremonies were postponed by rain
on Tuesday.

Mr. Cuomo told the graduating class of 3,500 that the ''lack of wisdom of our
leaders'' had caused American deaths in Vietnam, riots in Miami and pollution in
the Love Canal area of Niagara Falls, N.Y.  ''The system needs you badly,'' he
said, ''not just to serve in office or to vote, but to think, to work, to plan,
to decide, to insist.''

Mr. Cuomo said that New York City had been built by those ''who refuse to accept
the grim prediction of sophisticates who claim to have wisdom because they had
gathered some knowledge.'' He rejected what he called the ''new negativism,'' a
movement that he said sought to shrink government.

Expansion Plan Applauded

Mr. Cuomo also congratulated Queens College for seeking to build a law school.
''I tell you that a law school will be built,'' he said.  ''Some day it will be
joined by a medical school and a thousand students more than there are today.''
The plan for a law school has been supported by Governor Carey and the State
Legislature.

Other speakers, including Donald R. Manes, the Queens Borough President, and Dr.
Saul Cohen, the college president, elaborated on the need for a law school,
which would be the City University's first.

Mr. Manes said that Queens College was the ''jewel'' of the City University and
that it ''is regarded as the most desirable institution to attend in the city
system.''

Mr. Cohen said that the college had been underfinanced by the state and had been
treated with benign neglect. But ''Queens is on the move again,'' he said.

The college awarded a honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree to Joseph
Ternbach, an art curator, for his ''national and international reputation as a
restorer of three-dimensional art works.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. ASSAILS ISRAELIS OVER BOMB ATTACKS THAT MAIMED ARABS

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 761 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., June 5


The United Nations Security Council severely criticized Israel today for failing
to protect Arab lives in the occupied West Bank of the Jordan.

The Council's 14-to-0 vote, on a resolution condemning Israel, resulted from the
car bombings on Monday that maimed the Palestinian Mayors of Nablus and
Ramallah.

The American delegate, Donald F. McHenry, abstained. He condemned the bombings
as a ''brutal crime,'' but complained that the Council had isolated a single
outrage in a spiral of violence in the West Bank that had cost both Israeli and
Arab lives.

This was the sixth time in three months that the Council has either rebuked
Israel or insisted on the rights of Palestinians to determine their own rule.
The United States has supported only one of these measures, a call on Israel to
halt the establishment of settlements in the occupied lands. President Carter
disavowed that vote two days later on the ground that the resolution was
contrary to American policy and that the vote for it was a result of a failure
in communications in the Administration.

The Council's focus on the Middle East, Western diplomats said, reflects two
factors: a genuine fear that the mounting violence on the West Bank is
threatening a fragile peace in the region, and the Soviet Union's success in
deflecting attention from other sources of global tension, notably its own
intervention in Afghanistan and the regime installed by Vietnam in Cambodia.

The key section of today's resolution ''expresses deep concern that Israel, as
occupying power, has failed to provide adequate protection to the civilian
population in the occupied territories.'' The document ''condemns the
assassination attempts'' earlier this week and urges Israel to compensate the
victims. A Western European diplomat said this amounted to implying that Israel
was responsible for the assaults.

The bombing attacks wounded 10 persons, including an Israeli soldier. Mayor
Bassam al-Shaka of Nablus lost both legs, Mayor Karim Khalef of Ramallah lost
part of his left foot and the Israeli soldier was blinded attempting to defuse a
bomb intended for Mayor Ibrahim Tawil of Bireh.

The Council's resolution, like those preceding it, was largely designed to exert
pressure on Israel over its occupation of the territories seized in the 1967
war. Today's text was particularly strong, and Mr. McHenry said that the United
States could not support several of its provisions.

Among other things, the document voiced ''deep concern'' that Jewish settlers in
occupied lands ''are allowed to carry arms thus enabling them to perpetrate
crimes against the civilian Arab population.''

The resolution insisted on ''the overriding necessity to end the prolonged
occupation of Arab territories, including Jerusalem.'' Israel captured East
Jerusalem from Jordan in the 1967 war, and has repeatedly declared that the city
will not be divided again. A similar reference to occupied Jerusalem was the
principal reason Mr.  Carter gave for disavowing the earlier vote against
Israel.

An earlier draft of today's document described the occupation of the West Bank,
the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem as ''illegal.'' But the word was dropped to
avert a United States veto.

'Well-Known Double Standard'

In the brief debate, the Israeli delegate, Yehuda Z. Blum, called the resolution
''another display'' of the Council's ''well-known double standard.'' The
terrorist acts against the Arab Mayors, he said, were condemned by Israel's
Government and people. But, he said, ''this widespread revulsion stands in stark
contrast to the virtual absence of any similar condemnation by Arab governments
and public opinion whenever the Palestine Liberation Organization perpetrates
acts of terror against Jews or Arabs.''

The P.L.O., Mr. Blum charged, has been responsible ''to a decisive degree'' for
the ''plague of international terrorism'' over the past decade. The United
Nations, however, he said, ''has failed miserably to provide any leadership in
the struggle against the grave threat to international security.''

Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid, Egypt's delegate, delivered a stiff reply to his
country's partner in the stalled Camp David peace talks. The ''criminal''
attacks on the Mayors, Mr. Meguid said, ''testify to the evils of the Israeli
military occupation.'' He accused Israel's military administration of
''terrorist practices,'' and said that the settlements in the occupied regions
''fuel the vicious cycle of violence, bitterness and hatred undermining
coexistence between Palestinians and Israelis.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE APPROVES $5.2 BILLION IN AID

BYLINE: By GRAHAM HOVEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 571 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 5


The House of Representatives today approved legislation that would authorize
$5.2 billion in foreign aid, including $53.7 million for Nicaragua, for the
fiscal year beginning Oct. 1.

The vote, 221 to 147, followed a nine-hour debate in which conservative members
expressed fears about an expansion of Communist influence in developing
countries.

Fifty-eight Republicans joined 163 Democrats in support of the measure.
Sixty-five Democrats and 82 Republicans voted against it.  Shortly before final
passage, the House adopted, by a vote of 243 to 131, an amendment by
Representative William S. Broomfield of Michigan, the ranking Republican on the
Foreign Affairs Committee, cutting about $310 million from the bill.

House Provides More Money

The reduction still left the House authorization about $86.5 million higher than
President Carter had requested after his second budget proposal in March and
more than $300 million higher than a companion measure approved earlier by the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

The Senate is due to take up its committee's version later this month. A
Senate-House conference committee will later decide on a final figure.

Much of the debate revolved around the efforts of House conservatives to reduce
or eliminate proposed aid items for countries that have governments described as
socialist or that receive assistance from the Soviet Union or Cuba.

The sharpest controversy concerned a proposed $53.7 million aid package for
Nicaragua, where a Government dominated by the Sandinist National Liberation
Front displaced President Anastasio Somoza Debayle and the 46-year-old Somoza
family dynasty last year.

Emotional Appeals From Leaders

Only emotional appeals from the floor by the two highest-ranking Democratic
leaders, Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. of Massachusetts and the majority leader,
Representative Jim Wright of Texas, headed off a consevative move to cut $25
million in special aid from the $53.7 million package.

Mr. Wright, who is about to lead a special mission to Nicaragua at the request
of President Carter, urged the House to ''give me the tools with which to go to
the people of Nicaragua and say, 'We haven't abandoned you.'''

Mr. O'Neill, who delivered what he said was his first floor speech on foreign
policy in his 28 years in Congress, said it was ''in the best interests of the
nation'' to provide aid for Nicaragua.

The amendment had been proposed by Mr. Wright as a substitute for one by
Representative Robert E. Bauman, Republican of Maryland, that would have
eliminated the $25 million from the foreign-aid appropriations bill. On May 28,
Mr. Bauman succeeded, despite an appeal by Mr. Wright, in striking $5.5 million
in military aid to Nicaragua from the bill.

Under Mr. Wright's amendment, the President would be required to report to
Congress every 90 days during the 1981 fiscal year on Nicaragua's observance of
human rights and its progress in establishing democratic institutions, including
''an orderly system of free elections.''

The House also adopted, on a 145-to-44 vote, a ''sense of Congress'' amendment
urging the President to order the immediate expulsion of Cuban immigrants who
violate American laws by causing disturbances at processing centers.

One amendment adopted by voice vote would bar American aid to Cuba, Cambodia and
Vietnam, although the Administration had not proposed assistance to these
countries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BUNDY, AT CITY U., URGES PUBLIC VOICE ON U.S. POLICY

BYLINE: By GLENN FOWLER

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 478 words


McGeorge Bundy told a commencement audience at the City University Graduate
School yesterday that the public's instinct about major foreign policy issues
was truer than that of ''posturing politicians.''

There is thus a great need for individuals to speak out during the Presidential
campaign, the former national security adviser in the Administrations of
Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson declared yesterday.

Mr. Bundy, now a professor of history at New York University, was the
commencement speaker at the City University Graduate School as 209 degrees, most
of them doctorates, were conferred in 23 fields of scholarship, from
anthropology to theater.

The 90-minute-long ceremonies in the block-through arcade of the Graduate Center
on 42d Street opposite Bryant Park were accompanied by continuous chanting by
protesters on the street denouncing Mr.  Bundy, whom they characterized as an
''architect'' of the Vietnam War.

Struck in Chest With a Pie

Several guests at the commencement and a few graduates walked out when Mr. Bundy
was introduced to make his address early in the program. The schedule had been
revised in the hope that the demonstration would end, but it did not.

As Mr. Bundy rose to speak, he was struck in the chest by a cherry pie thrown by
Aron Kay, who called his target a ''warmonger'' and a ''pig,'' and who was led
out by security guards but was not arrested.

Mr. Bundy prefaced his remarks by saying he had ''never been unwilling'' to
discuss the Vietnam War and had ''understood and shared the anguish'' over that
conflict. His address, however, focused on the effect of the current
Presidential campaign on foreign policy, in particular the hostage situation in
Iran and the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.

Backs Carter on Afghanistan

''The campaign itself has not been helpful to the hostages,'' he said, but he
stopped short of attributing the aborted rescue of the hostages to campaign
pressures on the President. Nevertheless, ''it was still a blunder,'' he said,
and ''the affair of the hostages will now be settled in the only way that can
work - by diplomacy.''

In the Afghanistan crisis, Mr. Bundy said that he supported Mr.  Carter's firm
stand against the Soviet Union but that he feared that ''the Administration is
not telling us all the bad news.''

Three honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degrees were conferred at the
commencement. The recipients were: SOL C. CHAIKIN, president of the
International Ladies Garment Workers Union, for his ''outstanding service in the
labor movement since 1940.'' RUSSELL LYNES, author and, for many years, managing
editor of Harper's magazine, for ''exerting a wide and civilizing influence upon
the world of letters.'' JEROME ROBBINS, choreographer and dancer, as ''one of
the most creative forces in 20th century American theater and dance.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 7, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EMIL MAZEY, PIONEER, NOW LABOR'S LION IN WINTER

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SERRIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 743 words


He was a large and feared man in the old times, those hard, tumultuous years of
the Great Depression and the 1940's, when union men made the nation tremble as
they fought for the right to organize.

He is Emil Mazey. This week Emil Mazey retired.  Standing up to company men, to
cops, to hired sluggers, he was one of the leaders who helped build the United
Automobile Workers. He is among the handful of men left from labor's celebrated
days of the building of industrial unionism.

Wherever a Hand Was Needed

His legendary ''flying squadrons'' showed up in Flint, Pontiac, Detroit,
wherever union men needed a hand. He was so militant that, according to a union
historian, he was arrested not at the Battle of the Overpass, when, in May,
1937, Ford Motor Company men beat up union leaders, but on his way to the Ford
Rouge plant, the battle site. The police knew a union man when they saw one.

In 1947, when Walter P. Reuther consolidated his control over the United
Automobile Workers, Mr. Mazey was elected union secretarytreasurer, the position
he relinquished this week at the union's convention in Anaheim, Calif.

Not everyone praises him. Mr. Mazey - he refused to be interviewed for this
story - can be haughty and self-righteous. Like many union men, he is a good
hater, for he forgets nothing. Leftists regard men like Mr. Mazey as
collaborationists with captains of capital because, in the leftists' view, they
have accommodated themselves with business.

Paul Schrade, a once highly regarded officer who was defeated for re-election in
1972 after a bitter fight with the leadership, says many union men, many men,
mellow as they age. But he says Mr. Mazey lost his zealousness years ago, when
still comparatively young. ''Too moderate too soon,'' he says, asserting that
Mr. Mazey did not fight for stronger contracts and a more militant union.

Victor Reuther, brother of the late union president, praises Mr.  Mazey as a
''true pioneer'' of the union but says that he ''would be less than frank'' if
he did not say that Mr. Mazey is ''less of a crusader'' than in the old days. He
ascribes Mr. Mazey's less aggressive outlook to health problems of recent years.

Mr. Mazey, 66 years old, was a youth, in bleak, Depression-troubled Detroit,
when he went down and joined the union.

Organizing the Ford Company

Helping organize the old Briggs plant in 1937, he became president of Briggs
Local 212 that year and served until 1941, when he was assigned to help organize
the Ford Motor Company. Henry Ford had said Ford would never recognize the
union, but, in June, 1941, Ford capitulated, and the U.A.W. won a large
contract.

After World War II and his return to the union, Mr. Mazey handled a number of
chores. When a gunman shot Walter Reuther in 1948, Mr.  Mazey directed union
bargaining. The union that year joined in a historic agreement with General
Motors for automatic cost-of-living and productivity increases.

He watched over the union's million-dollar money matters, including its large
strike funds, so zealously that, around Solidarity House, the union's
headquarters in Detroit, he became known as ''Cash Box Mazey.''

If, in the view of critics, his militancy faded, he was among critics of the
Vietnam War, even though many union men, even ostensible liberals like Walter
Reuther, did not speak out.

Cranky and Bitter

As he aged, it sometimes seemed, even to some people at Solidarity House, that
Mr. Mazey's scrappiness turned into crankiness, even bitterness.

In March, 1971, when office workers at Solidarity House went on a strike that
embarrassed the union leadership, a strike in which some union executives
crossed picket lines, Mr. Mazey railed to the strikers that he had built the
union before they had been born. He directed unkind words at female strikers.

In some ways he sometimes seemed two men, a firebrand and a satisfied man.

Explaining the somewhat cordial relationships that can develop between union and
management men, he once said he could be having a cocktail with an auto
executive and the first thing he knew they would be talking about a problem in
the plants.

Yet, Mr. Mazey refused, in 1977, to attend a dinner that the union and General
Motors sponsored in Detroit's ornate St. Regis Hotel to commemorate the 40th
anniversary of the Flint, Mich., sit-down strike that gave the union its birth.

The dinner was, he was said to have told union men, ''class collaboration.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Emil Mazey

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT FACES POLITICAL PROBLEMS; REAGAN IS OPTIMISTIC BUT UNTESTED

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1868 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


The ease with which Ronald Reagan rolled through the Republican primaries has
left the former California Governor optimistic about his prospects for winning
the Presidency next fall but essentially untested for what his lieutenants
expect to be a bitterly fought campaign.

The central test, both Republican and Democratic strategists agree, is whether
Mr. Reagan can make the election a referendum on President Carter's performance,
or whether his own capacity for Presidential leadership will become the main
issue.

Determined not to repeat the mistakes of Senator Barry Goldwater's Presidential
bid in 1964, Mr. Reagan has already begun efforts to unify the Republican Party,
to dispel any lingering image of rightwing extremism, to keep cordial relations
with reporters and to lay the groundwork for an assault on the traditional
Democratic bastions in the Northeast and Middle West.

Reagan Demonstrates Strength

Even Democrats concede that in winning all but five Republican primaries, and
finishing unopposed, Mr. Reagan proved himself a formidable television
campaigner and demonstrated his capacity to attract crossover votes from
blue-collar Democrats and independents.  Mr. Carter's own strategists figure the
odds of re-election at only 50-50 today.

Moreover, while the President must still contend with Senator Edward M. Kennedy,
Mr. Reagan is fleshing out his campaign's high command, can see opinion polls in
key states edging him ahead of Mr.  Carter and now stands to reap a financial
advantage in the fall from independent pro-Reagan fund-raising movements that
will sidestep the Federal limits on contributions to his campaign.

The Reagan camp's strategy is to build on their candidate's solid base of
support in California and the West; to contest Texas, Florida, Kentucky,
Tennessee and other southern fringe states; to concentrate on pivotal northern
states like Illinois, Ohio and New Jersey, where some polls show Mr. Reagan now
ahead of Mr. Carter and John B. Anderson, the independent candidate; and to
press hard in others like New York, Michigan and Pennsylvania, where he is
behind but close. Although the Reagan strategists agree that Mr. Anderson may
siphon off some Republican votes, they believe that he will hurt Mr. Carter even
more.

But they point out that Mr. Carter has the power and platform of the incumbency
to shape events and dominate the news, as well as the larger party.

Moreover, Reagan advisers concede, the sharp spotlight of public scrutiny has
not yet focused on Mr. Reagan, on whatever blemishes there are in his record, on
his controversial statements or rhetorical gaffes in the past, or on Democratic
charges that he will be ''trigger-happy'' on foreign policy, too old at 69 to
handle the crushing burdens of the Presidency, and insensitive to the economic
needs of the poor, the minorities, and blue-collar workers.

''The fundamental problem for anyone opposing an incumbent President,'' said
Patrick H. Caddell, Mr. Carter's poll-taker, ''is to convince the public that
you are Presidential, to get people to accept the idea that you are someone they
would trust in the White House.''

Reagan lieutenants concede that foreign policy is the area of greatest
vulnerability for their candidate. As part of an effort to counteract criticism
that he lacks experience and steadiness in that area, Mr. Reagan is now being
urged to travel to Western Europe after the Republican National Convention for
talks with top European leaders.

''It's a matter of his establishing himself as a President, not just a
candidate,'' said one Reagan insider. ''He has to show that he's a guy who can
relate to the world, improve our international stature and not get us into a
military conflict, but see that we're militarily prepared. So far he hasn't done
that, but 10 days in Europe would help.''

First Important Test

But Mr. Reagan's first major political test will be to select a
Vice-Presidential running mate. That choice will be read as a signal of whether
he is reassuring conservatives or reaching out to the moderate and Northern wing
of the party, which is represented by such politically important governors as
Dick Thornburgh of Pennsylvania, Wiliam G. Milliken of Michigan, James R.
Thompson Jr.  of Illinois and James A. Rhodes of Ohio.

Some close advisers are reportedly telling Mr. Reagan that to hold the moderates
and blunt the challenge from Mr. Anderson, he should select either Howard H.
Baker Jr., the Senate minority leader from Tennessee, or George Bush, his most
persistent primary challenger.  These advisers argue that both Mr. Bush and Mr.
Baker have Washington backgrounds and experience in foreign affairs and would
complement Mr. Reagan, whose experience in office derives solely from two terms
as Governor of California.

As Presidential candidates, moreover, both men have gained national stature or
wide public recognition and are thus seen by the public as acceptable successors
to Mr. Reagan, should he not finish out a term in office. Because of Mr.
Reagan's age, the issue of succession has taken on greater than usual
significance this year.

On Bush and Baker

''Picking Baker would assure Reagan's election,'' a Middle Western Governor
said. ''But I like Bush almost as well.'' Others prefer Mr.  Bush, contending
that he proved his vote-getting ability in the Northeastern states where Mr.
Reagan most needs help.

But neither man sits well with conservative purists who have formed the loyal
long-term core of Mr. Reagan's supporters. Hard-line conservatives cannot
forgive Senator Baker for supporting the Panama Canal treaties. Other groups
also resent the unwillingness of both men to back a Constitutional amendment to
ban abortion. Some Reagan supporters also believe that Mr. Bush was too sharply
critical of Mr. Reagan late in his campaign.

Many conservatives would prefer Representative Jack Kemp of Buffalo, a co-author
of the Republican plan for a sweeping 30 percent tax cut over three years.
Others, contending that Mr. Kemp is still too young and untested, are pushing
for Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, a respected but not widely known
conservative on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee who backed Senator
Baker's campaign.

But pragmatists in the Reagan camp argue that choosing either could lose him the
support of the suburban Republicans and independent voters who often swing close
elections.

To buy time, to placate various factions, Mr. Reagan commissioned a poll to
check into public support for 18 potential running mates.  His aides thought
this approach might also make him look prudent and methodical, but they do not
expect a quick decision. Some predict that Mr. Reagan will delay announcing his
choice until the Republican convention in mid-July to help keep alive voters'
interest in the convention.

General Election Strategy

In the meantime, the Reagan organization is fashioning its fall strategy,
preparing to shift its headquarters from California to Washington for more
efficient campaigning in the East, and trying to anticipate its greatest
vulnerabilities for what is expected to be a harsh and intense fall campaign.

''We've been through one of the least bruising Republican primary campaigns in
years,'' said David Keene, a Reagan campaign aide in 1976 who was national
political director for George Bush this year.  ''But I think the fall campaign
is going to shape up as one of the meanest, most bitter fights in years.''

Already, the issues staff has been expanded to broaden and sharpen Mr. Reagan's
briefing on current issues, to quicken his reaction time to breaking
developments and to try to prevent the kind of misstatements that got him into
trouble in the primaries.

In late March, for example, Mr. Reagan raised eyebrows during a campaign swing
through Kansas when he did not seem to understand the system of parity price
supports for farm crops, and at another point, he contended incorrectly that
Vietnam veterans were ineligible for benefits from the G.I. Bill.

Within the Republican Party, the Reagan high command has had to resolve
intra-party feuds in states like Illinois, Ohio, Michigan and Missouri, trying
to assuage ill feelings that could damage the Reagan drive in the fall. Zealous
local Reagan supporters, long on the outside and eager to take over the party
apparatus in their regions, had to be restrained from purging Republican
regulars or tangling with such important leaders as Governors Thompson and
Rhodes.

Even more potentially more divisive to the party has been the push by some
Reagan aides to oust Bill Brock, the national chairman, and his deputy, Ben
Cotten, which has made some Republican moderates uneasy.

Moderates Are Key Target

Moderate voters, especially in large swing states like Ohio, Illinois,
Pennsylvania and New York, are an important target group for the Reagan
strategists, because their man fared relatively poorly among them in some of the
principal primaries that he lost to George Bush.

''Reagan has always had trouble with the suburban, higher income, better
educated Republicans who regard some of his statements as not sophisticated
enough,'' observed John Sears, former national campaign manager for Mr. Reagan.
''This suggests a fair segment of the Republican voters have a problem with the
Reagan candidacy and could go to Anderson in the fall.''

But the Reagan camp feels that Mr. Anderson will draw far more heavily from
President Carter, attracting mainly the disaffected Democratic liberals and
independents who voted for Senator Kennedy, thus helping tip the balance to Mr.
Reagan in key states like New York, Ohio, Illinois and possibly Pennsyvlania.

Moreover, Reagan lieutenant feels that although the former Governor encounters
strong resistance from blacks and Hispanic-Americans, he tapped a large block of
potential supporters in the primaries by winning a strong crossover vote from
blue-collar workers in places like Chicago, Milwaukee, Cleveland and Bridgeport.


Blue-Collar Backers

''The ethnic blue collar workers like his views on abortion, strong national
defense, tough law and order,'' observed Robert Hughes, Republican chairman in
the Cleveland area. ''He represents them on many social issues, but I think
they're leery of him on economic issues.''

Alert to such weakness, top Reagan strategists have ordered their issues team to
devise a package of urban proposals, especially some programs to deal fairly
quickly with rising unemployment and the economic downturn.

''Ron's got to come in with his own programs,'' said Paul Laxalt, the Senator
from Nevada who heads Mr. Reagan's national campaign.  ''He's got to do more
than chip away. And I think he can do it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Ronald Reagan

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KLAN CANDIDATE EXPLOITS A VEIN OF FEAR

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words

DATELINE: FALLBROOK, Calif., June 6


''You bet I voted for Tom Metzger,'' Bill Davis said angrily, almost shouting.
Standing outside Mr. C.'s pool hall, where he's one of the regulars, Mr. Davis -
a Vietnam veteran, commercial fisherman and native of this community that calls
itself ''The Avocado Capital of the World'' - was giving his views on Tuesday's
victory by the Grand Dragon of the California Ku Klux Klan, Mr. Metzger, who won
the Democratic Party's nomination for Congress in the nation's most populous
Congressional district.

''I think Metzger's got good ideas,'' Mr. Davis said. ''This country is all
screwed up; Metzger's the only guy asking the right questions; inflation, taxes,
unemployment - nobody can get a job and we're giving money to all those refugees
who are taking jobs from Americans.''

Mr. Davis paused briefly and then added, ''Metzger cares about the working
man.''

Soft-Spoken TV Repairman

Until four years ago, Tom Metzger was known to most residents of this
unincorporated community of 20,000 people 45 miles northeast of San Diego only
as a soft-spoken television repairman who liked to talk politics.

In 1976, a year after he says he joined the Ku Klux Klan, his name made the
papers when he came to the aid of 16 marines at the big Camp Pendleton base a
few miles from here who were being transferred because they admitted membership
in the Klan.

A native of Indiana who moved to California in 1961 to work in a defense plant
and later joined the John Birch Society and the American Independent Party, Mr.
Metzger said that he wanted to enter politics but couldn't get people to pay any
attention to him until the press started reporting what he said as an officer of
the Klan.

From all appearances, he never had more than 40 or 50 active followers, but,
drawn by an unusual story, the press regularly reported his utterances.

Fast-Growing Region

Now the 42-year-old TV repairman is the talk of Fallbrook and other communities
in the 43d Congressional District, which contains about one million residents
and encompasses northern San Diego County and parts of Imperial and Riverside
Counties.

For most of its 90-year history, Fallbrook was an isolated agricultural hamlet
where avocado growers bought provisions and farm implements, and traded stories
about their battles against avocado root rot.

A region of softly rolling foothills and meandering streams bordered by the
Pacific Ocean, northern San Diego County was bypassed by the postwar population
boom that swept over much of California.  But over the past decade or so, it has
become one of the nation's fastest-growing regions, with its population more
than doubling.

''Politically, the people here are pretty conservative,'' observed Eugene Hohn,
president of the Chamber of Commerce.  Even Democrats in San Diego County and
the rural areas in Riverside and Imperial Counties, party leaders said, tend to
be conservative. Except for a sizable population of Mexican-Americans, the
district's residents, for the most part, are people who have achieved economic
success in life and want to preserve it.

Incumbent Highly Regarded

Few people give Mr. Metzger much of a chance in the November general election.
The Republican incumbent, Clair W. Burgener, was re-elected by a margin of more
than 70 percent of the votes two years ago, and he continues to be highly
regarded in the district.  Virtually every Democratic leader in California has
disavowed Mr.  Metzger's candidacy.

Nonetheless, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and other civil rights
organizations say they are preparing to campaign against him.

In an interview at his TV repair shop, Mr. Metzger, a short, compact and
articulate man, who exudes a sense of self-confidence, sought to depict himself
as a member of a ''new'' Ku Klux Klan fighting for ''white working people'' who
are unhappy with big business, high taxes, white collar crime, high housing
prices and affirmative action programs.

He asserted that the reputation of the Klan had been ''distorted''; yet, he
claimed that violence was to be expected as part of any ''social upheaval.'' He
criticized American Jews and Israel. ''I'm anti-Zionist,'' he said. ''The
present oil crisis is directly rooted in our giddy preoccupation with Israel.''

The conventional wisdom in election post-mortems has been that Mr.  Metzger
scored a narrow victory over an obscure local Democratic Party officer because
of ''name recognition'' resulting from his activities in the Klan.

Flow of Aliens Deplored

Still, more than 32,000 people voted for a publicly identified leader of a white
supremacist organization, and in conversations with residents of the district,
it soon becomes clear that name recognition was only a part of his strong
showing.

Not all expressed their views as stoutly as did Mr. Davis, the commercial
fisherman, but many deplored the unchecked flow of illegal aliens from across
the Mexican border, 60 miles south of here; affirmative action programs that
give job preferences to minorities; and the Carter Administration's decision to
allow Cuban refugees to land in Florida.

The decisions of many of the people who said they voted for Mr.  Metzger
appeared to reflect a kind of insecurity rooted in what they saw as the nation's
eroding economic and military position in the world, with a future of declining
expectations.

In San Diego, an officer of a community Jewish organization, saying that he
could not be quoted by name because he did not want to violate rules banning
political comment by a tax-exempt group, declared:

''Part of the vote was racist; but Metzger uncovered a layer of fear among many
voters. There are a lot of frightened people out there. They're annoyed we're
taking in the refugees and afraid they are taking jobs; they're concerned about
crime and undocumented Mexican immigrants.''

Leighton Harrison, who owns Fallbrook's largest drugstore, said: ''I don't go
along 100 percent with everything he says. There aren't that many Klan people in
the community to back him up; I'm not a Klan member. But he's right on some of
the things he says. God knows, I don't like this influx of Cubans; he's against
waste in welfare and high taxes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Tom Metzger photo of Leighton Harrison

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM COMMENCEMENT ADDRESSES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 58, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1299 words


Following are excerpts from some commencement addresses this spring: The surface
of the earth is ever increasingly becoming a fragile membrane, and the
destruction of the James River is like an agonizing and perhaps irremediable rip
which tears across the membrane, leaving its ugly infection to fester for untold
decades.  William Styron, author, at Hampden-Sydney College in Virginia.

Good will and humility are two qualities that, as far as I know, have never
really been seriously used in trying to make and keep the peace on this
interdependent planet.  Pauline Frederick, NBC correspondent, at Fairleigh
Dickinson U. in Madison, N.J.

I think there may well be a great catastrophe, perhaps the destruction of the
ozone layer, perhaps death by starvation of a billion people, perhaps the end of
civilization in nuclear war, and I only hope that it is not the last one, but
that instead we can learn from the catastrophe and move forward to a better
world.  Linus Pauling, scientist, at Clark University in Worcester, Mass.

The international movement for human rights in the past 15 or 20 years has
shifted its center away from organizations such as governments and the United
Nations to these ordinary individuals who, it has been proven, were better
prepared to put this system of values on the world agenda.  Jose Fernando
Zalaquett of Amnesty International, at City College of City University of N.Y.

Public service is not a chore, not a burden. It is a joy. That is happiness,
that is a genuine kind of freedom, freedom with responsibility.  Ralph Nader,
consumer advocate, at Colby College in Waterville, Me.

There once was a time when concern for overregulation came almost exclusively
from the business community. Today, the anger, frustration and outrage of
university presidents and faculties more than matches that of the corporate
executive.  Franklin D. Murphy, chairman of Times-Mirror Company, at University
of Hartford

What should concern us is the paralysis of the political system.  Jerome B.
Wiesner, president of M.I.T., at his own institution in Cambridge, Mass.

At that time when the protests against the Vietnam War and the riots in the
black ghettos reached a peak, when many students decided to go to Canada, and
President Johnson decided to resign, when the East Village was turned into the
flourishing and suffering center of the counterculture, while the Upper West
Side made everyone believe that it was on the verge of an incessant decline, and
the Shakespeare Company started that passionate and uproarious musical which
soon became a world famous play, at that time the city displayed a strange
mixture of Hellenistic charm, of despair and rebellion.  Jurgen Habermas, Max
Planck Institute in Germany, at New School for Social Research in N.Y.

You are graduating into an economy fraught and beset with a recession which is
the first recession in the history of the nation to have been deliberately
induced by the President of the United States.  Representative Louis Stokes,
Democrat of Ohio, at Oberlin College in Oberlin, Ohio.

Human life can be happy or it can be hell. What will determine that is the
strength and dignity you apply to your life.  Rev. Harry V. Richardson, former
college chaplain, at Tuskegee Institute in Alabama.

We will not abandon the environmental protection effort in the name of
regulatory reform, economy or anything else. The James River in Virginia did not
poison itself with Kepone; the Hudson River did not contaminate itself with
PCB's; the cattle here in Michigan did not contaminate themselves with PBB's.
Self-regulation alone is not enough.  Benjamin R. Civiletti, Attorney General,
at University of Michigan Law School in Ann Arbor.

What is obviously true at Amherst and at other colleges and universities is that
there is an enormous pressure to adjust to the standards of science and
technology, and that the long view of culture, the humanistic view, is in danger
of being neglected.  O.B. Hardison Jr., director of Folger Shakespeare Library,
at Amherst College in Massachusetts.

Those who would master the institutions of our society - a community, a company
or any other collectivity - must decide here and now to give themselves over
fully to that which they wish to fully control. By so doing, they also will
forfeit some of their freedom and flexibility. Is mastery worth the outcome of
an imprisoned personality that is efficient, well organized, but constrained and
unspontaneous?  Charles V. Willie, professor of education at Harvard, at Brown
University in Providence, R.I.

What is so pernicious in Washington today is that we have institutionalized, in
law and bureaucracy, single-interest bureaus, agencies, departments, commissions
and committees that can only accede in the narrow interest and are incapable of
assessing and acting in the national interest.  Joseph A. Califano, ex-H.E.W.
Secretary, at Lyndon B. Johnson School of University of Texas.

Mercy as applied to standards has to do with the acknowledgment that people
learn at different rates and come to us unevenly prepared. Surely there must be
a means of investing in their potential as we do in the better prepared. There
are the late starters, the overworked, the disadvantaged, the handicapped, the
wavering and undecided, the slumbering and the reborn in our society. We must
find a more enlightened way of enabling them, not by circumventing but by
honoring these standards, to arrive at the same plateau of achievement, though
by possibly different routes and schedules.  David P. Gardner, University of
Utah president, at U.C.L.A.  Graduate School at Berkeley.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE HOLLYWOOD WESTERN RIDES INTO FAVOR AGAIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2220 words


Britches'' and ''The Legend of the Lone Ranger''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Miles Beller is a West Coast writer who specializes in popular culture.

By MILES BELLER

LOS ANGELES

Six-shooters blazing, horse hoofs thundering - the classic Hollywood western
rides again. The recent opening of United Artists' ''The Long Riders'' was but
the first in a stampede of ''old-style'' action-packed westerns to charge across
movie screens in the coming months.

In addition to ''The Long Riders,'' a film directed by Walter Hill that traces
the fortunes of Jesse James's gang, at least half a dozen other westerns are in
planning or already in production. ''Heaven's Gate,'' scheduled for release
later this year, is a presentation by director Michael Cimino (''The Deer
Hunter'') of the Johnson County Wars between cattlemen and homesteaders seen
from the perspective of the homesteaders. (Despite their titles ''Bronco Billy''
and ''Urban Cowboy,'' opening this week, are not traditional westerns. Both have
contemporary settings, and the latter belongs to the current spate of films with
a strong country and western music element.)

Scheduled for opening in December is ''The Legend of the Lone Ranger,'' with
Klinton Spilsbury as the masked man and Michael Horse as his faithful Indian
companion, Tonto. Warner Bros., the studio that recently brought the life and
times of Westerner Tom Horn to the screen with Steve McQueen as Horn, now has in
development an untitled project described as a fast-paced period piece, complete
with two heroes and a villain.

Reaching back to westerns past, M-G-M is revitalizing the Warner Baxter (and
later Cesar Romero) vehicle, ''The Cisco Kid,'' with an eye toward casting Erik
Estrada, of television's ''CHiPs,'' in the title role. Other new westerns in the
works include ''Desperadoes,'' about the outlaw Emmet Dalton; ''The Texans,'' a
Sam Peckinpah film; and ''Cattle Annie and Little Britches,'' a tale of two
teen-agers who sign on with the Dalton Gang.

Indeed, after a recent spell when it seemed headed for the last roundup, the
western is staging a remarkable recovery. Only a few years ago, what had once
been a hardy breed of motion picture was at the brink of extinction.

Why, in the 1980's, is the classic Hollywood western staging a comeback? Does
the answer lie deep in the national psyche, where the gall of dependency on Arab
oil, the ebbing strength of the once mighty dollar, the debacle in Vietnam and
the inability to resolve the hostage crisis in Iran have combined to create a
yearning for the return of America's mythic hero, the cowboy? Have moviegoers
finally grown weary of the flawed and involuted protagonists enmeshed in the
contemporary problems of recent films? Or has Hollywood simply decided to turn
to the past in search of novelty, reviving a genre that - with its clearly
defined heroes and villains, its shootouts and chases and the broad canvas of
its landscape - constitutes drama ideally suited to the screen?

To questions such as these, psychologists, filmmakers, actors and western
experts offer a variety of answers, incuding the theory that current
frustrations at home and abroad have made Americans hunger for strong heroes. In
the estimation of Leslie Fiedler, writer, essayist and Samuel Clemens Professor
of Literature at the State University of New York at Buffalo, the reemergence of
the western can be traced in part to the temper of times that have fostered a
need for its clearcut, uncomplicated heroes, figures who act rather than brood.

''We want to see protagonists take destiny into their own hands,'' Professor
Fiedler says. In contrast to the 1970's, which were characterized by an
atmosphere of resignation, Americans today seem to him to have wearied of
passive acceptance. And the quintessential Westerner, he says, is, above all,
''a doer'' - someone who achieves his goals or dies trying.

Almost all of those interviewed saw conservatism, coupled with a renewed sense
of nationalism, on the rise in America. Dr. Lee Salk, professor of psychology
and pediatrics at Cornell University Medical College in New York, believes that
these related conditions may be a reaction to the country's current economic and
political difficulties. In periods of national depression, he says, people tend
to band together to assert their national character and look back to strong
heroes of the past for inspiration. And who better to stand up to perilous
hardships, he asks, than Hollywood's cowboy?.

''On one level,'' observes Seymour Feshbach, chairman of the psychology
department of the University of California at Los Angeles, ''we feel as if the
Westerner would be the one who could pull off a rescue of the hostages in Iran.
He would succeed where others failed.''

''I think we do have this feeling that a great screen cowboy like (John) Wayne
could go in there and blast his way in and free the hostages,'' says Niven
Busch, the author of a number of western books and films, including ''Pursued,''
''Distant Drums'' and ''Duel in the Sun.''

''The fact that the cowboy has been around for so long and through it all has
managed to survive,'' says James Keach, one of ''The Long Riders'' actors and
scenario writers, encourages people to weather present difficulties. ''The
thinking is that if he can survive such incredible circumstances,'' says Mr.
Keach, ''so can I.''

Not only is this hero a man of action, he is the embodiment of time-honored
tenets. To some theorists, this suggests that the fresh appeal of westerns is to
a public grown weary of the introspective, brooding, self-lacerating and
sometimes psychopathic protagonists of many of the films of the 60's and 70's.
Unlike movie protagonists of a decade or so ago - individuals searching for
answers, like Dustin Hoffman's character in ''The Graduate''- the old-style
cowboy is an individual of clear motivation. ''Perhaps we want to see ourselves
as masters of our own fate,'' says Dr. Feshbach of U.C.L.A.,''having gone
through a period of withdrawal and introspection'' after the turbulence of the
late 60's and early 70's.

In the opinion of Don Graham, the cowboy hero is most appealing to us because
implicit in his persona is a rigid moral code. Unlike other people, who are
plagued by doubts and insecurities, the western hero instinctively knows what to
do. In fact, he acts faster than most others think. Through the film cowboy's
bold, aggressive responses, concludes Mr. Graham, we work out our inability to
get the drop on our own problems.

Hollywood's creative talents also see the vivid character traits of the classic
western film hero as a principal reason why moviegoers today respond to such
protagonists. ''They embody basic strengths, like courage and compassion, that
audiences now see as admirable,'' says the author Niven Busch.

And in contrast to Hollywood heroes of more recent vintage, like the policeman
and the secret agent, says Walter Hill, the director of ''The Long Riders,'' the
cowboy is perceived not as someone whose job it is to be courageous and heroic
but someone born with those attributes.

As home-grown myths retold, westerns comfort us by defining the way we perceive
ourselves as a people. The late critic and essayist Robert Warshow noted in a
celebrated essay about the classic western and its enduring hero, ''... the
movies in which the Westerner plays out his role preserve for us the pleasure of
a complete and self-contained drama - and one which still effortlessly crosses
the boundaries which divide our culture - in a time when other, more consciously
serious art forms are increasingly complex, uncertain, and ill-defined.''

Indeed, Leslie Fiedler notes that the film stories about ''The good guy with the
gun'' are one of the few uniquely American myths, for they provide a common,
albeit ''fantasy,'' history that all Americans share. They also serve as a link
to a fondly remembered past, a means of reaching back and touching the ''basic
values'' of years ago.

Just how deeply the very substance of Hollywood's old mythological West has
pervaded contemporary life, points out Dr. Salk, is apparent in the current
western clothing trend. ''Even in Manhattan,'' he notes, ''you see businessmen
wearing cowboy boots and maybe even a cowboy hat.'' These articles of clothing,
he continues, are perceived as having a talismanic effect, endowing the wearer
with the virtues and strengths of the classic film cowboy.

Beginning with one of cinema's earliest offerings, Edison Company's 1903 silent
movie ''The Great Train Robbery,'' the western enjoyed decades of wide
popularity here and abroad. Cranking out reel after reel of sagebrush sagas,
studios propelled cowboy heroes like William S. Hart, Bronco Billy Anderson, and
later Tom Mix, William Boyd, Gene Autry and Roy Rogers into international fame,
in the process etching an indelible portrait of America as an expanse of
chaparral and tumbleweed.

With John Wayne and Gary Cooper, the Westerner became a gun-toting knight-errant
astride a palomino, a law and order champion whose manifest destiny lay in
defeating the evil gunslinger. Under the direction of John Ford, Howard Hawks
and Raoul Walsh, the western was elevated to an art form, bringing to the screen
works of epic stature (including Ford's ''Stagecoach,'' Hawks's ''Red River''
and Walsh's ''High Sierra'').

By the mid-1960's, however, it was clear that the traditional western hero was
becoming acutely alienated. The wide-open spaces that once promised freedom and
release now stretched desolately toward a bleak horizon. European filmmakers
like Italy's ''spaghetti western'' master, Sergio Leone, forthrightly mocked the
noble protagonist of westerns past, portraying the erstwhile knight in white
Stetson as a scruffy, cynical killer whose allegiance belonged to anyone willing
to pay a few dollars more.

During the activist, protest-filled late 1960's and early 1970's, producers and
directors tried breathing new life into westerns by making them ''socially
relevant commentaries.'' Films like ''Little Big Man'' reworked the established
conventions, railing against oppression of minorities (Indians) by the brutish
military-industrial complex of cavalry, bankers, railroad tycoons and Federal
bureaucrats.

The western seemed but a cheap joke by the time ''Blazing Saddles'' was released
in 1974, its cowboys and gunslingers too ridiculous to be taken seriously. Even
''The Duke,'' big John Wayne, the screen's classic old Westerner, now appeared
but a self-parody - swaggering and drawling to extreme in films like ''Rooster
Cogburn.''

But is the revival of the western attributable solely to national malaise? In
the face of the current renaissance, it seems fair to wonder if Hollywood's
new-found affection for the genre might be rooted in nothing more than an
arbitrary and calculated desire to invigorate box-office traffic by retreating
from the cycle of science-fiction and horror films that have dominated recent
production schedules to seek out novelty in the form of a crowdpleaser from the
past. Apparently not. As ''The Long Riders'' director Walter Hill observes,
selling westerns to studios on the strength of their illustrious past is not
what is prompting the studios to make such films once again. ''Those in charge
of studios have no real feeling for westerns,'' he says, ''The fact that they
might have been popular years ago means nothing to them. Studio heads want to be
hip, produce trendy films like Woody Allen's 'Manhattan.' It's just not cool to
do a Western.''

What studio executives do find alluring about the current crop of westerns, he
says, is the talent behind them. ''They know 'The Warriors' and 'Alien' were
successful films,'' says Mr. Hill (a coauthor and director of ''The Warriors''
and a producer of ''Alien.'') ''So when the studio (United Artists) saw I was
involved with 'The Long Riders,' a western, they nonetheless were receptive.''
The fact that Michael Cimino's ''The Deer Hunter'' did well at the boxoffice,
adds Mr. Hill, was doubtless a key factor in the decision by United Artists to
back Mr. Cimino's big budget western, ''Heaven's Gate.''

So the classic movie western now gallops along the comeback trail, filling
screens with tales of trust and betrayal, sagas of men who live and die by the
gun, set in the glory days of the Old West. The noble cowboy - the durable
embodiment of an art form that seems destined to survive as long as America - is
coming back, his moral convictions still unshaken. As Robert Warshow wrote:
''The Westerner is the last gentleman, and the movies which over and over tell
his story are probably the last art form in which the concept of honor retains
its strength.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos from ''The Long Riders,'' ''Tom Horn,'' Cattle
Annie and Little

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON YALE MAN AT HARVARD;
by James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


One of the odd things about the conduct of American foreign policy is that
Secretaries of State never seem to tell what they really think about the world
until they resign, at which point people and even most newspapers have stopped
listening.

Former Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, a Yale man, saved the best speech of his
long and illustrious career for the Harvard commencement last week. And it seems
clear from this carefully and personally written address (the text of which was
published by only one or two American newspapers) that Vance resigned, not
primarily because he opposed the U.S. military rescue mission in Iran, but
because he had deep doubts about the political and military domination of the
nations's foreign policy.

Vance is too much of a gentleman to attack President Carter directly, but his
speech at Harvard was an unmistakable criticism of the President and the
Congress in their conduct of foreign policy.

''It is time to set and stick to basic goals,'' Vance said.  ''Neither we nor
the world can afford an American foreign policy which is hostage to the emotions
of the moment. We must have in our minds a conception of the world we want a
decade hence. The 1990 we seek must shape our actions in 1980, or the decisions
of 1980 will give us a 1990 we will regret.''

Put into plain language, which Cy Vance has made a brilliant career of avoiding,
he is now saying that neither the Administration nor the Congress have any set
goals, that they are reacting to ''the emotions of the moment'' -which is a
polite way of saying that they are playing politics with the dangerous issues of
foreign policy.

Vance's view, as I understand it, is that Carter wants to do the ''right
thing,'' but that the ''right thing'' in Carter's mind is what seems popular and
will get him re-elected: be tough on the Soviets, be easy on the Israelis,
increase the military budget - but not enough to deprive social services for the
poor, for the blacks, the Chicanos, and other politically powerful minorities.

Now that he's out, Vance is arguing, very courteously, that this Carter approach
is wrong. He agrees that the defenses of the United States and the alliance must
be strengthened, but insists that the defense of the Republic and the alliance
depends more on helping the starving nations and supporting the economies of the
West than on spending more billions on new weapons.

''It is imperative,'' Vance said at Harvard, ''that we put our resources behind
our policies. ... Our security assistance to other nations has declined by over
25 percent over the past 20 years. The United States ranks 13th among the 17
major industrial nations in percentage of gross national product devoted to
development assistance to the poor people of the world. ... The result is - I
can think of no other word -disgraceful ....''

In short, Vance feels that in our preoccupation with military problems and
re-election problems, we have lost our way. He clearly does not agree that the
Iranian crisis or even the Afghanistan crisis - important as they are -deserve
the first priority on our attention.

He is most concerned about the failure of America to deal with the energy crisis
and the decline of American industrial productivity.  ''Productivity in the
United States declined in every quarter of 1979,'' he points out and notes
further that its steady slowing over the previous two decades has not only
fueled inflation, but also undercut our trading position and the strength of the
dollar.

Vance failed in his private attempt to make his philosophy prevail within the
Carter Administration. He understood the pressure from Capitol Hill for bigger
defense budgets - but insisted that the Pentagon and the hawks on Capitol Hill
were going too far.

He tried to strengthen Washington's ties with Prime Minister Thatcher in London,
President Giscard in Paris and Chancellor Schmidt in West Germany, but found
them alarmed by Carter's preoccupation with the politics of re-election.

Yet Vance, who admires Carter personally despite all their differences, has
prevailed in a way by resigning. That move has had a restraining effect on
Carter's willingness, in an election year, to take reckless military risks to
liberate the hostages and save himself. There is no more talk around Washington
now about any further such adventures. Vance is gone, but Muskie is following
Vance's policies of detente, arms control and coexistance with the Soviets, on
the theory that hard as it is, coexistence is better than atomic war and
no-existence.

It's too bad that very few people read Vance's speech at Harvard.  It was the
summing up of a long career. Zbigniew Brzezinski is inclined to think that Vance
is ''the last Vietnam casualty'' - meaning, that Vance is so worried after the
disastrous use of force in Vietnam that he lacks the will to use force again -
but Vance at least had the courage to resign for his convictions, and nobody
else has done that in this town for a very long time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Tatyana Velikanova, Malva Landa, Sergei Kovalev, Yuri Orlov, Anatoly SAKHAROV: A
LETTER FROM EXILE Shcharansky, Leonard Ternovsky by Andrei D. Sakharov
c Copyright Andrei D. Sakharov, 1980

SECTION: Section 6; Page 31, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6809 words


Last January, Andrei D. Sakharov -a physicist, Nobel Laureate and one of the
Soviet Union's most outspoken human-rights activists - was seized on a Moscow
street by agents of the State Security Committee, the K.G.B., and banished to
the Volga River city of Gorky. There, some 250 miles east of the capital, he is
not permitted to communicate by mail or telephone with foreigners. He has,
nevertheless, managed to send messages to the outside world. The following
article, obtained by The New York Times, is his first major statement since his
exile in Gorky. It was translated by Raymond H.  Anderson, an editor on the
foreign news desk of The Times.  I should like to offer some thoughts on
problems that have been troubling me and discuss the way they appear to me here
in Gorky, a city closed to foreigners, in the depths of the Soviet Union, where
I now live under vigilant surveillance by the K.G.B.

World Problems

In the 1960's and 70's, the Soviet Union, making use of its growing economic and
scientific-technological potential, carried out a fundamental re-equipping and
expansion of its weaponry. There was a substantial increase in both the quality
and quantity of the missiles and nuclear weapons developed earlier, and in other
new systems of military technology: transport vehicles for the largest land
force in the world, the latest word in tanks and aircraft, combat helicopters,
fire-control systems, communications, nuclear submarines, fast hydrofoil craft
and many others.

A major change has occurred in the world balance of forces, and this change is
intensifying. It is true, of course, that the development of new technology and
the growth in numbers of weapons have not been confined to the Soviet Union.
This is a mutually stimulating process in virtually all technologically
developed countries. In the United States, in particular, such developments have
perhaps proceeded on a higher scientific-technological level and this, in turn,
caused alarm in the Soviet Union.

But in order to assess the situation properly it is imperative to take note of
the particular features of the Soviet Union - a closed totalitarian state with a
largely militarized economy and bureaucratically centralized control, all of
which make the growing might of such a country even more dangerous. In more
democratic societies, every step in the field of armaments is subjected to
public budgetary and political scrutiny and is carried out under public control.
In the Soviet Union, all decisions of this kind are made behind closed doors and
the world learns of them only when confronted by faits accompli. Even more
ominous is the fact that this situation applies also to the field of foreign
policy, involving issues of war and peace.

At the same time that the change in the balance of forces was occurring -though
not only because of that change - there was covert and overt Soviet expansion in
key strategic and economic regions of the world. Southeast Asia (where Vietnam
was used as a proxy) and Angola (with Cuba as the proxy), Ethiopia and Yemen are
only some of the examples. The invasion of Afghanistan may be a new and more
dangerous stage in this expansion. The invasion, which occurred against the
background of the tragedy in Teheran, and possibly had some concealed connection
with it, exacerbated world tensions and obstructed talks on disarmament and the
settlement of other conflicts. In particular, the invasion made it impossible,
at the present time, for the United States Congress to ratify the SALT II
treaty, which is of such crucial importance to the world.

Several months earlier, the Soviet Union had unleashed at home and had
instigated abroad a demagogic campaign against plans by the United States and
North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies for an urgently needed modernization
of their missile forces in Europe - this at a time when the Soviet Union had
already completed such a modernization - and had thwarted (I hope only
temporarily) talks on limiting medium-range nuclear missiles. The Vienna
negotiations on disarmament in Europe are likewise in a deplorable state, which
is also mainly the fault of the Soviet Union.

Despite all that has happened, I feel that the questions of war and peace and
disarmament are so crucial that they must be given absolute priority even in the
most difficult circumstances. It is imperative that all possible means be used
to solve these questions and to lay the groundwork for further progress. Most
urgent of all are steps to avert a nuclear war, which is the greatest peril
confronting the modern world. The goals of all responsible people in the world
coincide in this regard, including, I hope and believe, the Soviet leaders -
despite their dangerous expansionist policies, despite their cynicism, dogmatic
conceptions and lack of self-confidence that often prevent them from conducting
more realistic domestic and foreign policies.

Therefore, I hope that when there is some easing of the present crisis in
international relations, caused mainly by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan,
there will be a revival of efforts in regard to SALT II, a technologically
progressive treaty that provides the essential foundations for SALT III. I hope,
too, that there will be new efforts in regard to medium-range nuclear weapons
and tactical weapons as well as a reduction in ''ordinary'' weaponry in Europe.

Negotiations on disarmament are possible only on the basis of strategic parity.
The countries of the West must do everything necessary to maintain this parity
or, in some categories, to regain it - not allowing themselves to become victims
of blackmail and demagogy as in the campaign against American missiles in
Europe.

Of equal urgency is a peaceful settlement of ''hot'' conflicts.  The Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan was condemned by 104 nations, but the war continues
there and no end is in sight. Economic and political sanctions are extremely
important; they can help strengthen the hand of the more responsible,
nondogmatic members of the Soviet leadership. In particular, the broadest
possible boycott of the Moscow Olympics is necessary. Every spectator or athlete
who comes to the Olympics will be giving indirect support to Soviet military
policies.

It is vital to demand withdrawal of the Soviet troops in Afghanistan. I hope
that withdrawal of the troops will become possible - if not now, perhaps later -
on the basis of guaranteed neutrality, with stationing in the country of United
Nations troops or units from neutral Moslem countries, which should ease Soviet
apprehensions.

The Soviet ''conditions'' that foreign interference be ended are pure demagogy
because there is no such interference. In general, Soviet propaganda is
conducted now on a crude ''military'' level.  For example, television broadcasts
are showing allegedly captured ''American'' grenades containing nerve gas.
Painted on the grenades in large white letters are the words ''Made in U.S.A.''
All this is obviously intended to head off any similar accusations against
operations by the Soviet Army.

The Middle East conflict has been dragging on for decades. The main hope for its
settlement is development of the Camp David line so that the difficulties and
tragedies of the past will not be carried into the future. It is very important
that the Palestinians adopt such a position, that they recognize the existence
of Israel, renounce terrorist-guerrilla methods of struggle and refuse to be
pawns of those who supply them with guns. There is no evidence yet of any
movement in this direction.

Israel, it seems to me, should show more restraint, particularly in regard to
settlements in the occupied lands. The Middle East crisis can be solved only in
the context of general world problems.  Therefore, United States mediation seems
to me to be of utmost importance.

In November 1979, I wrote to Leonid I. Brezhnev, chairman of the Presidium of
the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R., urging him to help assure uninterrupted
supplies of food to the starving people in Cambodia, where famine is the
consequence of the crimes of the deposed Pol Pot regime and the war. This
problem, like that of the refugees from Vietnam, Cambodia, Ethiopia and other
countries, remains as critical as ever. Now there is the problem of refugees
from Afghanistan and Cuba. Saving people must be put ahead of all military and
political considerations and national prestige.

At the moment I write this, the world has just learned of the failure of the
American attempt to rescue the hostages in Teheran. I feel that this was a brave
and noble effort. It was undertaken only after it had become clear that the
Iranian authorities would not free the hostages voluntarily, thereby taking upon
themselves responsibility for a crime that flouts the standards of international
behavior.

I do not understand how so many technical problems could have arisen. These are
no doubt being subjected to intensive scrutiny, not only the technical questions
but also the possibility of sabotage. Success of the American mission would have
saved the world from a nightmare. No one should condemn the United States
because the mission failed. And no one should criticize President Carter for the
secrecy in which the mission was organized. It would be my guess that the
secrecy, if anything, was insufficient rather than excessive.  Personal
ambitions had no place in this. Over all, the actions of Mr. Carter in these
tragic days win only respect from me.

Success of the American rescue mission would have eliminated a need to impose
sanctions against Iran, and it would have been in the interest of the Iranian
people themselves. It appears now that sanctions have become inevitable, and it
is very important to achieve unity of action by the countries of the West.
Solution of the hostage problem is a matter for all countries that consider
themselves democratic and strive to preserve the norms of international
relations. This is not just an American problem but a worldwide one, as was
shown by new acts of terrorism: the successfully resolved incidents in Bogota
and London.

World attention should be paid to many other problems whose burden now rests
mainly on the United States - economic and technological aid to developing
countries, help to refugees and the starving, and general economic, ideological
and military resistance to the expansion of totalitarianism.

Western unity is one of the main conditions for international security, a unity
that will promote resistance and ultimately lead to rapprochement and the
convergence of world systems, averting thermonuclear catastrophe.

Western Problems

A totalitarian system conducts its policy through control from a single center -
diplomacy, information and disinformation services inside and outside the
country, foreign trade, tourism, scientifictechnological exchanges, economic and
military assistance to liberation (a word that must sometimes be used with
quotes) movements, foreign policy of satellite countries and all kinds of
clandestine activities - all these are coordinated from a single center. Special
attention must be paid here to clandestine activities, since a person is
inclined to forget something if it is not waved in front of his eyes. The West
and developing countries are filled with citizens who by reason of their
positions are able to promote Soviet influence and expansionist goals.

Some of them are motivated by ideas that at least merit discussion. After all,
in the Soviet Union, the ideological epicenter, and in China as well, Communist
ideology is not a complete fraud, not a total delusion. It arose from a striving
for truth and justice, like other religious, ethical and philosophical systems.
Its weakness, its failure and its degradation - evident from the very beginning
- represent a complex historical, scientific and psychological phenomenon that
requires separate analysis.

There are others among such people who conduct themselves in a ''progressive''
manner because they consider it profitable, prestigious or fashionable.

A third category consists of naive, poorly informed or indifferent people who
close their eyes and ears to the bitter truth and eagerly swallow any sweet lie.

Finally, there is the fourth group -people who have been ''bought'' in the most
direct sense of the word, not always with money. These include some political
figures, businessmen, a great many writers and journalists, Government advisers,
and heads of the press and television. Over all, they make up quite a group of
influential people.

(I can't resist telling about an incident involving my wife and me. Two leading
and influential American scientists, arriving in the Soviet Union to take part
in a conference, were given envelopes containing money for personal expenses.
Out of politeness and embarrassment they felt they could not decline the money.
So, in a state of confusion, they gave it to us and asked that we pass it on to
scientists who had lost their jobs. We don't know how many other such incidents
there have been.)

Of course, there are many spies, secret agents and organizers of sabotage. This
is true of nations other than the U.S.S.R., but a totalitarian system has
special opportunities. In particular, one cannot arbitrarily reject allegations
by some writers about connections between the K.G.B. and international
terrorism. The absence of direct proof about such links and concern about a
further worsening of tensions make governments of the West reluctant to look too
deep into this sensitive question.

Unity of all its forces is one of the advantages of totalitarianism in its world
offensive threatening the pluralist West. What can the West do to counter this
challenge? Of course, in historical perspective, in conditions of peaceful and
orderly development, the pluralist and free systems are more viable and dynamic.
Therefore, the future will follow the path of pluralist and converging
scientific-technological progress.

But the world is facing very difficult times and cruel cataclysms if the West
and the developing countries trying to find their place in the world do not now
show the required firmness, unity and consistency in resisting the totalitarian
challenge. This relates to governments, to the intelligentsia, businessmen and
to all people. It is important that the common danger be fully understood
-everything else will then fall into place. In this regard, I believe in Western
man. I have faith in his mind, which is practical and efficient and at the same
time aspires to great goals. I have faith in his good intentions and his
decisiveness.

Recent months have been under the shadow of the events in Afghanistan and
Teheran. The reaction in Europe, at least the initial reaction, has not been as
consistent and united as, in my opinion, it should have been. One could read
assertions in the press of the following type: ''Let Carter worry about it. He's
the one facing the elections. After all, this is a purely American matter. We
have our own problems.''

I am unable to judge how widespread are such views. In my opinion, they are very
harmful. Recently, the West German author Gunter Grass and three other writers
issued a statement in this spirit. The Soviet press delights in quoting such
statements, forgiving the authors all their past ''sins.'' The anti-Americanism
of certain representatives of the West European intelligentsia would be merely
amusing, given their show of exaggerated sensitivity, if it were not so harmful.

In truth, Europe has much of which it can be proud. But it is inappropriate for
Europe to adopt an arrogant attitude. The tragic nature of our time does not
permit this. Europe must fight shoulder to shoulder with the transoceanic
democracy, which is Europe's creation and Europe's main hope. A certain lack of
unity, of course, is the reverse side of the coin of democratic pluralism, the
West's major strength. But this disunity is also caused by the systematic Soviet
policy of driving ''wedges,'' a policy that the West has not resisted adequately
because of carelessness and blindness.  Nonetheless, I feel that in the course
of recent crises a positive shift has appeared in the stand of the West and of
the developing countries. Only the future will show whether I am right.

Among the important events of recent years is a movement toward greater
independence by several European Communist parties - though now the French have
apparently beaten a quick retreat. There may be profound consequences if the
parties continue to reject dogmatism and unquestioning support of Moscow (in
such matters as Afghanistan, for example) and if they accept certain pluralist
principles. It would be very important if the European Communist parties joined
all democratic forces in supporting the struggle for human rights in the Soviet
Union and other Communist countries.

One of the causes of the weakening position of the West is its dependence on oil
supplies, a ''fatal dependency,'' as an American leader has remarked. The
geopolitics of the Soviet Union is aimed precisely at this weak point. In these
circumstances, the West cannot afford to deprive itself of nuclear energy, which
gives room for diplomatic and economic ''maneuvering.'' Concern about safety and
environmental hazards should have no bearing on the principal issue - to build
or not to build nuclear stations - but only on how to build them. The price in
terms of polluting the environment are greater from coal and oil than from
nuclear energy. Of course, other sources of energy must be developed as an
alternative to oil, including coal despite its ecological shortcomings. Strict
conservation must be introduced in the use of electricity and heat. Steps must
be taken to provide small cars, good public transportation, insulation of homes,
integrated heating systems and, especially, introduction of technological
processes in industry to conserve electricity. Western voters must demand this
from government leaders and not allow demagogues to exploit these problems for
their selfish ends.

Internal Problems

Defense of human rights has become a worldwide ideology, uniting on a humane
basis peoples of all nationalities and with the most diverse convictions. I have
very high regard for them all, for Amnesty International and its struggle for
release of prisoners of conscience, against torture and the death penalty; for
the International League for Human Rights, and for the rights activists in
Eastern Europe, China and other countries, where they show great bravery in
coping with cruel repression.

In the Soviet Union, the movement for human rights emerged in its present form
at the end of the 60's with publication of the Chronicle of Current Events, an
anonymous underground journal that reports cases of violations in the Soviet
Union factually and without subjective comment. Despite severe repressions, the
journal has continued to appear, a total to date of 54 issues. In more recent
years, appeals by the Helsinki Group (formed in the Soviet Union to check on
compliance with human-rights provisions of the 1975 Helsinki agreement on
European security) began to appear.

The human-rights movement has no political objectives and its participants have
no desire to gain political power. Their only weapon is the free access and
dissemination of information. It is of vital importance that the movement limit
itself to nonviolent methods. Such a position is logical in a country that has
passed through the violence of every circle of hell. Calls for new revolutionary
upheavals or for intervention would be mad and a terrible crime in an unstable
world only several steps from the thermonuclear abyss.

Participants in the human-rights movement speak out openly for human rights
whenever they learn of violations, and they inform the people. They have also
set themselves the task of correcting the historical record about a society and
individual citizens if the truth has been distorted by official propaganda. They
help the families of victims of repression. I am convinced that this is what is
needed - a pure moral movement to plant in people's minds a basis for democratic
and pluralist transformation. This is crucial to the country and essential to
all mankind for the sake of peace on earth.

The consciousness of broad masses of the population has been deformed by a
number of factors: Decades of totalitarian terror ...  old and new prejudices
... the lure of a relatively good life after generations of havoc (I mean of
course a very limited good life, nothing like the wellbeing and freedom of
workers in the West or the privileged elites in the Soviet Union) ... the
constant need to wheel and deal, to scheme and break the law. The ideology of
the Soviet philistine (I have in mind the worst people but they, unfortunately,
are rather frequently found among workers and peasants and throughout the
intelligentsia) consists of several uncomplicated ideas:

Cult of the state, involving, in various combinations, submission to authority,
a naive belief that life in the West is worse than in the Soviet Union,
gratitude to a ''benefactor'' Government and, at the same time, fear and
hypocrisy.

Egoistic endeavors to insure a good life for oneself and one's family, to ''live
like everyone else'' with the help of graft, theft ignored by bosses and
ever-present hypocrisy. Yet there is a desire among better people in this
category to achieve a good life through their own labor, by their own hands.
Nonetheless, it is still necessary to wheel and deal and to play the hypocrite.

The idea of nationalist superiority, which takes on a dark, hysterical and
pogromlike form among some Russians, and not only among Russians. One often
hears exclamations: ''We're wasting our money on these black (or yellow)
monkeys! We're feeding parasites!'' Or one hears: ''The Jews are responsible!''
- or the ''Russians'' or the ''Georgians'' or the ''Chuchmeki,'' a derogatory
term for the peoples of Central Asia.

These are very disturbing symptoms after 60 years of proclaiming ''friendship of
the peoples.'' Officially, Communist ideology is internationalist, but it
surreptitiously exploits nationalist prejudices. So far, this has been done with
some caution and I hope that these forces will not be unleashed. After the class
hatreds we have suffered, we certainly have no need for a racist-nationalist
ideology. I am convinced that this is dangerous and destructive even in its most
humane (at first glance) ''dissident'' manifestations. There are few people who
react seriously anymore to slogans about building Communism, although there was
a time when, perhaps as a result of a certain misunderstanding, Communist
slogans reflected a wish for justice and happiness for all in the world.

But internal propaganda intensively exploits the nationwide tragedy of World War
II and the pride that people feel in their active part in historic events of
that time. The irony of life is that it was only during the war that the
ordinary person felt his importance and his dignity in an inhuman world of
terror and humiliation. There is intensive exploitation of the risk of war and
the much-decried American military bases around our country. Feelings of
suspicion are stirred up about schemes of the ''imperialists.''

A nation that has suffered the horrible losses, cruelties and destruction of war
yearns above all for peace. This is a broad, profound, powerful and honest
feeling. Today, the leaders of the country do not, and cannot, go against this
dominant desire of the people. I want to believe that in this regard, the Soviet
leaders are sincere, that when peace is involved they are transformed from
robots into people.

But even the people's deep wish for peace is exploited, and this is perhaps the
cruelest deception of all. The deep yearning for peace is used to justify all
the most negative features in our country - economic disorder, excessive
militarization, purportedly ''defensive'' foreign-policy measures (whether in
Czechoslovakia or Afghanistan) and lack of freedom in our closed society. And
those negative features also include the ecological madness, such as the
destruction of Lake Baikal, meadows and fields, the country's fish resources and
the poisoning of our water and air.

The people of our country submit uncomplainingly to all the shortages of meat,
butter and many other products - though they do grumble at home. They put up
with the gross social inequality between the elite and the ordinary citizens.
They endure the arbitrary behavior and cruelty of local authorities. They know
about the beatings and deaths of people in police stations but as a rule keep
quiet. They do not speak out - sometimes they even gloat - about the unjust
treatment of dissidents. They are silent about any and all foreign policy
actions.

A country living for decades under conditions in which all means of production
belong to the state is suffering serious economic and social hardship. It cannot
grow enough food for its people. It cannot, without the benefit of detente, keep
up with the contemporary levels of science and technology.

From the time I wrote ''My Country and the World'' (published in 1975), the
average salary has risen, but the cost of living has evidently risen even higher
because daily life has not improved. The much-acclaimed free medical care
steadily gets worse. (It is ''free'' because the wages of most workers are kept
so low and because one must pay for expensive medicines.) The situation in
education is not much better, especially in the countryside. It is no longer
possible to explain away all these problems as a result of the war or occasional
mistakes.

There is an urgent need for economic reforms that would increase the
independence of enterprises and allow elements of a mixed economy. There is need
for more freedom of information, a free and critical press, freedom for people
to travel abroad, freedom of emigration and a free choice of one's place of
residence within the country. In the long run, there should probably be a
multiparty system and elimination of party monopoly over all ideological,
political and economic life.

But all of this, even though obvious to most people, remains for the time being
nothing but wishful thinking. The dogmatic bureaucrats and the new people
replacing them - anonymous and shrewd cynics, moving in the many ''corridors of
power'' of the departments of the Central Committee, the K.G.B., the ministries
and the provincial and regional party committees -are pushing the country toward
what they consider to be the safest path but that is in reality a path to
suicide.

Everything is as it was under the system of power and economy created by Stalin.
The leaders carry on the arms race, concealing it behind talk of their love of
peace. They interfere in troubled areas around the world, from Ethiopia to
Afghanistan, in order to increase prestige, to strengthen the nation's power and
to insure that the guns don't get rusty. They round up dissidents, returning the
country to the quiet ''predissident'' period, as my son-in-law, Efrem
Yankelevich, has described the situation. (Mr. Yankelevich, who emigrated in
1977, is a researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.)

In the last 10 or 15 years there has been a worsening of the traditional Russian
curse, drunkenness. The Government has attempted some timid half-measures - more
in word than deed -but it is unable to accomplish much. Alcoholism is a
worldwide phenomenon, not wholly a result of conditions in our country. But
certain specific factors do play a major role.

Expenditures for drinking reduce surplus purchasing power of the population, but
the main point is that an alcoholic poses no threat to the Government. Also,
drinking is the only real freedom available and the authorities are not
foolhardy enough to take this away without giving something in return. There are
economic, social and psychological elements in all this. And the result: Instead
of dry wine and good quality old vodka, the authorities flood the market with
cheap and poisonous fortified wine, known as ''bormotukha,'' which swiftly
destroys men, women and youngsters. As the ''quiet'' Czar Aleksei Mikhailovich
said 300 years ago: ''Don't drive the hotheads away from the taverns.''

The people of our country are to some extent confused and intimidated, of
course. But there is also a conscious self-deception and an egoistic escape from
difficult problems. The slogan, ''The People and Party Are One,'' which hangs
from every fifth building, consists not entirely of empty words.

But it was from the ranks of the people that the defenders of human rights
emerged, standing up against deceit, hypocrisy and silence, armed only with
pens, ready to make sacrifices, yet lacking the stimulus one derives from the
certainty of quick success. They had their say. They will not be forgotten. On
their side, they have moral force and the logic of historical development. I am
convinced also that their activity will continue in one form or another,
whatever the size of the movement. What is important is not the arithmetic but
the qualititative fact of breaking through the psychological barrier of silence.

But history develops according to its own slow (and tortuous) laws. We are now
living through difficult and troubling times - a worsening of international
tensions, Soviet expansionism, shameless anti-American, anti-Western,
anti-Israeli, anti-Egyptian and antiintellectual propaganda and threats of still
greater tension ahead.

Inside the country, these are times of ever greater repression. It is terrible
to think that the most honorable and generous people, who have devoted many
years to defending others through public protest, have fallen victim to
arbitrary repression.

I feel obligated to tell something about a few of them: Tatyana Velikanova, a
mathematician and mother of three children, a grandmother, participant in the
struggle for human rights for more than 12 years, from the very beginning to the
present. Showing no interest in fame, glory or personal gain, sacrificing much
in her personal life, she has always been at the center of the battle,
committing herself to the fate of hundreds of victims of injustice, speaking out
on their behalf, helping them in every way she could, not caring whether their
opinions were close to hers or distant. Her only consideration was whether
someone had suffered injustice.

I do not reproach those who could not bear up under the many years of strain,
those who quit the struggle or even those who in some way betrayed themselves.
But they demonstrate all the more why we should admire the courage of this
woman.

Another is Malva Landa, a geologist, an active member of the Helsinki Group, one
of the volunteers in the aid fund helping dissident families, and for many
years, for decades in fact, a friend of political prisoners and their families,
totally dedicated to the idea of justice.

It is the same with Sergei Kovalev, a talented biologist and a deep and
penetrating thinker, kind, patient and strong. We all were devoted to him when
he was free. I was often impressed by the deep respect he received from many of
his fellow prisoners during six years in a labor camp.

Another is Viktor Nekipelov, who gave his utmost to help others in trouble or
subjected to injustice, a sensitive poet, a loving father, a brave man.

All the world knows of Prof. Yuri Orlov, the physicist, a courageous man always
in the forefront, founder of the Helsinki Group.

The world also knows of Anatoly Shcharansky, falsely accused of espionage in an
attempt to intimidate the Jewish emigration movement.  I have deep respect for
the talented writer and World War II invalid Mykola Rudenko; Vyacheslav Bakhmin,
the courageous and honorable member of the Working Commission on Psychiatric
Abuse; Leonard Ternovsky, a radiologist and member of the same commission and
also of the Helsinki Committee in Moscow, a remarkably kind and steadfast man.

Repression has been intensified against religious believers and those who defend
their cause. Noteworthy among these are the names of the priests Gleb Yakunin
and Dmitri Dudko and of Viktor Kapitanchuk, Lev Regelson, Aleksandr Ogorodnikov
and Vladimir Poresh. Also, the names of the church elder Nikolai Goretoi and of
84-year-old Shelkov, who recently died in a camp, should be well-known.

Mustafa and Reshat Dzhemilev and Rolan Kadyev, fighters on behalf of the Crimean
Tatars, are once again imprisoned.  As I was writing this article, more tragic
news reached me: the arrest of Aleksandr Lavut, a talented mathematician and one
of the veterans of the struggle for freedom of information. I have known Lavut
for many years. Modest, serious-minded and good-natured, he never sought to draw
attention to himself. But he worked on behalf of many people. Many of them,
including me, will miss his kind words and sound advice. All those I have listed
have either been sentenced to long terms or are awaiting an illegal trial. All
those who are free have the inescapable duty to speak out on their behalf and on
behalf of the many others I have not mentioned.

Some Words About Myself

I live in an apartment guarded day and night by a policeman at the entrance. He
allows no one to enter but family members, with a few exceptions. There is an
old friend who lives in Gorky; the price he pays for associating with us is a
summons to the K.G.B. for a talk after each visit. There is a Gorky physicist
who has been denied an emigration visa; he also has to go to the K.G.B. after
his visits to us. The only other visitors are people judged suitable by the
K.G.B.  There is no telephone in the apartment. I am unable to telephone Moscow
or Leningrad even from the public telephone bureau at the post office. The call
is immediately disconnected at the orders of the K.G.B. agents who always follow
me. I receive very little mail, and that consists mainly of letters
''re-educating'' me or merely cursing me. Oddly enough, I get the same kind of
letters from the West. However, I also get some mail from the West with kind
words and I am deeply grateful to the senders.

When I accompanied my mother-in-law to the station on her departure for Moscow,
K.G.B. agents, pistols in hand, made a show of preventing me from approaching
the coach, making it clear that the order forbidding me from going beyond the
city limits was not just empty words. A radio-jamming facility has been set up
in the apartment building, just for me. In order to listen to the radio, it is
necessary for my wife and me to go for walks at night with a transistor
receiver. While we are out walking, the K.G.B. agents are in our apartment
damaging the typewriter and tape recorder or searching through our papers. I
occupy myself with scientific work, but I suffer from a lack of regular contact
with colleagues.

At the end of the third month of my stay in Gorky, on the eve of the arrival in
Moscow of Western participants in an unofficial scientific seminar, the K.G.B.
allowed my colleagues in the Institute of Physics of the Academy of Sciences to
visit me. It even recommended that they do so. I am very grateful to those who
did come. It had been a long time since I had an opportunity to discuss
developments in science. During their stay, the police post was moved away from
the door and the jamming facility was turned off. But as soon as my colleagues
had left, promising that others would come in time, everything returned to the
former state. And there was a resumption of the regular summons to the Ministry
of Internal Affairs for registration.

In terms of everyday life, my situation is much better than that of my friends
sent into exile or, particularly, sentenced to labor camp or prison. But all the
measures taken against me have not even a shred of legality. It is part of a
harsh, nationwide campaign against dissidents, including the attempt to force me
to keep silent and thereby make it easier for repressive action against others.

On Jan. 22, in Moscow, K.G.B. agents forcibly took me to the Deputy Prosecutor
General, Aleksandr M. Rekunkov, who informed me that I was being stripped of my
awards and would be sent into exile.  He produced only the decree of the Supreme
Soviet concerning the awards, giving an impression, however, that the decree
also called for exile. But that was not so. I still do not know which branch of
Government or who personally made the decision to have me exiled. All my
inquiries meet only with silence. In any event, the decision is illegal and is
in violation of the Constitution. In two letters to Rekunkov and in a telegram
to the chairman of the K.G.B., Yuri V.  Andropov, I demanded revocation of the
illegal exile order and said I was prepared to face an open trial.

In recent months the Soviet press has printed many articles accusing me of
''mortal'' sins - contempt for the people and their aspirations, slander of the
Soviet system, inciting the arms race, groveling before American imperialism and
divulging military secrets. I shall not reply, once again, to those accusations
here. In part, this article is my reply. I put forth my position, in very brief
form, in my first statement from Gorky. All my activities stem from a desire for
a free and worthy destiny for our country and our people and all countries and
peoples of the world. I consider the United States the historically determined
leader of the movement toward a pluralist and free society, vital to mankind.
But I equally respect all peoples for their contributions to our civilization
and future society.

In April, the former president of the New York Academy of Sciences, Dr. Joel
Lebowitz, visited Moscow. He passed on to the president of the Soviet Academy of
Sciences, Anatoly P. Aleksandrov, a petition from American scientists urging
that I be freed from exile and be allowed to return to Moscow or, if I should so
choose, emigrate to the West. Aleksandrov replied that the exile was for my own
welfare because I had been surrounded in Moscow by ''dubious characters''
through whom there had been a leak of information involving state secrets. That
was an outrageous assertion. I have never had dealings with ''dubious
characters.'' My friends are honorable and decent people, all of whom are known
to the K.G.B. If state secrets have been betrayed, any guilty persons (including
me, first of all) should be put on trial. But the accusation about betrayal of
secrets is nothing but slander. The response to the demand that I be allowed to
emigrate was also somewhat strange: ''We have signed the treaty on
nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and we abide by it strictly.'' As if I were
a hydrogen bomb!

I am frequently asked whether I am ready to emigrate. I feel that constant
discussion of this matter in the press and many foreign broadcasts is premature,
motivated by thirst for sensationalism. I feel that every person has the right
to emigrate and, in principle, I do not exclude myself. But I do not regard this
as a valid question for me at this time because the decision does not depend
upon me anyway.

I regard as just and legal the demands of my foreign colleagues that my exile
order be revoked and that I be allowed to return home or go to the West. These
are my rights not only as a scientist but also as a human being. I am very
grateful for the concern and for the clearly formulated demands.

This article is being taken to Moscow by my wife, my constant helper, who shares
my exile and willingly takes upon herself the heavy burdens of traveling back
and forth, handling my communications with the outside world, coping with the
growing hatred of the K.G.B.  Earlier, she withstood the poison of slander and
insinuation, focused more on her than on me. The fact that I am Russian and my
wife is half-Jewish has proved useful for the internal purposes of the K.G.B.

Recently, someone appeared at the door of my mother-in-law at 5:30 A.M.,
describing himself as an officer of the K.G.B. He warned that if her daughter,
meaning my wife, did not stop her trips back and forth from Gorky and stop
inciting her husband with anti-Soviet statements, they would take certain
measures. Earlier, some of our friends received letters with similar threats
against my wife. Every time my wife leaves, I do not know whether she will be
allowed to travel without hindrance and to return safely. My wife, although
formally not under detention, is in greater danger than I am. I urge those who
speak out on my behalf to keep this in mind. It is impossible to foresee what
awaits us. Our only protection is the spotlight of public attention on our fate
by friends around the world.
A. SAKHAROV, May 4, 1980, Gorky

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cover photo of Andrei Sakharov and photos of Sakharov
and wife Yelena,

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE LONG YEAR OF THE PATZ FAMILYthe picture at 7:55 of a morning in May 1980.
The spectator is standing on the northeast corner of Prince and Wooster Streets
in Manhattan's SoHo. On the northwest corner is Food, a restaurant in which a
scene from ''An Unmarried Woman'' was shot.

BYLINE: By Mary Cantwell; Mary Cantwell is a freelance writer.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6954 words


This is the picture at 7:55 of a morning in May 1980. The spectator is standing
on the northeast corner of Prince and Wooster Streets in Manhattan's SoHo. On
the northwest corner is Food, a restaurant in which a scene from ''An Unmarried
Woman'' was shot. At the spectator's back is another restaurant, beyond that is
a hairdresser's, then Dean & DeLuca, a food store in which a scene from
''Starting Over'' was shot. Beyond that is the co-op - three gray buildings,
strung with fire escapes - in which Mr. and Mrs. Stanley Patz live with their
two children. Until May 25, 1979, three children lived with them.

The area seems choked with cars, not because traffic is especially heavy at this
hour, but because the streets are very narrow. A few blocks to the east, some of
the 27,000 day laborers -blacks and Hispanics mostly - who work in SoHo's
factories are emerging from the Spring Street stop of the Lexington Avenue line.
Over here, though, there is only a handful of people. A few pretty girls on
their way uptown. An elderly Chinese in a gray suit carrying a briefcase and
walking west. A tall young man who has been jogging - he is wearing red running
shorts over his gray sweatpants - pushing a carton-loaded dolly. The men feeding
garbage into the sanitation truck parked outside the R & K Bakery on the south
side of Prince.  And a short block away, on the corner of Prince and West
Broadway, SoHo's main street, three adults, seven children and a leashed
Labrador retriever waiting for the school bus.

On the morning of May 25, 1979, Mrs. Stanley Patz was getting her middle child,
Etan, 6, ready for school. Her husband was still asleep. Their daughter, Shira,
8, was dawdling. Their younger son, Ari, 2, had had an overnight guest and they
were already up and playing. And Etan was allowed, as he had begged to be many
times before, to walk by himself to the bus stop. It was the first time he had
gone alone.

If Shira, bored by the make-work that passes for schoolwork at the end of term,
had been more eager to get to class, she might have walked Etan as she had in
the past. If Ari had been asleep as he usually was at 8, his mother, Julie,
might have done so. And if, standing in the doorway of 113 Prince with Etan, she
hadn't seen all the usual faces on the street and, in the distance, a triangle
of mothers and children at the bus stop, she might have risked Ari's behaving
himself while she was gone. Instead, Julie gave Etan a dollar to get a soft
drink at the bodega near the bus stop, kissed him goodbye, and went upstairs and
into the shower. A neighbor and the postman saw him, carrying his schoolbag and
wearing his Future Flight Captain cap, at the intersection of Prince and
Wooster. No one else has admitted ever seeing him again. For all one knows he
now lives, if he does live - and his parents are adamant in their faith that he
does - as did Peter Pan, in a place that's ''second to the right and then
straight on till morning.''

If the day of Etan's disappearance hadn't been preceded by a school-bus strike
during which the children walked or were driven to school in private cars so
that normal groupings were broken ... if it hadn't been the driver's first day
on the route and if he hadn't left 10 minutes early ... if public-school systems
were not so cumbersome that parents are not called when a child is absent. ...
To contemplate the ifs is to realize, again, that in life there is no way to
cover all the bases. And to accept, again, the fact that a child once born, once
out of the egg, can never be safe again. There comes a day when every child has
to walk to the bus alone.

Julie Place Patz, a small, sturdy woman who stands very straight, was born in
Concord, Mass., in 1942 and grew up in Sudbury, which is half an hour west of
Boston. Sudbury is a backwater, and in Julie Patz's childhood most of the
population were swamp Yankees, a New England appellation comparable to
''redneck.'' ''It was a place you didn't leave,'' Julie says, ''because you
weren't given the opportunity to know there was a place to leave to.'' Her
mother's family is Nova Scotian, her father is part American Indian and she is
the oldest of nine children; only one of the children besides Julie has attended
college, and most married locally and stayed put. ''I can still remember the
first time I bought a record with my own money. It was an opera ... my father
thought I was crazy.''

''New York must seem a miracle to you,'' a visitor said as Julie and Ari and his
friend Benjamin walked along Bedford Street, past Edna St. Vincent Millay's tiny
house, through a Greenwich Village that was thick with spring. ''Everything,''
she replied, ''is a miracle to me.''

Stan Patz is a small, thin man in glasses whose cheeks have been slightly pitted
by acne. He is from Mattapan, a section of Boston, which he describes as 90
percent Jewish and reminiscent of Flatbush.  ''A lot of the houses were
three-deckers - you know, the kind with the porches on the front -and the
streets were lined with elms. Until they went down with Dutch elm disease.''
Dutch elm disease did to some parts of New England what defoliation did to
Vietnam; every New Englander over 30 remembers the days before Dutch elm.

Stan, like his two brothers, one of whom is a rabbi, the other of whom is a
teacher, went to Boston Latin, the oldest public school in the country. From
there he went to the University of Massachusetts, which is where he met Julie.

Most of us tend to lump school and college with pimples, dates, orthodontia,
virginity and the loss thereof: all the paraphernalia of growing up. Stan and
Julie do not. One the product of an ethnic group that classically cherishes
learning, the other the first of her family to aspire beyond 12th grade, they
care intensely about what is available, or not available, to Shira, Etan and
Ari. Neither, it appears, thinks of an education as a labor certificate; for
both, it is a goal in itself - to study, to know, to be enriched. Mention a book
Stan might enjoy or a school Shira might like and Julie writes it down.

Stan was the photographer for the college newspaper and, Julie says, was always
in the darkroom. ''I had roommates who worked at the paper so I was over there
all the time. Stan used to pat all the girls on the bottom as he passed through.
But not me. It was very frustrating.''

''My first and last days of greatness,'' Stan adds. ''I was a champion
bottom-pincher.'' ''One day in my junior year,'' Julie recalls, smiling, ''he
called me for a date.'' At the end of that year, she left college. Her father
had been out of work for a long time, and her mother was expecting another
child.

Julie got a job in Sudbury; Stan graduated and moved to New York.  His brother
the rabbi had just been drafted for military service.  Stan and Julie had hoped
to be married by him someday. Stan said, ''It's now or three years from now.''
He also said, ''Are you going to marry, or are you going to stay home forever
and take care of your mother's children?''

They married in New York in a chapel of Temple Emanu-El. Julie, a Protestant,
converted to Judaism ''so Stan's mother would get out of her sickbed and come to
the wedding. And I wired my sister to get a loan for shoes to go with my wedding
dress. And I went to Saks and Bergdorf's with your brother and his wife
-remember? - going to all those places I'd never have dreamed of. For years
after, my parents talked about their trip to New York for my wedding - the
subways they missed or took by mistake and the crowds and Fifth Avenue and.
...'' There was a small wedding reception at a friend's apartment near Columbia,
but no honeymoon.

The way they lived was the way you live when you come to New York young and with
little money.  Their first home was Stan's bachelor apartment on the Upper West
Side, the one where everyone was either crazy or a prostitute. Then they moved
to Stan's brother's old place in the East 60's: three and a half rooms, not much
light, the walls shadowed by the breath from a Con Ed generator. Julie worked in
real estate, Stan in a photographer's studio, and eventually Shira was born.
Three and a half small rooms weren't enough. Stan did a job at 131 Prince Street
in SoHo, was ''very impressed'' by the space and heard about a building a few
doors down that was being co-opped. ''They said I could turn the trick for
$7,500. This was like a dream.'' SoHo is a 43-block area of factories and
truck-clotted streets between Greenwich Village and Little Italy-Chinatown. Part
of it is in the National Register of Historic Places, because of its superb
19th-century cast-iron architecture, and most of it was once threatened by the
proposed Lower Manhattan Expressway. One longtime SoHo resident (longtime in
SoHo begins at about 10 years) divides its history into two periods: before and
after 1976.

SoHo was zoned for industry; much of it had huge, light-filled, underutilized or
empty lofts. Empty, that is, but for what one homeowner describes as ''several
tons of petrified rat droppings, rubble to my armpits, and 100 years of cracked
plaster.'' Attracted by the space, the kind of people who need space - artists,
film makers, photographers -began moving in and clearing up. Many lived
illegally, behind blackout curtains, fearing discovery by one or another arm of
the city government. One woman, married to a painter, remembers how their cover
was forever being blown by their diaperservice man standing beneath their
blinded windows and howling for admittance. ''There weren't even lights,'' a
neighbor of the Patzes recalls, ''and the streets at night were pitch black. We
all recognized one another. When you walked out and saw a new face you'd be so
damn glad to see somebody you'd say, 'Hello, how are you, what's your name?' ''

In 1971 there was a zoning resolution, which allowed joint livingworking
quarters for certified artists; that is, those recognized as such by the
municipal Department of Cultural Affairs.  In 1976 an amendment increased the
number of buildings that could be converted to residental use. Galleries and
restaurants sprouted; new settlers started arriving; chic bloomed. One might
assume that they, too, were lured by the space, but the explanation is too
simple. The magic of SoHo is that it's a place where things are happening. Live
there and you, by extension, are happening, too.

Stan and Julie Patz are pre-1976 chic. They, and their friends, live in the kind
of apartments Bloomingdale's fifth-floor furniture department would never
emulate. They also live in a very small town.  SoHo is not a small town in the
sense that Greenwich Village is a small town. The Village, one of the oldest
residential enclaves in Manhattan, has always had, despite its legendary
Bohemian overlay, a solidly middle-class substructure, and is studded with
schools, supermarkets and churches. SoHo has none of these. What makes SoHo a
small town is the friendship and a shared sense of survival that links its early
settlers. They were in the trenches together.  Etan Patz was born on Oct. 9,
1972, in University Hospital. His mother had studied the Lamaze method and,
conscious and unmedicated, was watching the crowning in the mirror over the foot
of the delivery table. ''All of a sudden,'' Julie says, ''I saw all this silver.
And I said to the doctor, 'The silver. What's that silver?' He said, 'It's the
baby's hair.' For the first few months Etan's hair was absolutely platinum.''

Julie, who had helped raise her eight brothers and sisters, who had tutored from
the time she herself was in the fifth grade, and who had been a volunteer in a
Boston hospital for disturbed children, ran a day-care center in the Patz loft.
Etan was the resident baby.

He is blond, blue-eyed, small like his parents. He is also very gentle. ''He
couldn't believe that people could be bad,'' says his mother. ''Evil didn't
exist for Etan,'' says a woman whose son was his closest friend.

Neither as precocious nor as restless as Shira, whom Stan and Julie eventually
enrolled in a loosely structured private school, Etan was very happy at the
Independence Plaza Annex of Public School 3. There he was learning to read. He
thought the transformation of symbol into sense miraculous. And his parents made
him memorize his phone number.

He is, perhaps, a bit timid. Independence was both necessary to him and
frightening. Coming home one day from shopping in the Village, he asked if he
could cross Washington Square alone. He did, but Julie and Shira walked the
perimeter, keeping an eye on him. He was glad and relieved when they met on the
other side of the park.  When Etan did not get off the school bus on the
afternoon of May 25, Julie called P.S. 3 and was told he had never arrived. She
called the parents of children who had presumably been on the bus.  Some of the
children had, of course, missed it because of the early departure. Those who had
not said Etan wasn't on it. Julie called the police, and then Stan, who was at
work.

''I was just coming home from a business trip,'' a neighbor said, ''at around 5
o'clock, when I ran into Stan. He was walking up and down Prince Street, looking
around, and he was tense. 'Etan's not back from school yet,' he said.'' ''What I
remember above all is the lights'' - a friend describing the scene in front of
the Patzes' co-op the night of May 25. ''There were police cars lining the curb,
and they all had their doors open ... those are the lights I remember, car
lights shining on the street.'' That night the Patz home became an annex of
police headquarters. The search for Etan involved helicopters, harbor launches
on both rivers, Transit Authority Police and the Port Authority. SoHo was
upended and shaken out. ''Every loft in the area was gone through not once but
three times,'' a resident says, ''right down to the bottom of our bureau
drawers.''

On Saturday two bloodhounds were trucked in from upstate, but there had been
rain during the night. SoHo has a number of dusty lumberyards, and the streets
are perennially cloaked in the exhaust from trucks. Three times the bloodhounds
seemed to have picked up Etan's path, three times the path led nowhere.

May 25 was also the beginning of the Memorial Day weekend.  Neighbors had left
town, stores were shuttered, and memories which might have been fresh on Friday
were faded by Tuesday morning. Stan, Julie, the postman and the neighbor who had
seen Etan last were hypnotized under police supervision. Under hypnosis they
recalled nothing out of the ordinary. But it was in the midst of the ordinary
that Etan disappeared. If there had been anyone or anything unusual on Prince
Street that early morning, someone would have noticed.  In the first two weeks
of the inquiry, 500 detectives and other police officers were assigned full time
or part time to the case.  ''Is that customary?'' a visitor at Missing Persons
inquired.

''For a boy 6 years old, yes.'' ''Some people claim that the investigation
wouldn't have been so intensive if Etan had been black, say, and from Harlem.''
''You're going to have people making remarks all the time. Until we have one of
that nature we can't compare.'' Detective Bill Butler, Patzes called to report
that Etan was missing, is now a member of the four-person task force - himself,
two detectives from Missing Persons and one from Homicide - assigned to the case
of Etan Patz. They will stay a team for the foreseeable future.

Bill Butler is a big, bulky man who looks as if he could halt a cannonball. With
his gold-rimmed glasses on, he resembles a priest; with them off, and when he is
laughing - which is often - there is a glimpse of a younger, thinner Jackie
Gleason. The Patzes are deeply fond of Butler, not only because of his work in
the search for Etan but also because, Julie says, he is like a father. A mythic
father: infinitely reassuring, infinitely trustworthy, and possessed of the kind
of humor that lights candles.

''Usually,'' the visitor says, ''when you're in a place where there's been a
crime ... a tragedy ... something inexplicable, you're bombarded by rumors.
There's always someone who claims to know the real story. But in SoHo you don't
hear rumors, or theories, anymore.  It's as if everyone's staring at a blank
wall.''

''That's because we ran down all the rumors. We followed every lead we got -
there never was any material evidence - and we're still following every lead we
get. Every lead. For instance, I must have spoken to a thousand psychics.
They've covered all the bases by now.  When all this is resolved one of them
will raise a hand and say, 'I told you so.'

''The phone calls! Just the other day I get a phone call from California. It's
somebody says they have information on Etan ... they had a dream about a white
fence, a brown building ... I said, 'Was there a little boy in this dream?' And
the person said, 'Well, no.  ...' It's like anybody has a vision, call Butler.
Tell him your troubles.''

That a child is missing is not, per se, unusual. Babies have been snatched from
carriages, or borrowed by baby sitters. When an older child vanishes there is
always the suspicion of truancy. But Etan has never been considered a possible
runaway. He is, says Butler, ''the kind of kid that if he were going to run away
he'd come upstairs first and say, 'Mommy, would you cross me?' '' Six-year-olds
simply do not vanish without a trace. And for so long. ''Etan,'' says Lieut.
Earl J. Campazzi, commander of the Missing Persons squad, ''is unique.''

''You must have been grateful for all the cooperation you received in SoHo.''
''The higher the flame, the quicker the pot will boil,'' Campazzi replies, ''and
we're certainly getting a lot of heat from that neighborhood.''

SoHo is the kind of place where a parent refers reverently to her offspring as
''my child.'' ''There's a style to parenting in SoHo,'' Julie says. ''I feel
self-conscious sometimes because I always say 'my kids.' ''

SoHo families tend to have one child, often born about the time when the
mother's age makes her a candidate for amniocentesis. And it is probably fair to
say that most SoHo children are deeply entwined in their parents' lives. In the
first place, many SoHo parents work at home; and, in the second, when home is a
loft, a child may be 1,500 feet away but he is still playing in the same room.
(The visitor was disturbed that Shira and Ari were often around when she was
talking to their mother about Etan. Should they, she asked herself, be hearing
all this? Until she remembered her own childhood, and that there is little more
frightening to a child than adults' whispering.)

The SoHo Cooperative Play Group was to hold a parents' reunion on that May 26.
It was immediately converted into a planning meeting, and the Etan Patz Action
Committee was formed. SoHo is a sophisticated community; so was the committee. A
task sheet issued June 5 listed:

Police assigned; Committee coordination; Fliers and posters; Umbrella
organizations contact work; Media contacts and production; Rewards (''Please
discourage firmly, but nicely,'' the subtext reads, ''and refer offers to
contributions coordinators''); Contributions to defray committee expenses; On
the other side of the flier is a list of eight depots where posters could be
picked up for distribution about the city. The posters, designed by a neighbor
who used Stan's photographs of Etan, were the gift of SoHo printers, and were
printed in five languages: English, Spanish, Chinese, Yiddish and Italian.
Friends, and the Jewish Daily Forward, did the translation; volunteers handled
the distribution - walking, busing and subwaying all over the city.  People who
had contacts within the news media, however remote, made pleas for radio,
television and newspaper spots. An artist, who suddenly found himself titled
Media Coordinator, recalls simply going through his Rolodex and calling everyone
who might be able to get Etan's photograph circulated. No one person had
extraordinary clout or connections; no one was, strictly speaking, pulling
strings. But so and so had a friend in TV; someone else knew the ins and outs of
company house organs and how to get Etan's picture printed in them; the mind
that had been adept at P.T.A. work was equally adept at coordinating poster
distribution and police contacts.

Julie had thought ''very soon we'll be alone in this,'' but they weren't, and it
was she who in midsummer suggested that the committee disband. ''People had
devoted so much time and money that their own lives were beginning to suffer.
One woman told me, tearfully, that she was leaving on vacation with her family
and that she felt guilty, as if she were deserting us. It's a trap, you see. You
get caught up in it and you can't get out. We were fighting drowning all the
time.

''Julie,'' a friend said, ''was so afraid we'd feel guilty. She said we mustn't
forget Etan, but that we have to have life go on.  But it's like we're in
suspended animation. We can't mourn; they can't mourn. There's no ritual for
this.''

''Do you see the Patzes much now?'' the visitor asked.  ''It's hard. I called
Julie the other day. I thought they might like to come over some evening. But
she called back and said The Anniversary was coming up and they knew there'd be
more interviews and letters and phone calls, so they couldn't plan anything
right now.'' (''We're still not back to reality,'' Julie says. ''No matter how
hard we want to go back to the way we were, we can't.'') ''Tell me,'' the friend
continued, leaning toward the visitor.  ''How are Stan and Julie?'' ''First we
were news,'' Stan says, ''Then we were human interest. I don't know what we are
now.'' Both were, for a time, suspects. When a child disappears, the police look
first toward its parents. The Patzes were cleared almost immediately - there
were, after all, two independent witnesses who had seen Etan alone, near the
corner of Prince and Wooster - but not before they had to take lie detector
tests. Julie's was first. ''The chair looks like an electric chair, and there's
an overhead light.  The walls are bashed in, with footprints on them, and there
are broken tiles. I walked in and thought, 'Oh my God.' ''

And although the press has been for the most part enormously helpful, there was
one newspaper story that was deeply painful.  Angered by the rumor (among the
many rumors that flew around SoHo) that Etan had been kidnapped by two Hispanics
in a car, ''Anonymous Puerto Ricans of the SoHo section of Lower Manhattan,''
reported El Diario on May 31, ''where the 6-year-old boy Etan Patz, disappeared
last Friday, got in contact with El Diario-La Prensa to confirm that the boy is
safe and sound in Massachusetts and to refute journalistic insinuations in the
sense that he was kidnapped by people of Hispanic origin.''

The unconfirmed rumor by the anonymous tipster was picked up by The New York
Post. Some people started taking down the posters, assuming that Etan was with
his paternal grandparents for reasons known only to the Patzes but which, it was
implied, had to do with dissension between Stan's Jewish family and Julie's
Protestant parents. Stan is still angry about those stories. In fact, he is
often angry.  ''Therapy? Why does everyone assume Julie and I had to have
therapy?'' Stan asks when the visitor inquires if they have had psychiatric
counseling during the last year. When the visitor replies that she asked simply
because many people have said they could not have survived what the Patzes have
survived without it, he softens.  ''We are unhappy he's missing, very unhappy.
But we're not going to grieve him. We are assuming he's alive. How else can we
bear it? What else are we going to do? This is no movie where you can cut to
another scene. You have to eat. The bills come in ... you have to pay them.

''There's a possibility, and a good one, that he's alive and well and living
somewhere. Etan has been betrayed by the adult world. What are adults for?
They're put on earth to take care of little children. They can't take care of
themselves. We made the decision to have children, so in a way we failed, but in
a larger sense society failed him. Here's this beautiful, vulnerable child ...
it's an unspeakable betrayal.

''How could an adult justify something of this nature? Taking a child!'' Stan
and Julie Patz get a lot of mail. Some letters offer condolences, others suggest
places to look and ''clues'' to follow.  Some report seeing boys who look like
Etan and enclose photographs of blond children torn from newspapers. Many
suggest that the Patzes use psychics, specifically Dorothy Allison, a much
publicized New Jersey housewife, who has already been involved. (''We have to
be,'' Stan says ruefully, and a bit amused, ''one of her biggest
embarrassments.'') A lot of letters reveal, however accidentally, the writer's
age and the prejudices of another era. ''I think,'' a woman wrote in a crabbed
Spencerian hand, ''you should look for gypsies (gitanos).'' And many more
reflect a deep strain of religiosity in America. Both men and women tell of
praying for Etan and his family, prayer circles write of group efforts, and one
elderly correspondent has Etan enrolled as a Perpetual Member in the Franciscan
Missionary Union. The Patzes hear from the last correspondent often. One of the
letters reads:

I KNOW HOW YOU FEEL FOR YOUR LITTLE BOY WHO IS MISSING I FEEL BAD ALL SO AND I
AM PRAYING TO GOD FOR HIM ...  PLEASE SEND ME A PICTURE OF YOUR LITTLE BOY ETAN
PATZ SO I CAN PUT IN MY BIBLE O.K.  In the front of the Patzes' loft, the
section that houses Stan's photographic setup, his several workbenches, a
bookcase jammed with children's books and, beside it, a small aluminum rocker,
there's a wall phone. Pinned next to it is Etan's poster - ''Lost Child'' it
says at the top - and beside that is his birth announcement. And on the table,
just below the phone, is the looseleaf notebook in which the Patzes jot down
calls. The visitor, thumbing through it, stops at a page. Julie's mother had
called about a dream she'd had. ''Etan walking on a white sidewalk,'' Julie
wrote. ''He struts by, happy and swinging arms ... Mom grabbed him and he said,
'Grammy!' She hugged him and woke up.''

''In a way,'' Julie says, ''talking to the media has been a release for us. This
is so terrible for our parents ... it's so hard to talk about it with them.''

Julie and the visitor are sitting at the other end of the Patzes' loft: a dining
table, two couches covered with throws, one painting given them by a neighbor, a
simple kitchen to the left. Shira and Ari's small sleeping lofts, constructed by
Stan, are straight ahead.  Shira's is cluttered with books, gerbil cages, a John
Travolta poster, and an aluminum-foil dome under which quail eggs are
incubating. Ari used to share his loft with Etan. He sleeps in the bottom bunk;
the top bunk is his brother's. Ari would like to move up - it's a mark of
maturity - but Julie demurs. (''... then I flew back,'' says one of Peter Pan's
Lost Boys, ''but the window was barred, for mother had forgotten all about me
and there was another little boy sleeping in my bed.'')

''One day I took Shira and Ari to Little Italy and a group of Italian mothers
came up to me and said how sorry they were that Etan was missing and how
terrible I must feel, especially since it was all my fault.'' Julie starts to
cry.

''Julie,'' the visitor says, tears pricking her own eyes. ''Every mother knows
what it's like to have a child want to do things on his own. Nobody could blame.
...''

''No, it isn't that, it isn't that,'' she interrupts. ''It's that they said it
in front of the children.  ''If people can't understand why I can sit on the
fire escape, for instance, laughing with my son ... well, that's their problem.
There's no way for them to get inside of me and know what I'm feeling.''

A few weeks before The Anniversary, Julie went to the day-care center that tends
Ari for part of the day and at which she is a volunteer. The visitor walked with
her.

When Julie entered, a little girl ran up to show her a potted, drooping plant.
Why, she wanted to know, are there no flowers? Two boys tugged at her to come
and cut out papers, and Julie gathered all of them around a small table. One
very little boy, who was supposed to be resting and who had been forbidden to
chatter, stared mournfully at the visitor from his mat. He wanted to talk, and
so did she, but both were cowed by the teacher.

A bit later the younger children, all of whom had been napping in another room,
straggled in, each trailing a blanket to tuck in his cubby. Among them was Ari.

The children were at the age when one buys them clothes they can grow into: They
all wore the bottoms of their trousers rolled. They were also at the age at
which, looking back, one tends to freeze one's children: when their wings are
still wet, and folded at their sides.

Looking at Julie surrounded by the children cutting paper, Ari leaning on her
shoulder, the visitor was reminded of a party she'd gone to the day before. One
of the guests was pregnant, and several women - diverse in age, in background,
in just about everything but the fact that they too had been pregnant once, or
twice - gathered around her. ''I had to wear a size 40 bathing suit, and slide
into the water. ...'' one said. ''Line up a car, for heaven's sake,'' another
said. ''Babies always aim for 4 A.M.'' The women were flushed, and laughing,
interrupting one another, topping one another's stories. They looked very happy,
remembering when they were barricades, when no one could hurt their children
without first killing them. Before their children were born. Before they were
all, in a sense, lost.  toward its parents. The Patzes were cleared almost
immediately - there were, after all, two independent witnesses who had seen Etan
alone, near the corner of Prince and Wooster - but not before they had to take
lie detector tests. Julie's was first.  ''The chair looks like an electric
chair, and there's an overhead light. The walls are bashed in, with footprints
on them, and there are broken tiles. I walked in and thought, 'Oh my God.' ''

And although the press has been for the most part enormously helpful, there was
one newspaper story that was deeply painful.  Angered by the rumor (among the
many rumors that flew around SoHo) that Etan had been kidnapped by two Hispanics
in a car, ''Anonymous Puerto Ricans of the SoHo section of Lower Manhattan,''
reported El Diario on May 31, ''where the 6-year-old boy Etan Patz, disappeared
last Friday, got in contact with El Diario-La Prensa to confirm that the boy is
safe and sound in Massachusetts and to refute journalistic insinuations in the
sense that he was kidnapped by people of Hispanic origin.''

The unconfirmed rumor by the anonymous tipster was picked up by The New York
Post. Some people started taking down the posters, assuming that Etan was with
his paternal grandparents for reasons known only to the Patzes but which, it was
implied, had to do with dissension between Stan's Jewish family and Julie's
Protestant parents. Stan is still angry about those stories. In fact, he is
often angry.  ''Therapy? Why does everyone assume Julie and I had to have
therapy?'' Stan asks when the visitor inquires if they have had psychiatric
counseling during the last year. When the visitor replies that she asked simply
because many people have said they could not have survived what the Patzes have
survived without it, he softens.  ''We are unhappy he's missing, very unhappy.
But we're not going to grieve him. We are assuming he's alive. How else can we
bear it? What else are we going to do? This is no movie where you can cut to
another scene. You have to eat. The bills come in ... you have to pay them.

''There's a possibility, and a good one, that he's alive and well and living
somewhere. Etan has been betrayed by the adult world. What are adults for?
They're put on earth to take care of little children. They can't take care of
themselves. We made the decision to have children, so in a way we failed, but in
a larger sense society failed him. Here's this beautiful, vulnerable child ...
it's an unspeakable betrayal.

''How could an adult justify something of this nature? Taking a child!'' Stan
and Julie Patz get a lot of mail. Some letters offer condolences, others suggest
places to look and ''clues'' to follow.  Some report seeing boys who look like
Etan and enclose photographs of blond children torn from newspapers. Many
suggest that the Patzes use psychics, specifically Dorothy Allison, a much
publicized New Jersey housewife, who has already been involved. (''We have to
be,'' Stan says ruefully, and a bit amused, ''one of her biggest
embarrassments.'') A lot of letters reveal, however accidentally, the writer's
age and the prejudices of another era. ''I think,'' a woman wrote in a crabbed
Spencerian hand, ''you should look for gypsies (gitanos).'' And many more
reflect a deep strain of religiosity in America. Both men and women tell of
praying for Etan and his family, prayer circles write of group efforts, and one
elderly correspondent has Etan enrolled as a Perpetual Member in the Franciscan
Missionary Union. The Patzes hear from the last correspondent often. One of the
letters reads:

I KNOW HOW YOU FEEL FOR YOUR LITTLE BOY WHO IS MISSING I FEEL BAD ALL SO AND I
AM PRAYING TO GOD FOR HIM ...  PLEASE SEND ME A PICTURE OF YOUR LITTLE BOY ETAN
PATZ SO I CAN PUT IN MY BIBLE O.K.  In the front of the Patzes' loft, the
section that houses Stan's photographic setup, his several workbenches, a
bookcase jammed with children's books and, beside it, a small aluminum rocker,
there's a wall phone. Pinned next to it is Etan's poster - ''Lost Child'' it
says at the top - and beside that is his birth announcement. And on the table,
just below the phone, is the looseleaf notebook in which the Patzes jot down
calls. The visitor, thumbing through it, stops at a page. Julie's mother had
called about a dream she'd had. ''Etan walking on a white sidewalk,'' Julie
wrote. ''He struts by, happy and swinging arms ... Mom grabbed him and he said,
'Grammy!' She hugged him and woke up.''

''In a way,'' Julie says, ''talking to the media has been a release for us. This
is so terrible for our parents ... it's so hard to talk about it with them.''

Julie and the visitor are sitting at the other end of the Patzes' loft: a dining
table, two couches covered with throws, one painting given them by a neighbor, a
simple kitchen to the left. Shira and Ari's small sleeping lofts, constructed by
Stan, are straight ahead.  Shira's is cluttered with books, gerbil cages, a John
Travolta poster, and an aluminum-foil dome under which quail eggs are
incubating. Ari used to share his loft with Etan. He sleeps in the bottom bunk;
the top bunk is his brother's. Ari would like to move up - it's a mark of
maturity - but Julie demurs. (''... then I flew back,'' says one of Peter Pan's
Lost Boys, ''but the window was barred, for mother had forgotten all about me
and there was another little boy sleeping in my bed.'')

''One day I took Shira and Ari to Little Italy and a group of Italian mothers
came up to me and said how sorry they were that Etan was missing and how
terrible I must feel, especially since it was all my fault.'' Julie starts to
cry.

''Julie,'' the visitor says, tears pricking her own eyes. ''Every mother knows
what it's like to have a child want to do things on his own. Nobody could blame.
...''

''No, it isn't that, it isn't that,'' she interrupts. ''It's that they said it
in front of the children.  ''If people can't understand why I can sit on the
fire escape, for instance, laughing with my son ... well, that's their problem.
There's no way for them to get inside of me and know what I'm feeling.''

A few weeks before The Anniversary, Julie went to the day-care center that tends
Ari for part of the day and at which she is a volunteer. The visitor walked with
her.

When Julie entered, a little girl ran up to show her a potted, drooping plant.
Why, she wanted to know, are there no flowers? Two boys tugged at her to come
and cut out papers, and Julie gathered all of them around a small table. One
very little boy, who was supposed to be resting and who had been forbidden to
chatter, stared mournfully at the visitor from his mat. He wanted to talk, and
so did she, but both were cowed by the teacher.

A bit later the younger children, all of whom had been napping in another room,
straggled in, each trailing a blanket to tuck in his cubby. Among them was Ari.

The children were at the age when one buys them clothes they can grow into: They
all wore the bottoms of their trousers rolled. They were also at the age at
which, looking back, one tends to freeze one's children: when their wings are
still wet, and folded at their sides.

Looking at Julie surrounded by the children cutting paper, Ari leaning on her
shoulder, the visitor was reminded of a party she'd gone to the day before. One
of the guests was pregnant, and several women - diverse in age, in background,
in just about everything but the fact that they too had been pregnant once, or
twice - gathered around her. ''I had to wear a size 40 bathing suit, and slide
into the water. ...'' one said. ''Line up a car, for heaven's sake,'' another
said. ''Babies always aim for 4 A.M.'' The women were flushed, and laughing,
interrupting one another, topping one another's stories. They looked very happy,
remembering when they were barricades, when no one could hurt their children
without first killing them. Before their children were born. Before they were
all, in a sense, lost.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Patz family home, Stan and Julie Patz, Etan
Patz with grandfather/other photos

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST AS A FIRST NOVELIST

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI; Michiko kakutani is a reporter for The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3462 words


LIVING in a small, cheerless flat and working at a dreary job, the eager young
novelist harbors intimations of glamour and success: He will write his
Bildungsroman, perfect his art and become a respected artist. Such is the
portrait of the writer as a young man that emerges in the latest novels of
William Styron and Philip Roth. In ''Sophie's Choice,'' Stingo, a callow
Southerner not unlike the young Styron, comes to New York, where he reads
manuscripts for a publisher by day and dreams by night of becoming ''a writer
with the same ardor and the soaring wings'' of Melville or Flaubert. In ''The
Ghost Writer,'' Nathan Zuckerman, an aspiring author who resembles the young
Roth in his desire to escape the banality of his middle-class youth, quits his
job selling magazine subscriptions and sets out to visit the secluded home of an
older writer, hoping to find in the Master a spiritual father for his own
Dedalean quest.

By now, of course, both Roth and Styron are themselves masters. And even as they
set down stylized recollections of their own apprenticeships, a new generation
of writers has come of age. Now in their 20's and 30's, these new writers share
the same expectations and uncertainties as their predecessors. What is different
is that during the last two decades, the whole literary enterprise has become
increasingly institutionalized. Always wary of the uncommercial author,
publishers have become more and more concerned with profit margins and hence
more dubious than ever about the unknown writer; at the same time, a formal
apprentice system composed of creative-writing courses, Government grants and
teaching jobs has developed to nurture and support the growing number of
would-be authors.

How does a novelist establish a reputation today? For some, the confluence of
talent and good fortune makes for early success. Lisa Alther made a bright debut
with ''Kinflicks,'' as did Ron Hansen with ''Desperadoes'' and Jayne Anne
Phillips with ''Black Tickets.'' Mary Gordon started her writing career as a
poet, never expecting that her first attempt at fiction, ''Final Payments''
would receive both critical and popular acclaim. ''It took me very much by
surprise,'' she says, recalling the ''tasteless'' television advertisements for
her novel. ''I was always concerned with being a perfect writer. I wanted a
tremendous succes d'estime, but I thought that meant working very hard in
solitude and never knowing if anyone would care at all.''

For others, though, the machinery of success works more slowly.  Scott Spencer,
whose third novel ''Endless Love'' was recently nominated for an American Book
Award, started writing over a decade ago. ''Perhaps because I came from the
Midwest, I had an extraordinary idealism about writers,'' says the 34-year-old
author. ''I never wanted to do anything else, and I didn't pursue my education
(beyond college) because I didn't want to have many escape routes. I was really
quite fanatic in my belief that there was only one life for me.''

A story of obsessive passion told in lyrical prose, ''Endless Love'' was
preceded by ''Last Night at the Brain Thieves Ball'' and ''Preservation Hall,''
which elicited respectable reviews but only modest commercial success. During
those early years, Mr. Spencer ghost-wrote short stories for women's magazines,
served as an evaluator for Federally financed education programs, and worked as
a clerk in an employment agency. He wrote most of ''Endless Love'' during a
three-year period in which his family lived in a small house in New Hampshire
and subsisted on his unemployment compensation and his wife's income as a
short-order cook. The book has now been optioned as a movie, and its earnings
have already surpassed the total of $50,000 that Mr. Spencer made in his last
ten years of work. The money has enabled him to buy certain things he did
without for years: several new suits and a Volvo station wagon.

Mr. Spencer is among the more fortunate ones. Many young writers spend years,
even decades, working for considerably more modest rewards: a fellowship
perhaps, or an encouraging review. Publication by a commercial house is
difficult in itself. Julia Markus, for instance, began writing over a decade ago
and accumulated more than 70 rejection slips before her third book, ''Uncle,''
was discovered in a pile of unsolicited manuscripts and chosen for the $10,000
Houghton Mifflin Literary Fellowship Award in 1978. Her first novel was never
published; the second she printed herself.  The writing of fiction has always
been something of a marginal enterprise, and the decreasing number of magazines
that pay well for it has only made matters worse. During the 20's, F. Scott
Fitzgerald managed to cultivate a readership as well as support his unprofitable
novels by selling short stories to many publications; today only a fraction of
those periodicals exists. The odds of selling a story to one of the few
remaining ''slicks'' that accept fiction - The New Yorker, The Atlantic,
Harper's, Playboy, Penthouse and Esquire - are now formidable indeed, and young
writers are increasingly turning to academic quarterlies and small magazines for
publication.

To complicate the situation, first novels are usually high-risk investments, and
high risks, say many editors, are increasingly difficult to take these days.
Given a poor or merely unexceptional track record with a first novel, many
authors face even greater difficulties in selling their second and third ones.
Such writers do not represent ''a discovery'' to publishers, but rather a
liability: Their works have been tested and found wanting in the bookstores.

Further, it is more difficult than ever for publishers to make money with
unknown writers. Library sales, which flourished during the late 60's thanks to
funds allocated by the Federal Government, have declined. The current emphasis
on so-called ''blockbusters'' means that there is less money left for
uncommercial titles. And adequate distribution has become more and more
problematic. As a result, many first novels do not even sell out their first
printings of 5,000 to 10,000 copies, and in a shrinking mass paperback market
they often do not get the chance to earn back their publishing costs in
subsidiary rights. ''The uncertainty in publishing today,'' says Aaron Asher,
the editor in chief of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, ''obviously hits hardest at the
little known writers and writers whose books are not perceived to be for a large
audience.''

Given the current economics of publishing, many houses simply decline to give
unsolicited manuscripts a reading, and will almost perfunctorily dismiss any
fiction proposal by an unknown author. A good agent can often obtain a better
hearing for a writer's work, but most aspiring authors find that agents are
reluctant to take them on until they have already established a reputation.
Consequently, many are left with as many rejection slips from agents as from
editors.

''The industry is always looking for the next John Irving,'' says Ted
Solotaroff, an editor at Harper & Row, noting that his house publishes about 8
of the more than 500 fiction manuscripts it receives a year. ''I've been pretty
much able to publish the young writers I really believe in. What suffers is the
good novel, not the first-rate one. Three or four years ago I'd have gone along
with a book that had flaws if I believed in the writer - in his promise, his
talent, his perseverance to write other things. I don't find myself doing that
now. I have to confine myself to books I'm completely enthusiastic about.''

Cost-conscious as they are, publishing houses must always consider the popular
appeal of any new author they take on, and the majority of first novels that get
published, it seems, are decidedly commercial works (''Scruples,'' after all,
was a first novel). The judges for last year's Ernest Hemingway Foundation
Award, given annually for a first book of fiction, estimated that of the 125
submissions they received (from both commercial and small press houses), only 1
in 12 represented literary works; the rest were intended for a mass audience.

Curiously enough, many of the ''serious'' novels written by younger authors
today are also relatively accessible works with conventional narratives that
stand in marked contrast to the more rarefied, experimental work of, say,
William H. Gass or Donald Barthelme. There is an apparent emphasis on narrative
and lucidity, a desire to tell a story, even to entertain. As Vance Bourjaily of
the Iowa Writers' Workshop observes, ''the kind of dense prose that makes for
difficulty doesn't seem to appeal to the younger people today; they don't seem
interested in experimentation. It's as though writing novels were simply an
exercise in communication.''

Tim O'Brien, for one, is eager to write a best seller. ''I realized I wanted to
reach a lot of people,'' says the 33-year-old author, who won a National Book
Award last year for ''Going After Cacciato.'' ''I don't want to be studied in
English classes; I want to be read.'' A political science major at Macalester
College in Minn., Mr. O'Brien says that as a student, he never thought about a
writing career because he had nothing particular to say. Then, in 1968, he was
drafted. What he saw in Vietnam left an indelible impression on him, and he
began to write.

After writing ''If I Die in a Combat Zone,'' a straightforward, nonfiction
account of his time in Vietnam, Mr. O'Brien joined The Washington Post. He felt
constrained by reporting, however, and began working on ''Northern Lights,'' a
conventional first novel about growing up in a small town. By 1974 he had left
The Post and was writing ''Going After Cacciato,'' a novel set in Vietnam. ''I
came to writing because I'd seen guys die and I wanted to tell how it was in the
most direct, blunt way I could,'' Mr. O'Brien recalls. ''I didn't give a damn
about language or elegant sentences. I just had something I cared very deeply
about, and I wanted to get the stuff across to other people. The craft came
later.''

For Mr. O'Brien's friend John Irving, the craft came first. The author of ''The
World According to Garp'' knew from the time he was 14 that he wanted to be a
writer, and he set about learning the skill as methodically as he went about
training to wrestle. In college, he wrote every day, mechanically learning how
sentences worked, and later spent two years at the Writers' Workshop in Iowa,
where he finished ''Setting Free the Bears.'' ''I was writing it chiefly with
the priority of finishing it,'' he recalls. His next two novels -''The
Water-Method Man'' and ''The 158-Pound Marriage'' -elicited a modest response;
the fourth was ''Garp.''

Although the author adamantly denies any autobiographical impulse, a certain
resemblance between Mr. Irving and his hero Garp remains obvious - both are
writers of fiction, both are wrestlers, both grew up in New England prep school
towns. There has always been a tendency among younger writers, of course, to
rely heavily on the facts and observations of their own lives; as they achieve a
mature voice, that impulse is usually either abandoned or transformed into an
emotional and geographical terrain of the author's own making. Yet Mary Gordon,
who has drawn at length upon her own severe Catholic upbringing for both ''Final
Payments'' and her next novel, ''The Mercy Seat,'' believes that for most
writers such regional and ethnic themes are of diminishing significance.

''I'm a bit of an anachronism,'' explains the 30-year-old writer, who grew up
attending Irish Catholic schools in Valley Stream, L.I.  and in Queens. ''The
kind of intense religious life I was exposed to was more typical of a generation
before me. I think I was lucky in having such a peculiar upbringing. Because
backgrounds seem to be more and more homogeneous and less eccentric now, it's
harder for most people to have such ready-made subjects to write about.''

If younger fiction writers share any themes at all, it is that vague 60's notion
of impermanence, whereby backgrounds become gratuitous and tradition itself is
abjured. This is not subversion in the political sense - indeed politics seem
curiously absent in these books - but the spiritual detritus of an era of
change. Many of these writers, after all, were members of the counterculture,
although most seem to have maintained a certain distance from their
contemporaries. Miss Gordon demonstrated with the other Columbia and Barnard
students on Morningside Heights, but always worried about getting home to her
mother's house in time for dinner. Mr. O'Brien worked for Eugene McCarthy and
protested the war - until he was drafted and went to Vietnam. Jayne Anne
Phillips, who is now 27, spent a year working as a waitress in such communities
as Berkeley, Calif., and Boulder, Colo., ''where people were vegetarians and
went to crafts fairs,'' then went off to the Iowa Writers' Workshop to write
''Black Tickets,'' a collection of short stories focused, she says, on
''relationships that were changed by the mobility and rootlessness'' of the
times.

In her latest novel, ''Falling in Place,'' Ann Beattie also depicts the
dislocations of spirit that afflict her peers, and like so many of her own
characters who drift vaguely into love or work, Miss Beattie seems to have
achieved her own reputation as a representative literary voice almost in spite
of herself. ''I never had a burning ambition to be a writer,'' says the
32-year-old author. ''I started writing because I was bored with graduate school
- in some kind of attempt to care about literature again, I guess I started
writing it. Years ago when I might have done something else, I just didn't
pursue it, and now I don't know what else to call myself except a writer.''

While still in graduate school at the University of Connecticut, Miss Beattie
started publishing short stories in such publications as the Texas Quarterly and
Western Humanities Review. In 1973, after she had received some 20 rejections
from The New Yorker, Roger Angell, the magazine's fiction editor, discovered one
of her stories in the ''slush'' pile of unsolicited manuscripts. She has been a
regular contributor there ever since.

Having recently moved into New York City from the suburbs of Connecticut, Miss
Beattie and her husband, a musician, now live in a modest two-room apartment in
Chelsea, where she writes on an electric typewriter on a small desk in the
living room. Months may pass, she says, in which she does no writing at all, but
once she starts a story, she works 18 hours a day, writing as fast as she can
type - some 70 words a minute.

Miss Beattie claims that few of her friends are writers and that she prefers it
that way. It is a sentiment apparently shared by many of her contemporaries, who
seem to have almost willfully renounced the communal spirit of their
predecessors. In the 50's, writers frequently moved within concentric circles
and their work was grounded in a shared legacy of modernism. The New York of
Norman Mailer and The Paris Review crowd was clearly the nexus of literary life.
Today, no such center exists - anywhere. Few of the new young writers regularly
read one another's work; fewer still actually meet their literary
contemporaries. As Barry Hannah, the author of ''Airships,'' says, ''I have no
idea what's going on in New York, except what I read in the slicks.'' Mr. Hannah
lives in Tuscaloosa, Ala.; Stephen Goodwin, in Washington, D.C.; Lisa Alther, in
Hinesburg, Vt.; Mary Gordon, in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.; Jayne Anne Phillips in
Provincetown, Mass. John Irving and Tim O'Brien, who live several blocks from
one another in Cambridge, Mass., visit perhaps once every three months.

This extraordinary dispersion has to do, in part, with the proliferation of
writing programs around the country. Whereas previous generations of writers
tended to learn their craft at newspapers or simply by reading the works of the
old masters before migrating to New York - would-be authors today can receive a
master's degree in creative writing at schools around the country, then go on to
teaching careers themselves. They need not seek out a Master as did Roth's young
Zuckerman; instead, they may become disciples of older, established writers
within academia - as did Stephen Goodwin, who studied with Peter Taylor at the
University of Virginia.

''It was an old-fashioned notion that you would do pretty much what the Master
did,'' says the author of ''Kin'' and ''The Blood of Paradise,'' recalling how
similar his early stories were to his mentor's. ''You couldn't help but want to
be like him, and later, it was a little hard to get out from under his shadow.''
After leaving U.Va., Mr. Goodwin began teaching at a local college in Virginia,
set up housekeeping in a small backwoods cabin -much in the way that his hero
did in ''The Blood of Paradise'' - and began to work on developing his own
voice. By teaching and writing an occasional article for The Washington Post or
Country Journal, he has been able to live ''a pleasantly marginal existence''
while working on his novels.

By furnishing a hermetic environment of study and colleagues who can supply
advice and recommendations, writing programs free the young writer from the
responsibility of having to invent his own career as so many authors did in the
past. Instead of taking a menial job, the aspiring novelist can now survive
comfortably in academia with a little help from grant programs and lecture
circuits. It is precisely this aspect of the new apprenticeship, though, that
disturbs many older writers and editors. Such developments, they argue, create
an insulated world devoid of authentic experience and offer false encouragement
to would-be authors of mediocre talents, fostering what the novelist Reynolds
Price calls ''a subculture of semi-failed writers who take in one another's
laundry. It gives them a sense they're writers before they've ever written
anything serious. The old-fashioned thought is that you'd better go off and sit
in your room and write - not postpone it by sitting in class with other
writers.''

But whatever their other effects, writing programs have no doubt contributed to
the high degree of technical facility achieved by this new generation of
authors. In virtually all their books, there exists an emphasis on precision, a
respect for control. It is her fine sense of language and her eye for social
detail that helps Mary Gordon to maintain that delicate balance of intellect and
emotion in ''Final Payments,'' just as it is her economical, almost grudging use
of words in ''Uncle'' that enables Julia Markus to give the shape and resonance
of a man's entire life in all of 170 pages. And in ''The Blood of Paradise,''
Mr. Goodwin transforms an otherwise conventional story about a young man and his
family through the calculated economy of his prose.

While their voices and their subject matter remain as disparate as the
circumstances of their lives, it is evident that these new writers share both an
appreciation and working knowledge of craft.  ''I think this generation of
novelists is technically far superior to the generation before it,'' says John
Gardner, the prolific author of ''On Moral Fiction'' and such novels as
''October Light'' and ''Freddy's Book.'' ''Never before in history have we seen
so many people who are so good at what they do. The question that remains is
whether that technique is accompanied by a vision - a vision that will endure.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon photos of Ann Beattie, Tim O'Brien, Mary Gordon,
Ron Hansen and Scott Spencer

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS;
FICTION

SECTION: Section 7; Page 48, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words


1 1 14 THE BOURNE IDENTITY, by Robert Ludlum. (Richard Marek, $12.95.) The
melodramatic adventures of an amnesiac trying to find out who he really is.
2 2 19 PRINCESS DAISY, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $12.95.) The fight for survival
in the world of glitter, from the Czar's St. Petersburg to Manhattan's SoHo.
3 4 5 RANDOM WINDS, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $11.95.) Three generations of
doctors and their families.
4 3 7 NO LOVE LOST, by Helen Van Slyke. (Lippincott, $10.95.) Three New York
society women learn to cope with marriage and men.
5 5 19 THE DEVIL'S ALTERNATIVE, by Frederick Forsyth. (Viking, $12.95.)
Countdown to global doom in 1982.
6 6 8 KANE & ABEL, by Jeffrey Archer. (Simon & Schuster, $13.95.) Battles in a
corporation boardroom between new money and old.
7 8 5 THE NINJA, by Eric Van Lustbader. (M. Evans, $12.95.) The erotic side of
the Japanese samurai tradition.
8 9 11 THE BLEEDING HEART, by Marilyn French. (Summit Books, $12.95.) An
American feminist's romance in England.
9 10 3 INNOCENT BLOOD, by P.D. James. (Scribner's, $10.95.) A veteran whodunit
writer now investigates the mysteries of family life.
10 7 23 PORTRAITS, by Cynthia Freeman. (Arbor House, $11.95.) A New York Lower
East Side family makes it to San Francisco Bay in four generations.
11 13 12 WHO'S ON FIRST, by William F. Buckley Jr. (Doubleday, $9.95.) Blackford
Oakes plays his part in the race with the Russians to get a satellite into
orbit.
12 12 25 SMILEY'S PEOPLE, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $10.95.) The great British
spy has a final confrontation with his Russian counterpart.
13 11 10 CREEK MARY'S BLOOD, by Dee Brown. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $12.95.)
Four generations of American Indian family life on the Great Plains.
14 14 3 WHIP HAND, by Dick Francis. (Harper & Row, $9.95.) Dirty doings at the
race track.
15 15 7 BACK BAY, by William Martin. (Crown, $12.95.) Through 200 years of
Boston's history with the Pratt family and a priceless tea set.

NONFICTION
1 1 5 THY NEIGHBOR'S WIFE, by Gay Talese. (Doubleday, $14.95.) How American
sexuality has changed in our time.
2 3 18 FREE TO CHOOSE, by Milton & Rose Friedman. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$9.95.) The Nobel laureate economist and his wife discuss the relationship of
government and the economy: tie-in to the current PBS television series.
3 7 6 MEN IN LOVE, by Nancy Friday. (Delacorte, $12.95.) Men's fantasies about
women and sex.
4 8 5 WILL, by G. Gordon Liddy. (St. Martin's, $13.95.) A Watergate principal
tells his story.
5 6 10 THE THIRD WAVE, by Alvin Toffler. (Morrow, $14.95.) The changes our
society is about to undergo: a pop prognosticator's analysis.
6 2 17 DONAHUE, by Phil Donahue. (Simon & Schuster, $11.95.) The host of the
popular television talk show tells his life story.
7 5 7 JIM FIXX'S SECOND BOOK OF RUNNING, by James F. Fixx.  (Random House, $10.)
More advice for both beginners and marathoners.
8 10 24 THE BRETHREN, by Bob Woodward and Scott Armstrong.  (Simon & Schuster,
$13.95.) Inside the Supreme Court.
9 4 35 AUNT ERMA'S COPE BOOK, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill, $8.95.) How to get
from Monday to Friday ... in 12 days.
10 11 2 HEARTSOUNDS, by Martha Weinman Lear. (Simon & Schuster, $12.95.) Life
with a dying husband.
11 9 3 WAR WITHIN AND WITHOUT, by Anne Morrow Lindbergh.  (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich/Helen & Kurt Wolff, $14.95.) Life in the family of Charles Lindbergh,
1939-44.
12 13 2 THE REAL WAR, by Richard Nixon. (Warner Books, $12.50.) A grim view of
the situation of the United States and the world.
13 12 29 ANATOMY OF AN ILLNESS, by Norman Cousins. (Norton, $9.95.) A patient's
account of his successful fight against a serious disease.
14 10 THE BOOK OF LISTS 2, by Irving Wallace, David Wallechinsky, Amy Wallace
and Sylvia Wallace. (Morrow, $12.95.) More facts that entertain.
15 14 7 NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $9.95.) How to buy
real estate with little or no money down.
The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 1,600
bookstores in every region of the

United States.

FOOTNOTES
As the Best Seller List is little changed this week, it seems worthwhile to scan
the horizon for ''comers'' that may make it in the near future. Among the
fiction is ''The Spike,'' a story about a young journalist who, in an effort to
prove his suspicion that the media have made the public insensitive to the
Soviet Union's plans for global supremacy, ferrets out the facts in Vietnam,
Hamburg, Rome, Moscow and even the White House. The authors are both
knowledgeable journalists: Arnaud de Borchgrave of Newsweek and Robert Moss of
The Economist (London). The two promising works of nonfiction are both
autobiographies, but the tales they tell are quite unlike. Susan Strasberg,
daughter of Lee Strasberg, head of The Actors Studio, shows in her gossipy
memoir ''Bittersweet'' that life can be very difficult for children in
star-studded families. Lillian Hellman's ''Maybe'' is one of this week's
Editors' Choices.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WILTON: GENERATION WITHOUT HEROES;
WILTON

BYLINE: By ANDREE BROOKS

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 12, Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1250 words


BORN the year President John F. Kennedy was assassinated, they entered the first
grade at the height of the demonstrations against the Vietnam war; junior high
school when the oil crisis broke and high school during the surge of patriotism
that accompanied the Bicentennial.  Today they don cap and gown to become the
first high school graduating class of the 1980's.

What are they planning for the future? What are their career preferences? How do
they feel about their country? About politics?  About the climate of changing
moral values? And what do they see as the legacy of their school careers?

To seek the answers, we met with representatives of the senior class and junior
class members at Wilton High School. While they may not typify the views of all
of their age group, they afford a glimpse into the minds of 1980's graduates.

It seemed to be a troubled group that came together around the table that day; a
group that would characterize their peers and their elders as lacking in any
deep commitment to anything.

They felt humiliated, they said, at what they saw as the country's loss of face
over the Iranian hostage crisis. They decried the caliber of the current
political leadership. They felt betrayed at having passed through school at a
time of experimentation in education, which they insisted had left many of them
lacking in basic skills.

James Taylor, president of the senior class, said: ''I expect to have a 9-to-5
job, carry a briefcase, have two children and two cars in the garage. I know it
sounds boring, but what alternative is there for us? We are a generation without
heroes or causes.''

Andrew Darnell, chairman of the Student Relations Board, said: ''The
administration hears our input and then they seem to do their own thing anyway.
If we don't even seem to have a real voice here, how can we possibly do anything
on the outside?''

Many said they were disheartened because the adult world was apparently doing
little more than paying lip service to solving problems that would deeply affect
the lives of future generations - for instance, dwindling natural resources
coupled with a population explosion.

They said that their apparent turning inward to concentrate on their own futures
and their own pleasures was not solely that they were children of the ''me
generation,'' but that it was the result of a wider disillusion.

But to emulate the student protests of a decade ago and take to the streets in
protest was also not their style. They said the chaos that caused was alien to
their taste. They were not even sure concrete results had emerged.

So they were putting the emphasis on their own lives. Instead of the idealistic
pursuits that characterized so many of the previous generation, almost all said
they were headed toward business, with its opportunity for well-paid jobs.

Ellen Schacht, vice president of the National Honor Society, said: ''The
corporations are constantly calling the kids these days and telling them what
they are doing and what they can offer. It makes a big difference. I really
wanted to go into psychology, but I knew there were too many psychologists out
there in private practice. So I changed to industrial relations because I felt
that way I could get into a corporation.''

Jim Taylor said: ''I got interested in the way money works when I took an
accounting course. Demand was also a big factor in my decision. I knew I could
always get a job with a corporation as an accountant. And the salaries are
good.''

Katie O'Brien, a representative from the junior class, said: ''I think we would
also like to do something that would maintain the standard of living we have at
the moment, if not increase it,''

Thus they do not see any radical changes in their own lives, compared to those
of their parents. ''I'll probably be a lawyer battling for money so I can build
the good life, because at least I'll want to stay where I am,'' said Mr.
Darnell.

Trying to define more clearly what made them feel this way, Tom Keenan, editor
of the school newspaper, said: ''Before, it was always that you could live for a
better future for your kids. I don't think that is true anymore. The world's in
a mess. There's an energy crisis. A population explosion. And nobody seems to
care. And if they do care, nothing is ever done. It makes us feel that nothing
can be done.''

Mr. Darnell said: ''That's why I think we all feel an innate hopelessness about
everything. Nobody takes education seriously.  There is no respect for
authority. Look at our leaders - they seem helpless to do anything about any of
the world's problems. ''

''I see our country losing status, and it's embarrassing,'' said Miss Schacht.
''So when we see that even our leaders aren't deeply committed to anything, what
does that say to us?''

And Mr. Keenan replied: ''That perhaps since nobody is making a commitment, why
should we?'' The students felt that such an attitude was also true of marriage.
Citing the increasing rate of divorce among their parents' generation, they said
this would make them very cautious about marrying, that they would probably
marry at a later age than their predecessors.

''Even though we see so much divorce, that doesn't mean we won't marry,'' said
Tracy Gates, another junior-class representative.  ''Maybe we will just wait a
little longer.''

They found that the lack of a sense of commitment showed up also in the lack of
school spirit. ''It's dying,'' Miss Schacht said. ''Kids aren't interested. It's
hard to get a crowd out even for a pep rally.''

Mr. Darnell said: ''You can see it in the vandalism, in the trash.  People throw
trash everywhere. Nobody cares.'' He suggested that the lack of school spirit
was partly the result of a sense of betrayal.

''I remember when I was in grade school,'' he said, ''the emphasis was on open
classrooms and teaching yourself. Nobody would explain anything, there was no
drill. It was all up to you. They must have been all wrong because now I feel I
can't write. I can't express myself on paper on an intellectual level.''

Such a state of malaise, they concluded, had to be a major cause of the
increased use of alcohol among high school students. Beer parties are far more
frequent now, they said, and drinking is heavier and starts at an earlier age.
''If you can't depend upon anything or anybody. maybe that's why we're all
drinking ourselves to death,'' said Mr. Darnell.

But such expressions of hopelessness did not seem to extend to the senior prom.
In a rare outpouring of enthusiasm, the students indicated that the prom was an
event nobody wanted to miss.

Whether it represented something they would always remember, or whether it was a
nostalgic step back into what they perceived as a more ordered and dignified
past, everyone wanted to attend the prom as something very special.

The girls, they said, would wear formal dresses and the boys would rent tuxedos.
The boys would even insist upon paying for the girls that they escorted. And
gifts of a corsage would be a must.

At least these members of a disenchanted generation can still manage to have a
good time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Wilton High School students

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AGENT ORANGE OFFICE IS OPENED

BYLINE: By TESSA MELVIN

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 13, Column 1; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 567 words


WESTCHESTER County last week opened an office for Vietnam veterans who were
exposed to the herbicide known as Agent Orange and who are now concerned about
health problems that some have linked to the chemical defoliant.

''The office is being established,'' said County Executive Alfred B. DelBello,
''in response to the growing number of Vietnam veterans in the county expressing
concern over health problems possibly attributable to the herbicide while
serving in Vietnam.'' Mr.  DelBello said he thought the office was the first in
the country to be opened by a local government.

The county office will provide a way to bring together all the concerns about
Agent Orange, Mr. DelBello said, but he added, ''We don't know that Agent Orange
is the scientific cause of our Vietnam veterans' health problems.''

By creating the office, which will be opened initially for two months to
determine whether there is sufficient need for the service, Mr. DelBello said
that he wanted ''to get enough attention to get this matter resolved at the
Federal level.''

The herbicide 2,3,5-T, one of two components of Agent Orange, produces during
the manufacturing process the byproduct dioxin, a cancer-causing chemical. Last
year, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency issued a partial ban on
2,3,5-T, which has been used domestically in small concentrations as an
agricultural defoliant. Between 1962 and 1970, United States planes sprayed 12
million gallons over 5 million acres of the Vietnamese jungle.

When the South Vietnamese press began publishing accounts of birth defects and
still births, which they contended resulted from Agent Orange, the United States
military stopped its use.

Returning Vietnam veterans have filed numerous claims for illnesses related to
the defoliant, but the Federal Government and the chemical companies producing
Agent Orange have maintained that the herbicide affects only vegetation.

Efforts to get Federal agencies to assume responsibility for studying the
effects of Agent Orange have not been successful, although legislation is
pending in Congress and several states have formed commissions to study the
issue.

Meanwhile, veterans organizations nationwide and in Australia have sought to
focus attention on Agent Orange, and a class-action suit on Long Island has been
organized against five major producers of the chemical.

Morgan Strong, a history teacher at Mercy College who lives in Peekskill, is a
Vietnam veteran and a leader of Agent Orange Victims International, which has an
estimated 17,000 members. For several years, Mr. Strong has had a painful skin
rash covering his legs and feet, which one doctor diagnosed as ''a residual
effect of a gunshot wound.'' A dermatologist he contacted, however, has agreed
to testify that the rash is caused by Mr. Strong's exposure to Agent Orange.

Mr. Strong has agreed to be a volunteer on the county's Agent Orange desk.  The
office will provide information, and counseling and will assist veterans in
filing claims with the Veterans Administration. The county office will be open
three days a week, Monday, Wednesday and Friday from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. For
information, call 682-2349.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 542 words


WORLD NEWS BRIEFS;
213 Vietnamese Refugees Reach Hong Kong

HONG KONG, June 8 (UPI) - Two cramped, ill-equipped boats carried about 213
refugees into Hong Kong today, the largest group of Vietnamese refugees to
arrive in Hong Kong this year.

Vietnam, bowing to international pressure, halted the flood of refugees in
August. But the arrival of new refugees today followed a warning by Hanoi in
late May that many more refugees would be allowed to leave Vietnam.

One of the two boats contained 173 refugees who said they left central Vietnam
May 12.  The refugees did not indicate if they were forced to buy their way out
of Vietnam; they said regular exit permits were being issued.

Explosion in Ulster Injures Bomb Expert

DUNGANNON, Northern Ireland, June 8 (AP) - A bomb exploded and badly wounded a
British Army bomb expert who was trying to defuse the device here today,
military spokesmen reported.

In Londonderry, a car bomb exploded and damaged a studio of the British
Broadcasting Corporation, telephone headquarters, two banks and a score of shops
and offices, the police said. There were no reports of injuries.

Bomb experts made two unsuccessful attempts to detonate devices in Londonderry.
The injured man in Dungannon was not identified.  The army said the bombs were
planted by the provisionals of the Irish Republican Army.

Pakistani Going to Europe For Talks on Afghanistan

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, June 8 (Reuters) - Pakistan's Foreign Minister, Agha Shahi,
left Islamabad today for four days of talks on Afghanistan with Rumania and West
Germany.

Rumania is considered a possible neutral site for talks between the Kabul
Government and the Islamic foreign ministers' committee of which Agha Shahi is a
member. Earlier this year, Rumania offered to act as intermediary between the
Islamic countries, particularly Pakistan, and the Soviet Union to help ease
tension in the central Asian region as a result of Moscow's military
intervention in Afghanistan.

----

NEW DELHI, June 8 (AP) - The Government of Afghanistan has tried and executed 10
supporters and aides of the late President Hafizullah Amin and one well-known
Afghan guerrilla leader, Kabul Radio announced today.

The aides included Abdullah Amin, brother of the slain President, who had been
in charge of four northern provinces before the Soviet intervention, and that
brother's son, Assadullah Amin, who had been Deputy Foreign Minister, chief of
the secret police and head of the ruling Khalq Party in Kabul. The radio also
reported the execution of Abdul Majid Kalakhani, whom Afghan exile sources said
was a guerrilla leader.

Lebanese Leader Forming New Coalition Government

BEIRUT, Lebanon, June 8 (Reuters) -President Elias Sarkis of Lebanon will open
talks tomorrow on the formation of a government of national unity following the
resignation of Prime Minister Selim al-Hoss, but the negotiations could take
several weeks.

Mr. Hoss handed in his Cabinet's resignation yesterday, but left it up to the
head of state when to accept the resignation.  Official sources said the
President would start contacts tomorrow with the country's different parties.
Mr. Hoss became Prime Minister soon after the end of Lebanon's 1975-76 civil
war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ON EXPORTING MORALITY;
BY ALEXANDER PERRY JR.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 878 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The United States no longer can afford the pretension of ''exporting morality''
through aid and trade restrictions. We have so lost our competitiveness on the
world market that we are faced with the simple choice of trade or fade.

In the fervor of the post-Vietnam period, United States business has been
saddled with a crippling variety of trade restrictions designed to enforce the
observance of human rights, curb extortion and bribery abroad, protect the
environment and effect a host of other single-issue social objectives. The
punitive restrictions are applied to bilateral aid, the multinational agencies,
investment guarantees, and credits vital for United States exports.

It is impossible to calculate accurately the annual loss of exports and jobs
because of the use of trade as a big stick. One estimate in 1978, however,
suggested that as much as $5 billion worth of business was stalled by the
bureaucratic machinery of the institutionalized post-Vietnam morality. This
figure doesn't reflect the trade lost by United States businessmen who decided
not to run the gauntlet.

With respect to exports lost to human rights restrictions, the most celebrated
case occurred two years ago when the Export-Import Bank, because of alleged
human rights violations, could not approve a letter of interest to the
Allis-Chalmers Company for the sale of $276 million worth of turbines to
Argentina. One day after the announcement, Allis-Chalmers was notified that the
Government export banks of Japan and Britain would provide comparable financing
for their suppliers. At the time, it should be observed, the State Department
estimated that $1.25 billion in exports were being withheld because of the human
rights situation there.

A less-publicized case involved the Itaipu hydroelectric project between Brazil
and Paraguay. Westinghouse and General Electric lost out on the sale of $700
million worth of turbines because Washington attempted to impose its viewpoint
on human rights and Brazil's nuclear energy program. A recent General Accounting
Office report noted that ''Eximbank financing is intended to help facilitate
U.S.  exports but legislation also makes Eximbank financing a foreign policy
instrument.'' In its survey of United States firms it found that eligibility
restrictions on official funding ''are significant deterrents to United States
exports.''

Regarding exports lost due to the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, a
United States Government inter-agency working group on export disincentives, in
a draft report prepared last fall, estimated a minimum loss of $1 billion.

As a businessman with 36 years of experience in Latin America, which now buys
two-fifths of all United States exports to the developing world, I can attest
that we have had precious little success trying to impose our standards on
sovereign nations. The trade weapon is counterproductive.

We are now reassessing our foreign policy on a number of counts.  Let's take a
hard look at the trade picture.  In the last decade, the United States imported
approximately $82 billion more in merchandise than it exported. We cannot blame
oil imports alone. Oil-poor West Germany and Japan manage acceptable trade
balances.

The United States' share of world exports has shrunk from 21 percent in 1957 to
12 percent in 1979 - and the decline continues. In this period, West Germany,
whose population is a third of the United States', became the world's leader of
total exports in 1978. Now Japan threatens to surpass us.

We must reverse this dangerous decline in Latin America where we have always
enjoyed a positive balance of merchandise trade.  The Latin American gross
national product is $430 billion annually and is growing impressively. Mexico,
for example, may become our most important individual trading partner. American
republics share historic trade patterns, social values and business practices.

We businessmen want to compete on an equal basis with other world exporters. We
believe, therefore, that the Administration and Congress should take the
following steps:

* Remove the post-Vietnam restrictions on the operations of the Export-Import
Bank, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, and the international lending
institutions;

* Intensify its efforts to assist United States exporters, especially small and
medium-sized, in developing markets in Latin America;

* Make sense out of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act - the poorly-drafted
legislation has the restrictive influence of an Act whose applicability is
capricious;

* Update the archaic antitrust laws that prevent United States businessmen from
participating in the same kind of joint ventures and consortiums that all major
competitors employ.

Finally, we businessmen reject and resent any implication that we don't share
common sense concerns about human rights, the environment, bribery and the rest.

But as international businessmen, we do know the sharp limits to imposing
ethnocentric political fashions on other peoples through the medium of commerce.

Trade is a crucial source of capital and domestic employment.  Either we compete
abroad or pay the price at home.
Alexander Perry Jr. is president of the Association of American Chambers of
Commerce in Latin America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME THE KISINGER SECRETS;
BY ANTHONY

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 865 words

DATELINE: LEWIS BOSTON, June 8


In the foreword to ''White House Years'' Henry Kissinger wrote: ''Treatment of
classified materials in this book has been worked out with the office of the
national security adviser, Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, to whom I express my
appreciation.'' The acknowledgment seemed routine. It was not.

The passage caught the eye of a publisher, Robert L. Bernstein, president of
Random House. He wrote Brzezinski and asked ''how the clearing of the Kissinger
book was actually accomplished.'' The Staff Secretary of the National Security
Council, Christine Dodson, replied:

''Prior to the publication of his book Dr. Kissinger forwarded to Dr.
Brzezinski's office a very small part of the manuscript then prepared, in the
form of disconnected brief excerpts. These excerpts were reviewed for possible
classification problems; they were edited to indicate what we would require to
clear the publication of those excerpts.

''The edited manuscript was returned and further oral comments were made to a
member of Dr. Kissinger's staff to the effect that after the required changes,
we were clearing what we saw and that N.S.C. clearance of the book would have to
await a review of the total manuscript.

''Dr. Kissinger never submitted any further materials for review.  It is our
judgment, therefore, that the passage you quote from the book's foreword vastly
overstates, at least by implication, the degree of classification review to
which the book was subjected by Dr. Brzezinski's office.''

Government employees do not usually use language as colorful as ''vastly
overstates'' in official correspondence. Evidently the National Security Council
staff, and perhaps Brzezinski, felt that they had been used. They resented
Kissinger's bland little effort to deceive the public into believing that his
use of classified material in the book had their official approval.

The interesting point in the episode is what it shows about the disparate
treatment of former Government officials who write books about their experience.
Robert Bernstein was curious about the handling of classified material in the
Kissinger book because of what had happened to one of his authors, Frank Snepp.
The contrast was staggering.

Kissinger, who had been privy to the highest secrets in the American system,
made wholesale use of classified documents in his book. Some experts say that it
discloses more current or recent national security material than any ever
published.

As Miss Dodson's letter indicates, the Government was given a chance to make
only a partial judgment on small portions of the manuscript. What was used was
largely Kissinger's unilateral decision. Yet he has not been denounced by any
official for allegedly compromising national security. He has not been sued. No
court has lectured him. And he is expected to make more than $5 million on the
book.

Frank Snepp was a line C.I.A. officer in Vietnam. Afterward he wrote a book,
''Decent Interval,'' criticizing American policy at the end of the war. Because
he did not show the manuscript to the agency, as he had promised to do, the
Government sued him for damages. It did not allege that he had disclosed any
classified information at all. But it said the precedent of publishing without
approval was dangerous.

The Supreme Court found that Snepp had violated a ''fiduciary obligation'' to
show officials his manuscript - an obligation arising not from his promise but
from the secret nature of his work. Without giving Snepp's lawyers a chance to
argue the point, the Court summarily decided that the Government was entitled to
take all of Snepp's earnings on the book, about $140,000.

If the law declared by the Supreme Court in the Snepp case applies to anyone
else, it surely must apply to Henry Kissinger. Hardly anyone had greater access
to secrets and hence had a greater ''fiduciary obligation'' to show the
Government his manuscript - all of the manuscript - before publication.

Here is a chance for the Justice Department to collect upwards of $5 million.
Will it sue Kissinger? I think we shall wait a long time until either the
Department or the Supreme Court Justices treat Henry Kissinger as they do the
powerless Frank Snepps of this world.

There is also an important historical point about the treatment of classified
material in ''White House Years,'' a point made by Theodore Draper when he
reviewed the book for the quarterly Dissent.  On inquiry at the State
Department, Draper found that Kissinger's quotations from secret documents had
been declassified - but only those quotations, not the entire documents. Thus no
one else could see the context of these passages to judge whether Kissinger had
dealt with the material fairly.

''This system is a political and intellectual outrage,'' Draper wrote. ''It
enables political figures to control the history of their own deeds or misdeeds.
No partial quotation can be properly understood without its context...

''What is declassified for one should be declassified for all.  Whether or not
the present declassification system is good or bad is not here the question; the
real issue is whether Government officials should be permitted to make a mockery
of it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 10, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MCNAMARA PLANNING TO STEP DOWN AS WORLD BANK PRESIDENT IN A YEAR

BYLINE: By EDWARD COWAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 916 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 9


Robert S. McNamara, the former Secretary of Defense, announced today that he
would retire a year from now as president of the World Bank, the international
agency that makes economic development loans to poor countries.

A statement by Mr. McNamara, issued on his 64th birthday, raised the possibility
that his successor might not be an Ameri-
In his years at the World Bank, Mr. McNamara enlarged its scope a nd fostered
significant changes in its development strategy. Page D 1.
can. That would end the tradition, going back to the creation of the bank in
1946 by the victorious Allies, that it be headed by an American chosen by the
White House.

Mr. McNamara, in a statement he read to the bank's executive directors this
morning, said he wished to retire on June 30, 1981, when he would be 65, even
though his present five-year term, his third, would not expire until April 1,
1983. ''Timely change in leadership is salutary both for institutions and for
individuals,'' he said.

There was no immediate reaction from the Carter Administration. Mr. McNamara
paid a call on Treasury Secretary G. Wiliam Miller last Thursday and presumably
told Mr. Miller that he would recommend that the bank's directors create a
search committee to select a new president.

Mr. McNamara made that recommendation in the statement he read to the bank's
executive directors this morning. A companion news release by the bank that
reviewed the McNamara years, 1968-80, elaborated on what was evidently Mr.
McNamara's view.

The bank's 135 member countries, it said, must ''insure that the bank's next
president - be he American or not - be qualified to exercise strong and
impartial leadership.'' The tradition that the bank - formally known as the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development - is headed by an American
derives from the fact that the United States has been its largest single
shareholder, with 22 percent, more than twice the next largest position. It also
was part of an understanding that the bank's sister institution, the
International Monetary Fund, which is responsible for currency-support loans,
would be headed by a European.

One United States official with some knowledge of the situaton speculated that
the Administration would not agree to the selection of a non-American. This
official said he believed Mr. McNamara's suggestion for a search committee was
the result of ''his being sensitive to this being a member-owned institution.''

Mr. McNamara, one of the leaders of the New Frontier Cabinet of President
Kennedy, left the presidency of the Ford Motor Company for public service and,
according to his friends, never regretted it.  After the assassination of Mr.
Kennedy in 1963, Mr. McNamara stayed on at the Pentagon under President Johnson
and was one of the optimistic architects of full-scale American involvement in
the war in Vietnam.

Early in 1968, he resigned as Secretary to move to the bank, a move that
Washington generally read as signifying a change of heart about the war and a
deepening rift between Mr. McNamara and Mr. Johnson.

Took Over Bank April 1, 1968

Mr. McNamara assumed the presidency of the bank on April 1, 1968, one day after
President Johnson's announcement that he would not run for re-election.

Mr. McNamara was described by an old friend as having no particular plans for
post-bank activities, just a general inclination to combine public service with
perhaps some private activities. He is said to have repeatedly disavowed any
thought of writing an insider's account of the Vietnam War. ''He regards that as
a matter for the historians,'' the friend said. ''He believes someone who was
involved could not be objective.''

At the start of his 65th year, Mr. McNamara gives every indication of being in
characteristically robust good health. He climbed Mt.  Everest in Nepal last
month to the 18,000-foot level, he reported on his return, and hiked 140 miles
on Everest and in the foothills. He still plays tennis and he continues to walk
up the stairs to his 12th floor office every morning.

Secretary Miller issued a statement expressing ''great personal disappointment''
that Mr. McNamara was leaving but saying nothing about whether the Carter
Administration felt that another American should succeed him.

''The world's developing nations and especially the poorest of their citizens
will sorely miss his compassionate concern,'' Mr.  Miller said.

Previous presidents of the bank and their periods of service were Eugene Meyer,
for several months in 1946; John H. McCloy, 1947-49; Eugene Black, 1949-62, and
George D. Woods, 1963-68.

While Americans emphasized that the United States remained the largest single
subscriber to the bank's capital, Europeans pointed to the shrinking American
fraction of the funds of the International Development Association, the bank's
easy-credit affiliate. That share has declined from 43 percent in 1960 to 27
percent now, a bank spokesman reported.

Some associates said Mr. McNamara was not asserting that it was time for a
non-American to head the bank but only that the institution had become much
larger in the 12 years since he joined it and that it was no longer appropriate
to assume that an American must head it.

The bank's retrospective statement on the McNamara years noted that the bank's
annual commitments had grown to $11.5 billion this year from $1 billion in 1968.
The bank now supervises more than 1,600 projects, in 100 countries, worth some
$100 billion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert McNamara (pD7)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 10, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTH KOREA REBELS BIDE TIME IN HIDING:NOW DISPERSED AND SHORT OF

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 739 words


CASH, THEY ARE FEAARFUL BYR MAKING WARY EFFORTS TO REGROUP

By HENRY SCOTT STOKES

SEOUL, South Korea, June 7 - The student said he was 28 years old, but he looked
barely 16 with a bell of black hair hanging over his ears and eyes, his white
neck, shy expression and soft complexion. He wore a suit to make himself ''look
like an office worker.''

He is one of thousands of student leaders, many of them active Christians, who
went into hiding after the army crackdown last month. He suspected that the
police had his name after he took part in demonstrations here in May, and he had
misgivings about venturing out into the streets to meet a reporter in case he
was asked to produce his identification card.

The student, who called himself ''Mr. Kim,'' estimated arrests of students at
600 in Seoul and 2,000 nationwide since the Government closed the campuses when
it declared full martial law on May 17, paving the way for seizure of power by
Lieut. Gen. Chon Too Hwan. The Government has released no figures on the
arrests.

Before the crackdown, students were well organized. Leaders at Seoul National
University said they could put 50,000 students on the streets within five hours
and the assertion may not have been far short of reality. The Government has
said that 350,000 students demonstrated throughout the nation.

No Contact With Parents

Now the student leaders are dispersed in poor lodgings and are short of money
because many have cut off contact with their parents.  Mr. Kim said they have
been meeting in groups of three and are ready to stage another demonstration
against the military this week.

But it seemed uncertain whether the protest would take place. The students have
lost their safe domains, the many campuses now occupied by the military. And the
spring movement for ''campus autonomy,'' when students demonstrated without
interference on campus for over a month with increasingly political demands, now
seems like a bygone age.

The Kwangju uprising of last month, in which citizens and organizers in the
capital of South Cholla Province put the death toll at over 250, is the main
point of reference in student debates on future strategy against the military,
to judge by the words of Mr. Kim.

''It was totally unexpected,'' he said of the Government's response to peaceful
demonstrations in Kwangju against martial law, ''but it showed the determination
of the military to seize power at any cost, much earlier than we expected,
though we took this to be their aim all along. They revealed their true
character.''

Accounts of Brutality

Most of the dead in Kwangju were civilians, many of whom were shot by soldiers
or savagely beaten. Eyewitness accounts of such brutality were too numerous to
leave doubt; the brutality turned a protest against martial law into a
student-led revolt conducted with army and police weapons taken in the riots.
The rebels took over the city for six days.

The students drew the conclusion that their established tactic of nonviolent
marches was no longer valid. Asked what the alternative would be, Mr. Kim
answered: ''Armed uprising.''

''Kwangju came as a tremendous shock to students,'' said an American teacher
living here. ''They suddenly realized how much power they had with weapons.''
She said that after years of refusing to pay the regime back in its own currency
of armed violence, the students learned that was the only way to deal with
General Chon.

Seoul, a city with soldiers at City Hall and armored personnel carriers in front
of Government offices and political party headquarters, is a place where
students talk of armed revolt.

'Another Vietnam' Feared

The Government has similar thoughts. ''Confrontations between students and
police would result in many casualties,'' said a recent official report, ''and
in the worst case igniting another Vietnam.  Who would presume to say this could
not happen?''

The premonition of a crumbling of South Korean society is everywhere.
Long-established American missionaries warn of the growing, if still latent,
anti-American feeling that accompanies the fears of revolution. ''One of my
friends remarked the other day,'' said a pastor who has been in South Korea more
than 20 years, ''that it was time to start shooting tourists if the United
States Government paid so little attention to Korean demands for democracy.  I
have never seen anti-American feeling at such a pitch.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 10, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 639 words


AROUND THE NATION;
Murderer Seeks to End Appeals to Stay Execution

ATLANTA, June 9 (Reuters) - Jack Howard Potts, a condemned murderer who evaded
execution last week by filing an appeal just 13 hours before he was to die,
changed his mind today and said he wanted to go to the electric chair.

''I beg of you to please let me withdraw this appeal as quickly as possible,''
Mr. Potts said in a letter to Federal District Judge William O'Kelley. ''Let me
get a date set immediately and most of all let me die while in a state of
grace,'' said Mr. Potts, who converted to Roman Catholicism while on death row.

In a letter witnessed by his mother and addressed to Judge O'Kelley, he said he
had appealed the sentence for the sake of his older brother.

''At the time I asked for the new appeal I was with my brother,'' he wrote.
''The only reason I asked for the appeal was to satisfy my brother who I love
very much. Judge, I had no idea the stay would be granted.''

Judge O'Kelley scheduled a hearing on the request for tomorrow morning and
ordered the 35-year-old Mr. Potts, who is in the state prison at Reidsville in
south Georgia, to appear in Atlanta to explain his decision.

Mr. Potts was given two death sentences for the 1975 kidnapping and murder of a
24-year-old father of two.

Marine's Lawyer Wants General Put on the Stand

CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., June 9 (AP) - Lawyers for Marine Pfc. Robert Garwood asked
today that the commander of Camp Lejeune be put on the stand to explain why he
ordered the former jeep driver courtmartialed on charges of desertion and
collaboration with the North Vietnamese.

That motion was part of a barrage of legal motions filed by defense lawyers as
Private Garwood's case resumed with a pretrial hearing before a military judge.

Col. R.E. Switzer made no immediate ruling on the request that the camp
commander, Brig. Gen. David B. Barker, testify at the hearing.  He adjourned the
hearing until tomorrow.

Defense lawyers said that General Barker had not been told, among other things,
that Private Garwood had only 10 days left of his tour in Vietnam when he
allegedly deserted.

Military prosecutors objected to the commander being called to testify, saying
the record spoke for itself.

Jaycees Leader Withdraws From National Contest

MOUNT OLIVE, N.C., June 9 (AP) -J. Harold Herring, a former state Jaycees leader
whose administration was marked by charges of bogus chapters and misused funds,
withdrew today as a candidate for president of the national organization. The
state Jaycees on Saturday withdrew their endorsement of Mr. Herring as national
president.

Mr. Herring has refused to be interviewed since the disclosure several weeks ago
that some of the diverted money had been raised by volunteers selling jars of
jam and jelly. The funds were supposed to go to a hospital.

He said he would continue to serve as a vice president of the national Jaycees
until the organization holds its convention in Cleveland on June 18.
National news appears on pages A10-11, A16, B14 and D19; political news on B12.

Richard Pryor Is Burned As a Lighter Explodes

LOS ANGELES, June 9 (UPI) - Richard Pryor, the comedian, was critically burned
tonight when a cigarette lighter exploded in his hand, a doctor who treated him
said.

''Mr. Pryor sustained a serious 50 percent total body surface burn over his
hands, chest and face,'' said Dr. Jack Grossman, who treated Mr. Pryor, 38 years
old, at Sherman Oaks Community Hospital shortly after 8 P.M. ''He is in critical
but stable condition.''

Dr. Grossman said a cigarette lighter exploded in Mr. Pryor's hand. Fire
Department paramedics reportedly picked Mr. Pryor up at Parthenia Street in the
Northridge area of the San Fernando Valley.  Mr. Pryor, engulfed in flames,
apparently ran into the street and collapsed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Pfc.Robert Garwood

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 10, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE MILITARY BUDGET;
by George McGovern

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1061 words

DATELINE: ,0WASHINGTON


The failure of the United States rescue mission in Iran highlighted shortcomings
in the country's military operational capabilities. Yet the recent
military-budget debate in the Congress has shed little light on the underlying
reasons why spending over $1 trillion on defense since the end of World War II
has left us with helicopters that break down, fighter aircraft grounded for lack
of spare parts, and experienced military technicians leaving for more rewarding
jobs in civilian industry.

The military-readiness problem is real. The commander of the Atlantic Fleet
Naval Air Force, Vice Admiral George Kinnear II, admits that 47 percent of his
first-line F-14 fighters are not certified to fly peacetime missions because
they are awaiting repairs.

In a recent visit to Ellsworth Air Force Base in South Dakota, one of the most
important Strategic Air Command bases in the country, I saw crumbling taxiways,
poor housing, obsolete service vehicles, and uninsulated hangers so cold in
winter that the mechanics must repair America's most advanced strategic weapons
with numbed hands.

There is a growing consensus that readiness problems exist not because we spend
too little on defense but because we don't spend the existing huge budget
wisely. Instead of stressing a lean and ready defense structure, the defense
budget overemphasizes procurement of highly complicated new weapon systems. For
example, in 1983, the Air Force will spend twice as much as it did in 1975 to
purchase new tactical aircraft, but the operating account for repairing the
planes in 1983 will be the same in inflation-adjusted dollars as it was in 1975.
Why haven't we spent enough to maintain our existing hardware or to retain
qualified military personnel? Is it because, as Gen.  David C. Jones, Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Senator John Culver have suggested, there is
no constituency for military readiness? These basic questions must be addressed
or else we will spend the $1 trillion budgeted for defense for the next five
years and end up where we are now.

The readiness dilemma is caused largely by the politicizing of the military
budget that has occurred since the end of the Vietnam War.  The military budget
has evolved into a barometer of our post-Vietnam intentions in the world. Higher
and higher military spending is proposed not to carry out specific missions or
to buy particular weapons but rather to send diplomatic signals to friends and
adversaries that we intend to remain an assertive global power: If 3 percent
real growth isn't sufficient to prove this point, then 5 percent must be!

Treating the military budget as a symbol of our foreign policy causes two
distortions.  First, it divorces spending decisions from realistic military
planning. Voting to buy another aircraft carrier or a World War II battleship is
a satisfying way to send a signal, but no new capability is added if there are
not enough spare parts and mechanics to keep it running. Conversely, the type of
spending that improves readiness in the short run - overhauls, training, spare
parts - is considered too ''mundane'' to exert any influence on foreign policy.
Who wants to ''send a signal to the Russians'' by buying more spare parts?
Budget symbolism thus ignores the axiom that more dollars do not automatically
buy more defense.

The second danger is that symbolic budgeting leads to inflated expectations of
the capacity of military force to shape decisions and influence conflicts in the
world. Once the military budget is viewed as the barometer of our world
standing, then every frustration we face - whether Iran, the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries, Afghanistan, allied solidarity - is erroneously
traced back to military causation. As a result, the military budget is expected
to deter not just a finite set of hostile military threats but also a broad
range of political and economic decisions by other countries as well.

Our political power in the world is changing and our frustrations are growing,
but not because of insufficient military power.  Political events have political
and economic causes as well as military ones. Many of the political upheavals
and tensions of our time stem from the breakup of colonialism and the emergence
of scores of new nations since World War II. These new nations are seeking their
own place in the world - not subordination to the superpowers.  Yet these forces
are ignored in the rush to buy new weapons to influence perceptions even as we
leave the old weapons sitting dead in their hangars.

By using the military budget as the primary instrument for sending diplomatic
signals, we end up with the worst of both worlds: an inoperable military force
and an unrealistic view of the ability of military power to deter political
events. Our readiness problems, therefore, are the logical outcome of the way we
have been approaching the budget.

I offer two recommendations to solve the readiness problem.  First and most
obviously, the readiness-budget accounts should be increased. Weapons
maintenance and military pay must receive a greater share of the defense assets
to extract the greatest potential from the existing force structure even if this
means foregoing the latest Star Wars gadgetry. The second change is most
difficult: We must discard our faulty conception of the military budget as a
barometer of intentions and return to a more finite concept of military
deterrence as the military's primary mission.  This requires foregoing the empty
symbolic debate on abstract budget increases and turning instead to utilizing
the military budget to strengthen actual military capabilities while we look to
a more realistic mix of military, diplomatic and economic policies to secure our
vital interests in the world.
George McGovern, Democrat of South Dakota, is a member of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee. He was his party's Presidential nominee in 1972.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon of two knights dueling

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 10, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ACADEMY'S REPORTS SPARK DEBATE OVER ITS OBJECTIVITY

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 4; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2407 words


WASHINGTON THE National Academy of Sciences, which serves as a kind of
semiofficial supreme court of science, has begun to search for a replacement for
its retiring president amid controversy over the integrity of its reports and
the style of its leadership.

Long-standing complaints from consumer and environmental interests that the
academy's reports are often biased toward the views of industry were renewed
recently following a report by its Food and Nutrition Board disputing widespread
opinion that cholesterol intake should be restricted. It was reported after the
study was published that it had been financed by contributions from the food
industry.  Influential members of the panel have ties to the food, dairy and egg
industries. They have asserted that such ties do not impair their objectivity.

The nutrition study and other recent controversial reports on such matters as
energy, radioactive-waste disposal and health technology have focused increased
attention on the academy, a private honorific body chartered by Congress 117
years ago to advise the Federal Government on scientific matters that often
influences legislation and public policy.

300 Reports Issued Annually

Residing in a staid stone building across the street from the State Department,
the academy, through its operating arm, the National Research Council, issues
about 300 reports a year. Most of them involve narrow technical matters and
appear to be accepted as objective and authoritative. However, as it ventures
increasingly into such politically sensitive issues as energy and environmental
hazards, it has found itself accused of subtly defending the status quo and
countenancing conflicts of interests on its panels.

''They do not reflect dispassionate analysis,'' said Henry Kandell, a physicist
who heads the Union of Concerned Scientists and charges the academy with pushing
for expansion of nuclear power.  ''There's a consistent pattern of having the
goat guard the cabbage patch.''

The academy, however, is not without its supporters. Dr. Frank Press, science
adviser to President Carter, asserted that ''The academy is a convenient
mechanism for getting a creditable review on issues with a major technical
component.'' He added that its president, Dr. Philip Handler, has ''transformed
the academy from a sleepy honorific body to one that performs a public
service.''

The academy receives 91 percent of its budget from the Federal Government, and
its reports are often cited by Congressmen in writing laws. But it operates amid
much secrecy. Staff members are instructed to tell outsiders, in the words of
its internal guidelines, nothing more than ''the type of information ... in such
publications as American Men and Women of Science and Who's Who in America.''

''This is a private body free to make its own rules - all that matters is what
advice we give,'' said Dr. Handler, the 62-year-old New York-born biochemist who
will be compelled under academy rules to retire next year after 12 years as
president.

Scientists who work for or consult for industry are not barred from panels and,
indeed, Dr. Handler says they are the only ones with adequate expertise in many
fields. And, although they must state their potential conflicts to the academy,
their disclosures are shielded from public scrutiny. Dr Handler said he is more
concerned about screening out people with an ''ideological fix'' than those with
monetary conflicts.

Any discussion of the academy inevitably turns to Dr. Handler. As president, he
reserves the right to approve all reports and on occasion has delayed
publication of some - as in the case of a recent one casting doubt on the value
of certain medical technology. In rare instances, he even has quashed them, as
with a recent document on radioactive-waste disposal. Some say he uses this
power to impose his opinions.

''It is perfectly clear Phil Handler is pro-nuclear,'' said Dr.  John P.
Holdren, a physicist at the University of California at Berkeley who
participated in a hotly disputed report on the future of energy. Dr. Handler
strongly rejects such suggestions, saying he intervenes only when reports are
scientifically unsound.

Academy's Operation Praised

There is, in fact, wide agreement that the academy operates better today than it
did a decade ago. Committee appointments usually represent a broader range of
views than before, reports are given more stringent review and there are more
public meetings.

Also, a number of panels widely regarded as too closely attached their
industries, such as the Drug Research Board and the Highway Research Board, have
been abolished.

''This is a great compliment to Handler,'' said George Kistiakowsky, the Harvard
University chemist and former vice president of the academy, who once parted
company with Dr. Handler because he felt the organization was being used to
whitewash the effects of American military defoliation in Vietnam.

It is difficult to gauge the academy's influence. Dr. Handler has said that he
controls or influences most major Government scientific appointments. Interviews
with Congressional and administration officials leave some doubt about that, but
the academy does command respect in Washington. And Congress often requires
Federal agencies to consult the academy on major issues.

Dr. Handler is regarded as an articulate spokesman for science and an effective
defender of dissident scientists in the Soviet Union.  But numerous interviews
with members of the academy's 1,100-strong staff, almost none of whom would
agree to talk without assurances of confidentiality, paint him as a difficult
man of autocratic style.

''He is very smart, a good scientist, and he's gone to bat for human rights,''
said one high-ranking member, who added, with bitterness, ''But we're
second-class people - all we're supposed to do is make sure there are enough
pads and doughnuts at the meetings.''

Before coming to Washington, Dr. Handler served on the faculty of Duke
University and on the boards of several drug companies. He is a believer in a
strong military posture and is a man uncomfortable with the drift of modern
times. The American dream, he wrote in his last annual report, is being eroded
by encouraging children ''to think of their ethnic or cultural background as
more precious than their entry into the wondrous American melting pot.''

He recently accepted appointment as a director of the Squibb Corporation, the
drug makers. He did not mention this during a recent interview at which he
stated that he had resigned his past corporate directorships to maintain the
appearance of impartiality. His spokesman said later that Squibb was unable to
keep the post open until Dr. Handler retired and that Dr. Handler had agreed to
avoid dealing with the many academy studies involving the drug industry.

The charge is often leveled that Dr. Handler, and much of the academy's inner
circle, is hostile to environmental constraints to progress and is uninterested
in the social problems sometimes associated with technology.

''He feels that anything that says science does not have all the solutions is no
good,'' said Professor Holdren of Berkeley, who has participated in several
academy panels.

Dr. Handler responds that his main concern is to be sure that the science
underlying environmental controls is solid and that minimal risks do not trigger
draconian regulation that smothers industrial advances.

''The political influence of environmental interests far exceeds the scientific
facts,'' he said.  Edward Groth, who served for five years as a staff officer of
the academy's Environmental Studies Board, said the president was sometimes a
''frustrating influence,'' but generally did not interfere with committees whose
work was well documented.

However, a different view comes from those who produced the recent report
''Medical Technology and the Health Care System.'' The report raised doubts
about whether the health system could usefully absorb economically some of the
new equipment available. It was approved by the academy's layered review system,
then seemed to disappear.

After repeated inquiries, Judith Wagner, study director, learned that Dr.
Handler had personally halted its publication. She believes he did so because he
feared it would be a ''boon to regulators.''

Dr. Handler said he acted because the report was too scanty technically. The
panel's membership changed over time, he said, and the ''technically
knowledgable'' people departed. ''To read it, you'd think the CAT scanner was an
unalloyed evil,'' he went on. ''I was amazed the benefits of all medical
technology got such short shrift.  I once paid $175 for a CAT scan that saved my
life.''

The report was ultimately published, a year late, with some modifications in
language to satisfy Dr. Handler.

Process Is Questioned

Dr. Handler's personal role aside, the recent controversies have spurred
questions about the process by which the academy produces its reports.
Interviews with many committee members suggest that process does not work as
well in some cases as others. Often, they say, they are the products of bitter
negotiations between opposing camps. Those with the most time and energy often
prevail, they say.

Compounding the problem, many panelists feel, is that they are unpaid volunteers
with many other responsiblities. Therefore, much of the work is left to the paid
staff - which may or may not have the proper scientific expertise.

Professor Holdren offered this description of his experience as a member of the
Committee on Nuclear and Alternative Energy Systems, which produced the recent
widely publicized and debated report ''Energy in Transition: 1985-2010.''

''We took one and a half steps backward for every two steps forward. We would
reach some agreement, then the arguments were repeated over and over again at
meeting after meeting after meeting.  Criticism and suggestions of wording went
in and disappeared without a trace. In the end I barely had the motivation to
read the latest version.''

The final report stirred an uproar because it dismissed the economic feasibility
of solar power as a major energy source, giving no basis for that conclusion.
Solar-energy proponents charged it was nothing more than the opinion of the
study's co-chairman and was meant to enhance the attractiveness of nuclear
power. Since then, the nuclear power industry has been running radio spots
saying the academy has endorsed expanded nuclear power.

According to Jack M. Hollander, who took leave from the Lawrence Berkeley
Laboratory at the University of Calfornia to be staff director for the energy
panel until it dragged on for so long he had to quit, industry representatives
on this and other panels had unduly strong voices because they could call on
their corporate staffs for backup material. Consumer interests, while
represented, had no similar resources.

W. Kenneth Davis, a vice president of the Bechtel Power Corporation, builders of
nuclear power plants, said he spends one day a week year round on academy
business. He serves on many panels, most recently heading the supply and
delivery subcommittee of the energy study. He said he felt that, if anything,
the industry view was underrepresented in academy deliberations.

Federal agencies come to the academy for many reasons, sometimes to delay making
a hard decision, other times to get support for a course of action. Current
studies touch on such diverse matters as airworthiness procedures, tax-return
processing and health goals.

The agencies often complain that the reports they get are too timid and take too
long. ''They tend to be cautious and this limits their usefulness,'' said David
Hawkins, an assistant administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.

''I would not go to the academy with a question on which I need a quick
turnaround,'' said Dr. Sanford A. Miller, chief of the Bureau of Foods at the
Food and Drug Administration. ''Also they tend to avoid conflict and say there's
not enough data.''

Dr. Handler bristled at suggestions the reports are too wishywashy. ''No agency
ever comes with problems that are easy,'' he said. ''All they bring us are the
stinkers. They already know the evidence STRUCTURE OF THE ACADEMY is not
conclusive or they would not come.''

Membership in the National Academy of Sciences is intended as recognition of
high achievement in the sciences. However, the 1,300 members, whose average age
approaches 70, have little to do with the operation of the academy. Much of the
real power lies with the National Research Council, which serves as ''agent''
for the academy and for its two less influential affiliates, the National
Academy of Engineering and the Institute of Medicine.

The Research Council actually does no research itself. Instead, it issues
reports prepared by nearly 1,000 committees grouped under eight ''assemblies''
and ''commissions.'' They are staffed by about 9,000 scientists, most of them
not academy members. This allows the academy to draw on ''the best of American
science,'' in the words of its president, Dr. Philip Handler.

Just how committee members are selected is shrouded in some mystery. Officially,
names are proposed by the various assemblies and advisory committees and
screened by Dr. Handler's staff. Dr. Handler said that no more than one-third
are reappointed.

The academy operates like a consulting firm. It receives grants from Government
agencies, such as the Pentagon and the Agriculture Department, and even the
President's office to evaluate specific technological issues. It does not take
assignments from industry, but it does accept financial contributions. The
Nutrition Board's only source of day-to-day operating expenses is $75,000 a year
given by 80 food companies whose representatives sit on its ''industries
liaison'' committee.

Final committee reports are scrutinized by a special review committee headed by
Saunders MacLane, a mathematician at the University of Chicago who is vice
president of the academy and a close associate of Dr. Handler.

Final authority devolves on the retiring president. Dr. Handler appoints the
review panel, referees any irreconcilable disputes and signs all reports going
to the printer.

A nominating committee is now searching for candidates to succeed Dr. Handler. A
new president will be selected by a vote of the entire academy membership in
December.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dr. Phillipp Handler

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 10, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WORLD BANK UNDER MACNAMARA

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 9


The World Bank in 12 years under Robert S.  McNamara has become the leading
international instrument for the transfer of technical and financial assistance
to the world's poor.

In addition to vastly enlarging its scope of operations, Mr.  McNamara, a former
Defense Secretary and a former president of the Ford Motor Company, has fostered
significant changes in the bank's development strategy.

He emphasized rural development projects aimed at half the people of many third
world countries, who scratch a bare living from the soil.

By making the poorest villagers -the small holders and tenant farmers - more
productive, the rural development program he sponsored sought both to create
''wealth'' where it is needed most and to increase food supplies.

70% in Rural Development

Where the bank had earlier concentrated on larger and highly visible
''infrastructure'' projects, such as dams and steelworks, it now puts 70 percent
of its resources into rural development.

Behind the McNamara shift in emphasis was a belief that, while the big projects
would increase industrial production, it would take years for the benefits to
filter down to the people. Meanwhile, rural poverty was rising, throwing
increasing numbers of people into overcrowded cities and taxing the limited food
and other resources.

The rural strategy envisaged a more direct and immediate payoff by helping to
keep the people on the land. It has worked most successfully in India's populous
Bihar Province.

Another major innovation of the McNamara presidency was to stress the ''basic
needs'' approach by throwing bank support behind projects whose goals were to
improve the health, education, nutrition and housing of the poor.

He has provided a ''social dimension to development,'' said M.  Narasimham,
executive director for India, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka on the bank's governing
board.

Mr. McNamara has also been a staunch advocate of population control measures,
pressing these even to the point of risking open controversy with member
governments. Three years ago, Mexico angrily turned down a World Bank loan with
conditions that some of the money be set aside for birth control.

With the strong support of the United States, Mr. McNamara has also pushed the
bank into the energy field, with projects to spur oil and gas exploration in
developing countries.

''Bob McNamara's performance has been unique and refreshing in that he has
brought to the world of high finance a concern for humanity and a sympathy for
the poor that most bankers lack,'' said Senator William Proxmire, Democrat of
Wisconsin, chairman of the Senate Banking Committee.

Eugene R. Black, a former investment banker and one of the four earlier World
Bank presidents, observed that Mr. McNamara had managed the difficult job of
maintaining confidence both of the third world and the financial community.

Much of the World Bank's funds are raised in capital markets. In terms of
creditworthiness, the bank still gets the highest rating on its bonds.

Even bank critics paid their respects to the McNamara presidency.  ''He is a
worthy adversary,'' said C.W. Bill Young of Florida, ranking Republican on the
House Foreign Operations subcommittee, who has tangled with Mr. McNamara over
what the Congressman considers the lack of bank accountability to its 130 member
governments.

''He has made the World Bank into a very smooth operation,'' said Representative
Young, adding: ''I do believe Mr. McNamara feels he is responsible to no one.''

Marcus G. Rankin, co-founder of the Institute for Policy Study, a liberal
research organization in Washington, said that in ''coming to grips with the
incredible amount of misery in the world,'' Mr.  McNamara has ''attempted to
make up for his disastrous role in the Vietnam war.'' As Secretary of Defense
from 1961 to 1968, in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, he helped to
prosecute that war.

Mr. McNamara was appointed to the World Bank presidency by President Johnson on
Nov. 22, 1967, and formally took over in April 1968 from George D. Woods,
another investment banker, who retired.

The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the formal name of
the institution established initially to speed reconstruction after World War
II, is the major institution providing financial aid and technical assistance to
some 100 developing countries.

The numbers of the McNamara years tell some of the story behind the rise of the
bank to pre-eminence as the major source for the transfer of resources from rich
nations to the poor.

1,600 Projects Supervised

In 1968, when Mr. McNamara took over, the bank's annual financial commitments
totaled $1 billion. In the fiscal year ending next June 30, these will have
risen to $11.5 billion. The bank now supervises some 1,600 projects with a total
value of $100 billion in the third world.

The financing necessary to support this expansion of lending has come both from
the private capital markets of the world and from contributions from the
developed countries.

The most recent steps in this process have included the approval of a $40
billion increase in the capital of the bank, and a $12 billion replenishment for
the next three years of the funds of the International Development Association -
the soft loan affiliate that lends to the poorest countries on repayment terms
of up to 50 years with only a small service fee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF ROBERT MACNAMARA GRAPHO F WORLD BANK UNDER
MACNAMARA

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 11, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

500 REFUGEES FROM VIETNAM LAND AT 2 ASAIN PORTS

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 287 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, June 10


More than 500 ''boat people'' from Vietnam arrived here and in Singapore today,
and a new surge of refugees was expected to reach ports of asylum in Asia.

Hong Kong officials said that 327 refugees had arrived in four boats since
midnight, raising the number of arrivals this month toward the 900 mark. The
total of arrivals this month is already higher than the 635 who arrived in the
British colony in all of May.

In Singapore, 194 arrived at a transit camp, many of whom told of shortages of
food, clothing and medicine in Vietnam. One refugee who asked that his name not
be used said that Vietnamese officials and soldiers were accepting bribes from
the refugees for safe passage.

Those landing in Singapore had been rescued at sea; 103 of them arrived aboard
the Danish ship Pepsun, and 75 on a Dutch vessel, the Smit Lloyd 14. Fourteen
were brought in on a Japanese ship, the Carl Liner.

Officials in Singapore said that those aboard the Danish vessel had been
guaranteed resttlement in Denmark, and that the 75 aboard the Dutch ship would
be taken to the Netherlands.

900 Landed in Malaysia This Month

Nine hundred Vietnamese refugees have landed on Malaysia's east coast so far
this month, the largest number since last summer, officials in Kuala Lumpur said
today.

And a Hong Kong official said of the surge of refugees, ''It is picking up,
there's no denying that.'' Hong Kong officials said they were expecting at least
500 more refugees shortly because about 700 of them arrived in the nearby
Portuguese colony of Macao during the weekend. Vietnamese refugees do not want
to stay in Macao because it does not offer them resettlement, and the Portuguese
authorities do not want to care for them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 11, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AIDE DEFENDING POLICIES ON CAMBODIA SAYS OUTLOOK IS BLEAK

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 300 words


The Carter Administration sees little hope of achieving a political settlement
that would help end the plight of starving Cambodians, a top State Department
official said Monday night.

Speaking in New York at a forum on the United States role in Cambodia, Richard
C. Holbrooke, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs,
said, ''We are trying to find a political settlement, but I am not optimistic.''

Before a panel of journalists and relief experts and an audience in the Public
Theatre, Mr. Holbrooke defended the Carter Administration's policy against
William Shawcross, the author, and Donald Luce, who visited Cambodia last year.
The forum was sponsored by the The Nation magazine and the Citizens Committee on
Cambodia.

''The human dimension is the highest priority of the U.S. policy toward
Cambodia,'' Mr. Holbrooke said, but he added that the Cambodian Communists and
the Vietnamese Army ''and their big brothers in Moscow, Peking, and Hanoi'' were
not interested in ending the warfare that had impeded the distribution of aid
and the creation of a peaceful settlement.

Vote in U.N. Attacked

To cheers from the audience, Mr. Shawcross and Mr. Luce attacked the United
States vote in the United Nations last September favoring the Pol Pot regime.
''The U.S. calls it a public relations problem,'' Mr. Shawcross said. ''I think
it is something more than that.''

Mr. Holbrooke said that the United States vote was cast ''with distaste'' and
that the Administration had ''decided for continued seating of Kampuchea on the
narrowest technical ground.'' ''We are opposed to them and we have not
encouraged others to support them,'' he added.

Noting the future need for bargaining leverage, Mr. Holbrooke said, ''We felt it
would be inappropriate to abstain.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 11, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY AIDE IN TAX DISPUTE LEAVES WHITE HOUSE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 663 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 10


The Pentagon transferred one of President Carter's military aides after the
Marine Corps major became embroiled in a dispute with the Internal Revenue
Service over nonpayment of taxes on religious grounds.

Maj. Jeffery Zorn, who was given the White House assignment last December, said
he had not paid income taxes since 1976, when he took a vow of poverty and began
turning his military pay over to a small church that he heads.

When Internal Revenue Service investigators began looking into the matter, the
White House informed the Defense Department. Last April, the Marine Corps
returned Major Zorn to a staff job at the Marine Corps base at Quantico, Va.

A decision was made that, while the Government investigation was going on, ''he
should be transferred back to Quantico,'' said Ralph Blanchard, a Pentagon
spokesman.

The tax case has not yet gone to court. But Major Zorn complained in an
interview today that the White House had forced his transfer.  ''They told me
that they thought it would be better if I wasn't around,'' he said.

Ray Jenkins, a White House spokesman, denied that the White House had ordered
Major Zorn removed as one of the President's military aides, saying, ''We simply
notified the Defense Department'' of the investigation.

Pentagon Version

But a knowledgeable Defense Department source said the White House did ask for
the transfer and that the Pentagon was clearly aware of the fact that the White
House wanted the major removed from his duties.

A tour as military aide to the President normally runs two to three years and is
considered the sign of a promising military career.  In a letter to the
President, Major Zorn complained about the revenue service's handling of his
case. Lloyd N. Cutler, counsel to the President, replied that it would be
inappropriate for Mr. Carter to become involved.

''Let me add that the constitutional right to enjoy freedom of religion is not a
constitutional right to enjoy freedom from paying nondiscriminatory taxes,'' Mr.
Cutler said in his letter.

Major Zorn, 33 years old, who joined the Marine Corps in 1969 and served a tour
in Vietnam, where he received the Bronze Star, occasionally went jogging with
Mr. Carter and guarded him on fishing trips. He was among six men nominated by
the Marine Corps for the post.

The marine and his wife are co-pastors of the Third Estate Church in Quantico.
The church, which is nondenominational, has about a dozen members. Major Zorn
said he had a theology degree from the International Bible Institute and
Seminary in Florida and was licensed by the state of Virginia to perform
marriages.

How Church Used Money

In a telephone interview, Major Zorn said that ''every penny'' of his salary
went to the church. Defending his nonpayment of income taxes in the past four
years, he said the church used the money for a variety of programs, including
the purchase of religious pamphlets, contributions to television and radio
evangelists and running Bible study programs in nursing homes and hospitals.

Major Zorn and his wife live on the Quantico base. He said their expenses were
paid for by church funds after approval from the church members. A Marine Corps
major earns about $19,000 in taxable income.

The Internal Revenue Service declined to discuss the case. But a spokesman said
there had been many cases involving individuals who obtained ministerial
licenses and then sought to avoid paying taxes.

''A minister's income, salary and so forth is subject to tax,'' said Rod Young,
the agency's spokesman. ''There have been a number of court cases involving the
assignment of income'' to a church. He added, ''You cannot merely assign away
your income and get it back and claim that it's tax-exempt by that manner.''

Major Zorn said he planned to remain in the Marine Corps but believed his career
had been harmed by the controversy. ''I don't see how it could help it,'' he
said. ''The Marine Corps is a very competitive business.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 12, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE EXODUS IN SEASONAL SURGE

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 562 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 11


With the seas seasonally calm and political repression and economic hardship
continuing in Vietnam, the number of refugees leaving in small boats is again
reaching its annual peak, reports from countries around the South China Sea
indicate.

But unlike last year, when the normal, clandestine exodus was overshadowed by
the expulsion of tens of thousands of ethnic Chinese from Vietnam, the present
rate of flow suggests that the Government is abiding by its undertaking at the
Geneva conference on refugees last July to limit departures.

The pledge was taken to mean that Vietnam would no longer force people out in
return for payment, and refugee officials report that most of those escaping
have been ethnic Vietnamese who leave without governmental connivance.

A total of 10,503 refugees from Vietnam were reported by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and by national authorities to have reached shore in
May, and this month's arrivals were reported at a comparable level. A year ago
at this time, refugees were leaving Vietnam at a rate of about 55,000 a month.

Number of Camp Residents Down

The increased rate of acceptance of refugees, particularly by the United States,
which is admitting 168,000 Indochinese a year, has reduced the number of
Vietnamese in Asian camps. Malaysia's total has dropped from 76,000 last year to
23,000. Hong Kong, which at last year's peak sheltered 68,000, mainly ethnic
Chinese, has declined below 40,000.

The United Nations High Commissioner puts the present total of Vietnamese in
Asian camps at 96,979. In addition to Hong Kong and Malaysia, the main
concentrations are in Indonesia and Thailand, which harbor 10,000 each. In
addition, 6,000 Vietnamese are awaiting departure, mainly to the United States,
in a refugee processing center in Bataan, the Philippines.

In addition, Thailand has a refugee population of 126,000 Indochinese who have
crossed its land border, mainly from Laos, as well as 160,000 Cambodians who
have not been given refugee status.

The higher rate of departure of Vietnamese has improved the climate of
hospitality in the region. While refugees are still not greeted with joy,
government agitation against them, cases of boats being pushed out to sea or
their passengers being stoned have been rare of late.

Gulf of Siam Pirates a Threat

The greatest risk faced by refugees heading toward southern Thailand or northern
Malaysia is the continuing wave of piracy. A Western refugee official estimated
that, of the girls and women between 10 and 50 years of age in Songkhla camp in
southern Thailand, with a population of 6,800, at least 90 percent of them were
raped at sea.

Most of the boats have been stopped and pillaged more than once as they near
shore, and in ensuing fights many refugees have been killed and wounded.

Although the Thai government protests against reports describing the pirates as
Thai, witnesses and international officials usually identify the attackers as
Thai. Eight court actions have been initiated or are in preparation by Thailand,
but no case has been concluded.

Meanwhile, many of the rape victims are prevented from leaving for countries of
asylum, mainly the United States, because they may be called as witnesses. Most
of them, discouraged by the delays, would prefer to leave for a new life, even
if their assailants go unpunished.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Vietnamese refugee children

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 12, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SEOUL PRESIDENT PUTS CONDITIONS ON NEW ELECTIONS

BYLINE: By JAMES P. STERBA

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 528 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, Thursday, June 12


President Choi Kyu Hah promised today to speed up South Korea's constitutional
revision process leading to elections and a transfer of power to a new
government by the end of next June, but only if ''public order and social
stability'' are maintained.

In a nationwide radio and television address, President Choi said that
Government-drafted revisions of the Constitution would be put to the voters in a
national referendum by the end of October ''at the latest'' if there is no
turmoil like the riots in Kwangju and nationwide student demonstrations last
month. Elections would then be held during the first half of 1981 and power
transferred to a new administration by the end of June, he said.

It was Mr. Choi's first major public statement since student demonstrations led
to a declaration of full martial law on May 17, and riots in Kwangju in which an
estimated 250 people were killed in gun battles with soldiers. He warned that
the Government would crack down harshly on any attempts to hold mass rallies or
create further disturbances.

President Choi did not say when or if martial law would be lifted, but he
declared, ''I am determined to continuously promote political development,
including the reopening of universities and colleges and the resumption of
political activities commensurate with the economic and social development of
our country.''

'Social Discipline' Emphasized

He added, ''The maintenance of public order and social discipline cannot be
overemphasized, especially in light of the seriousness of the recent grave
turmoil.'' He declared that ''free Vietnam fell due to extreme social chaos
prompted by public dissension and persistent mass demonstrations, after which
there was neither freedom nor democracy.''

The President hinted that the Government's ''social purification'' campaign,
announced last week by martial law committees led by Lieut. Gen. Chon Too Hwan,
would extend further into the political as well as economic arena. He said:
''There is no doubt that the pending constitutional amendment and subsequent
fair elections are an important part of political development. However, no less
important to political progress, I believe, is the creation of the sound
political climate wished for by the majority, by reflecting on the chronic ills
in our political climate and taking corrective action.''

He did not say what kind of corrective action the Government intended to take.
He added that the Government would go about ''eradicating irrationality on the
campuses,'' but he did not say how. Students in demonstrations which turned
violent had demanded an immediate end to martial law and a speeding up of the
Government-promised transition to greater democracy.

The Government has promised to revise the Constitution and put it before voters
by the end of the year. Today's promise to do so two months early is not likely
to change the protests of students or Government opponents. They believe that
the army, led by General Chon, has moved forcefully to take over the reins of
government for the purposes of retaining power through the constitutional
revision and election process in the new administration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 12, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PLAYING THE 'CHINA CARD';
by David M.Lampton

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 842 words

DATELINE: COLUMBUS, Ohio


The Carter Administration has clearly decided to play the ''China card''
vigorously.  This has been signaled by the visit of Geng Biao, one of China's
Deputy Prime Ministers, to the United States in May and the resulting agreement
to provide military-support equipment to his country, and by Defense Secretary
Harold Brown's trip to China in January.

While playing the card makes sense from the perspective of preempting
Presidential-campaign charges of the Administration's being ''soft'' on Moscow,
and it makes Americans who feel impotent in the face of Soviet advances feel
better, there are at least four reasons not to play the hand as it now is being
played.

Indeed, the ''China card'' is most useful when it is not played.  First, just as
Western business has historically overestimated its potential sales in China,
United States policy makers now exaggerate the strategic benefits of enhancing
Chinese military capabilities.  Students of the Chinese military generally agree
that China already has considerable resources for defense of its heartland and
that it would take incalculable additional resources to enable it effectively to
send conventional forces significantly beyond its borders. Consequently, China
would have little direct use to the United States in any conflict outside of its
immediate region.  Furthermore, even large infusions of military resources would
enhance only marginally China's self-defense capability.

In short, providing military-support equipment to China will not make a
significant strategic difference. There is no substitute for the United States'
enhancing its own capabilities and those of its close allies. Although talk of
the ''China card'' is cathartic, it diverts our attention from this central
task.

Second, even if the Chinese military is significantly improved, what assurances
can we get about its ultimate use?  Except for India, our friends in Asia are
not alarmed - at the moment. But what certainty can we all have about the
composition and proclivities of future leadership in Peking? The average
Politburo member is about 70 years old. Moreover, didn't China's incursion into
Vietnam in February 1979 suggest the dangers of our becoming too closely
identified with Chinese military policy? Should we assume that China will remain
stable indefinitely, that the pot that boiled over in the Cultural Revolution
has now cooled permanently?

Third, China has deep and abiding cultural, political and strategic antagonisms
toward the Soviet Union (to be sure, the feeling is mutual). While Washington
also has fundamental conflicts of interest with Moscow, it serves no useful
long-term American purpose to jump on the Chinese anti-Soviet bandwagon.

What we can object to is Soviet behavior in South Asia, the Middle East,
Southeast Asia and Africa. We should focus on that behavior and not let our
China policy reinforce an image in Moscow of implacable anti-Sovietism in the
United States.

Fourth, although America has very little influence over Chinese
military-procurement decisions, China's future political stability depends
largely upon rapid economic growth, particularly in agriculture and consumer
goods.

In the broadest sense, China's legitimate national-security needs are best
served by concentrating resources in these economic sectors. Washington should
be warning Peking of the long-term dangers in misallocation of resources rather
than implicitly encouraging that misallocation.

China cannot remain stable until it has solved its economic problems, and there
cannot be a durable peace in Asia unless China is stable.

If these four problems with the ''China card'' suggest that it is not our ace in
the hole, what policy should Washington pursue? Most importantly, the United
States should transfer technology that will improve China's economic
performance. Of course, this would inevitably increase all Chinese capabilities,
military ones included. However, enhanced military capabilities would be the
long-term consequence, rather than the immediate objective, of our policy.
Transferring technology that helps solve pressing economic problems will
contribute to China's short-term stability and may help ensure that we do not
forever poison the well of Soviet-American relations.  Further, we would not be
perceived by future generations of Chinese as having promoted our own
national-security interests at the expense of their economic welfare.

American policy toward China should not be packaged and sold as an anti-Soviet
product. This is not conducive to a durable relationship with China.

David M. Lampton, associate professor of political science at Ohio State
University and author of ''The Politics of Medicine in China,'' is writing a
book on the post-Mao Zedong leadership.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Judge Rebuffs Pfc. Garwood

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 63 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., June 12


A military judge today denied a series of defense motions seeking to block the
court-martial of Pfc.  Robert R. Garwood of the Marine Corps on charges of
desertion and collaboration with the enemy in Vietnam. At a pretrial hearing
Col.  R.E. Switzer ruled that Camp Lejeune's commander, Maj. Gen. David B.
Barker, acted within his authority in ordering the case to trial.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ALBANY ADOPTS BILL TO HELP 'RESCUE' YOUTHS FROM CULTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, June 12


The New York State Senate gave final approval today to a bill that its
supporters said was primarily intended to help parents ''rescue'' children who
have joined religious cults.

A major provision in the bill would authorize a judge to appoint a temporary
conservator with the power to supervise a person over the age of 15 who has
''undergone a sudden and radical change in behavior, life style, habits and
attitudes'' as a result of associating with a group that uses ''deception'' in
the recruitment of members.

The standards for obtaining a temporary conservator would include proof that
deception had been used in recruiting the person and that the group engages in
''systematic'' food or sleep deprivation and forced isolation from the person's
family. The court also would have to be convinced that the person's judgment has
been impaired and that he is unable to care for his own welfare.

The vote on the bill was 42 to 14, and Senators who opposed the measure
described it as unconstitutional and ''hysterical.'' The bill was approved in
the Assembly last week, but a spokesman for Governor Carey said it was
''uncertain'' whether the Governor would sign the bill into law.

During an often dramatic two-hour debate, Senator Carol Berman, Democrat of
Lawrence, L.I., described her own encounter with a cult five years ago that her
daughter, then 17 years old, had joined.  Mrs. Berman said that she was
concerned about the constitutionality of the bill, but that ''no one is looking
out for the civil liberties'' of people in cults.

Senators Explain Their Vote

Mrs. Berman said that her daughter had eventually left the cult in Indiana but
that she was unable to communicate with her while she was there. ''I won that
fight only by good fortune,'' Mrs. Berman said.  ''We were powerless. I'm going
to vote for this bill in fear and trembling.''

Senators Howard E. Babbush of Brooklyn and Martin M. Solomon of Brooklyn, both
Democrats, said they had decided to vote in favor of the bill because of
misrepresentations by people they suspected of being members of cults. The
Senators said they and other Jewish Senators had been urged to vote against the
bill by a person who falsely claimed to be a reporter for the B'nai B'rith
Messenger, a publication in Los Angeles.

Senator Babbush also said that lobbyists against the bill had falsely contended
that they were representatives of Hasidic organizations.

A group of mothers, who said their children were in religious cults, had lobbied
in the corridors of the Capitol for two days, seeking passage of the bill.
''Without this legislation, parents face an impossible decision,'' said one
mother, Virginia Greene of Guilderland. ''Either you abandon your child or
resort to breaking the law and kidnapping.''

The bill, sponsored by Assemblyman Howard L. Lasher, Democrat of Brooklyn, and
Senator Joseph R. Pisani, Republican of New Rochelle, would allow a conservator
to be appointed for a maximum of 90 days to give the person in the cult time to
decide whether to remain in the group or leave. According to the bill's
supporters, five specific criteria would have to be established in court before
a conservator could be appointed.

There were these other developments in the capital today:

Legal Marijuana

The Senate gave final passage to a bill that would allow cancer patients or
glaucoma sufferers to use marijuana or its derivatives legally. Cancer patients
have found that the drug relieves the nausea that accompanies chemotherapy. It
also seems to reduce the pressure inside the eye from glaucoma. The bill now
goes to Governor Carey, who is expected to sign it.

Agent Orange

The Senate gave final passage to a bill that would set up a commission and
provide $225,000 to determine the needs of veterans exposed to the chemical
known as Agent Orange and to conduct an epidemiological study of its effects.
Hundreds of Vietnam veterans have complained that the defoliation chemical has
caused them lasting health problems.

Truth in Heating

The Legislature approved a bill that would require landlords or owners to
provide two years of back utility bills on request to prospective tenants who
want to know how much it would cost to heat the home or apartment they are
considering.

Casino Gambling

It had appeared doomed for this year, but casino gambling was suddenly revived
tonight when Senate and Assembly leaders agreed to vote for each other's bills.
That would keep alive the possibility of a constitutional amendment which must
be approved by two consecutive legislatures.

The amendment was framed in eight different ways - six from the Assembly and two
from the Senate - keeping all options open including private, public and
semipublic operation. The Assembly bills also spanned a wider range of locations
including Brooklyn whose legislators are anxious for casino gambling on Coney
Island.

Actions by Carey

Governor Carey signed a bill creating a new type of insurance for the elderly to
cover the types of health needs not provided by the Federal Medicare program. It
would prohibit, after June 20, 1981, sale of so-called ''medigap'' insurance
that overlaps the Federal program.

In addition, Mr. Carey signed a bill to prevent defense attorneys from having to
disclose results of psychological and polygraph tests of their clients, unless
they plan to use them as part of their defense. Currently, those tests are
available to prosecutors during pretrial discovery. This makes defense lawyers
wary of letting their clients take the tests, even though they may be helpful to
the defense.

The Governor also signed a bill that would permit motorists to turn left on a
red light, after a full stop, onto a one-way street, except in New York City.

Mr. Carey vetoed a bill that would have let police officers to work as security
guards or traffic directors at events for which a temporary beer and wine permit
has been issued. He also vetoed an extension of the Town Highway Improvement
Program, which is due to expire April 1, 1982.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
Miss Vanderbilt Drops Suit Against River House

BYLINE: By Albin Krebs and Judith Cummings

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 860 words


Gloria Vanderbilt's battle with River House ended yesterday. She dropped her
suit against the board of directors of the exclusive East Side apartment
building and agreed to withdraw the complaint of racial discrimination she had
filed against it. The board had rejected her attempt to buy an apartment, and
Miss Vanderbilt accused it of racial bias because of her friendship with Bobby
Short, the black entertainer.

The discontinuance of the suit also ends an injunction the heiress and jeans
designer had obtained barring the sale of the $1.1 million apartment to anyone
but her.

Under terms of the discontinuance, the matter cannot be brought up again, and
neither party is subject to costs or liability. Miss Vanderbilt will also
withdraw the complaint she filed with the New York City Commission on Human
Rights.

The River House board had said that it feared Miss Vanderbilt would bring
''unwelcome publicity'' to the building and that she could not actually afford
to buy the apartment. Miss Vanderbilt could not be reached for comment, but
Warren Hirsh, president of Murjani International, which markets Vanderbilt
jeans, said he believed the publicity over the suit ''was too much for her'' and
''could be affecting her home life and her children.''

Mr. Short had laryngitis, but a friend quoted him as saying: ''I went along with
Gloria's wishes when she filed the suit, and I go along with her in dropping
it.''

Textual Research Into an American Performance Mode

Summer school promises to be hilarious for some New York University students.
They are being offered, in the School of Arts, course H42.2704, ''Burlesque,''
taught by Prof. Ralph G. Allen, four days a week, June 30 through July 17.

The summer catalogue gives this description of the course: ''Research into the
texts and staging of American Burlesque.  Professor Allen and guests will
discuss and analyze burlesque performance modes. Open to all interested students
capable of taking a graduate-level course.''

Professor Allen, who usually teaches the history of the European theater at the
University of Tennessee in Knoxville, is an acknowledged expert on burlesque and
was recently nominated for a Tony award for writing the sketches, based on
ancient burlesque routines, for the Broadway show ''Sugar Babies.''

''But I've never taught a course on burlesque,'' he said yesterday. ''It sounded
like fun to actually lecture on it, so I jumped at the chance. It will be most
unusual.'' Among the guest lecturers will be Bob Williamson, the old
vaudevillian who in ''Sugar Babies'' tries to make a spectacularly dumb dog do
tricks.

A Bit of Mississippi in the Heart of New York

From up in Central Park tomorrow there will come rebel yells and soft Southern
accents, when more than 500 people are expected to show up for a ''Way Up North
in Mississippi Picnic, Dinner on the Ground, and Watermelon Cuttin.' ''

The idea of getting transplanted Mississippians together on the park's East
Meadow originated with Vicki and Ron Carter, a young couple late of Tupelo and
Ellisville, and Kay McDuffie, a native of Nettleton.

Mrs. Carter said yesterday: ''About three months ago we started calling everyone
we knew in New York with a Mississippi connection, and they gave us their lists,
and pretty soon we had 1,000 names. Now it's got so big that Brad Dye, the
Lieutenant Governor, and two Congressmen from Mississippi, Thad Cochran and
Gillespie Montgomery, are coming up for the picnic.

''We've ordered 80 watermelons, and there'll be a watermelon seedspitting
contest, a prize for the best Southern fried chicken, and one for the best
Southern dessert. This will be like a down-home dinner on the grounds, with
people bringing their own frying pans and covered dishes. My mother is bringing
up the grits from Mississippi.''

Prof. Genovese Turned Down by University of Maryland

Eugene D. Genovese, a historian of pre-Civil War America whose Marxist
sympathies embroiled him in Vietnam War-era controversy, has been rejected for a
faculty position at the University of Maryland.

The chairman of the university's history department, Emory Evans, said yesterday
that the faculty last month turned down Dr.  Genovese's application by a
23-to-23 tie vote. A department subcommittee had previously recommended Dr.
Genovese, a professor and former history department chairman at the University
of Rochester and the president in 1979 of the influential Organization of
American Historians.

The head of the subcommittee, Louis Harlan, while citing intense competition for
the position, called the historian's Marxist views ''not a negligible issue.''
Asked about political considerations, Mr. Evans said ''I'm not discussing
that.'' But Dr. Genovese said in Rochester: ''I was told privately that the
Red-baiting was outright, flagrant and undisguised.''

He set off a political uproar when, as an associate professor at Rutgers
University, he told a 1965 audience he would welcome a ''Vietcong ascendancy in
Vietnam.'' Yesterday he confirmed reports that he had also been a candidate for
a post at Harvard's department of African-American studies - also
unsuccessfully.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Prof. Ralph G. Allen

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 14, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY CHIEF OF STAFF DISLIKES TROOP REDUCTION PLAN

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 598 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 13


The Army Chief of Staff said today that a proposed reduction of 25,000 soldiers
would have to come out of combat forces deployed in Europe and South Korea.

The cutback, part of a proposal approved yesterday by the Senate Armed Services
Committee, is intended to improve the quality of Army manpower by reducing
recruitment quotas at a time when insufficient numbers of high school graduates
are enlisting. The plan would permit the Army to increase recruitment and
strength if it could attract a larger proportion of high school graduates.

The Chief of Staff, Gen. Edward C. Meyer, said that a formula for enlistment
levels contained in the proposal was ''unmanageable'' because it would make it
more difficult than it is today for the Army to fill the ranks and rotate
noncommissioned officers. He said it would be better to take the cutback alone
rather than try to juggle the formula.

Would Make Cut Abroad

General Meyer said the reduction would have to be taken from forces overseas,
which make up 40 percent of the Army, and not from the already thin forces
within the United States.

To take the cut in forces here and keep the same numbers overseas would mean
that career soldiers would have to spend more time abroad. He said duty abroad
was the second most important reason career soldiers are leaving the service,
low pay being the first.

The general was supported by Senator John G. Tower, the senior Republican on the
Armed Services Committee, who said he had opposed the proposal in committee. He
said it might be defeated on the Senate floor or in conference with the House.

In a discussion with reporters, General Meyer also made these points: - He
defended his choice of Maj. Gen. James B. Vaught as mission commander for the
rescue attempt that failed in Iran. General Vaught has been criticized on
Capitol Hill, but General Meyer said he had chosen him for his service with
airborne troops and experience with helicopters and unconventional operations.
''Jim is not the kind you'd want to meet in a back alley on a dark night,'' the
general said.

- He elaborated on recent Congressional testimony in which he said that the
nation had a ''hollow army'' within the United States. He cited divisions with
only 75 percent to 90 percent of their authorized strength, shortages of
noncommissioned officers and undermanned reserve and National Guard forces, all
armed and equipped with outdated weapons and equipment that suffer from
insufficient maintenance.

- He disclosed that the Army had begun to put renewed emphasis on unconventional
warfare, such as the Special Forces, which played an important role in Vietnam
but had since been what General Meyer called ''stepbrothers'' to the mainstream
of the Army.

Committee's Recommendation

The Armed Services Committee recommended yesterday that the Army's strength in
the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1 be cut from the requested 775,800 to 750,300
because the Army was failing to attract enough high school graduates.

Under the proposal, the Army would be allowed to recruit 1,250 more young men
and women for each percentage point above 52 percent that it obtained in high
school graduate enlistments. If the high school graduates filled 72 percent of
enlistments, the Army's strength would rise 25,000, to 775,300.

General Meyer said that would disrupt the recruiting cycle. Eighty percent of
the high school graduates who join the Army do so from June October, he said,
and the Army tries to recruit a balanced number throughout the year to keep
training loads level and to fill ranks in units steadily.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 14, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY CHIEF OF STAFF DISLIKES TROOP REDUCTION PLAN

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 598 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 13


The Army Chief of Staff said today that a proposed reduction of 25,000 soldiers
would have to come out of combat forces deployed in Europe and South Korea.

The cutback, part of a proposal approved yesterday by the Senate Armed Services
Committee, is intended to improve the quality of Army manpower by reducing
recruitment quotas at a time when insufficient numbers of high school graduates
are enlisting. The plan would permit the Army to increase recruitment and
strength if it could attract a larger proportion of high school graduates.

The Chief of Staff, Gen. Edward C. Meyer, said that a formula for enlistment
levels contained in the proposal was ''unmanageable'' because it would make it
more difficult than it is today for the Army to fill the ranks and rotate
noncommissioned officers. He said it would be better to take the cutback alone
rather than try to juggle the formula.

Would Make Cut Abroad

General Meyer said the reduction would have to be taken from forces overseas,
which make up 40 percent of the Army, and not from the already thin forces
within the United States.

To take the cut in forces here and keep the same numbers overseas would mean
that career soldiers would have to spend more time abroad. He said duty abroad
was the second most important reason career soldiers are leaving the service,
low pay being the first.

The general was supported by Senator John G. Tower, the senior Republican on the
Armed Services Committee, who said he had opposed the proposal in committee. He
said it might be defeated on the Senate floor or in conference with the House.

In a discussion with reporters, General Meyer also made these points: - He
defended his choice of Maj. Gen. James B. Vaught as mission commander for the
rescue attempt that failed in Iran. General Vaught has been criticized on
Capitol Hill, but General Meyer said he had chosen him for his service with
airborne troops and experience with helicopters and unconventional operations.
''Jim is not the kind you'd want to meet in a back alley on a dark night,'' the
general said.

- He elaborated on recent Congressional testimony in which he said that the
nation had a ''hollow army'' within the United States. He cited divisions with
only 75 percent to 90 percent of their authorized strength, shortages of
noncommissioned officers and undermanned reserve and National Guard forces, all
armed and equipped with outdated weapons and equipment that suffer from
insufficient maintenance.

- He disclosed that the Army had begun to put renewed emphasis on unconventional
warfare, such as the Special Forces, which played an important role in Vietnam
but had since been what General Meyer called ''stepbrothers'' to the mainstream
of the Army.

Committee's Recommendation

The Armed Services Committee recommended yesterday that the Army's strength in
the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1 be cut from the requested 775,800 to 750,300
because the Army was failing to attract enough high school graduates.

Under the proposal, the Army would be allowed to recruit 1,250 more young men
and women for each percentage point above 52 percent that it obtained in high
school graduate enlistments. If the high school graduates filled 72 percent of
enlistments, the Army's strength would rise 25,000, to 775,300.

General Meyer said that would disrupt the recruiting cycle. Eighty percent of
the high school graduates who join the Army do so from June October, he said,
and the Army tries to recruit a balanced number throughout the year to keep
training loads level and to fill ranks in units steadily.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ANTIDRAFT GROUPS PLAN FOR PROTESTS

BYLINE: By E.J. DIONNE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 863 words


With draft registration expected to begin next month, a number of antidraft
organizations have begun laying plans for demonstrations, vigils and civil
disobedience this summer and fall.

Many groups plan to urge 19- and 20-year-olds not to register.  Other
organizations, preferring not to counsel illegal action, are preparing to
provide legal help for those who defy the law. Still other organizations,
particularly religious pacifist groups, will call on those who register to sign
up as conscientious objectors.

Some antidraft organizers are toying with what Dan Ebener of the pacifist
Fellowship of Reconciliation called ''all sorts of creative ideas to disrupt the
system.''

These include legally tying up business at the post offices where registration
is expected to take place by forming lines of dozens of people to buy one-cent
stamps and registering thousands of noneligible or false names with the
Selective Service System. ''We'll register Carter and maybe some generals,''
said Ed Hedemann of the War Resisters League.

Change Since Vietnam Era

No one is certain how extensive resistance will be, and the opponents of
registration acknowledge that young Americans are generally more sympathetic to
the military now than their counterparts were in the Vietnam War era.

Mr. Ebener, who has spoken against the draft at high schools and on college
campuses, said that many of the students he had spoken with were quite ready to
register. ''The trend among young people is to be prepared to go and fight,''
Mr. Ebener said. ''They've really been stirred up with this hatred of Iran.''

The public opinion surveys offer a mixed picture. A Gallup Poll earlier this
year of 560 Americans 18 to 24 years old found that, while three-quarters of
them favored draft registration, 51 percent opposed the reinstitution of the
draft itself.

Post Office Demonstrations

The main public events planned by the antidraft groups will involve peaceful
demonstrations at post offices around the country on the first day of
registration. Many groups are also considering keeping small group vigils
outside post offices throughout the registration periods, and some organizations
expect to set up tables outside post offices and ask potential registrants to
consider not signing up.

Mr. Hedemann said that the War Resisters League might urge those who registered
to wait until the last two days before signing up, while Susan Hadley said that
the Fellowship of Reconciliation would distribute cards on which those of draft
age would be asked to register their opposition to the draft at the same time
that they registered with the Government.

Many antidraft organizers believe that the biggest headaches for the Government
may not come from any of their activities. ''The largest share of resisters
won't be organized by us,'' said a law student working with the movement.
''They'll be the thousands of kids who passively resist by not showing up at all
on registration day.  And there's no way the Government will ever get around to
prosecuting even a small share of them.''

Many of the groups involved in the current antidraft activities are the same
organizations that spearheaded antiwar work in the 1960's. Most organizers
believe that the antidraft movement has grown more quickly than it did in the
1960's because of the political lessons activists learned in the movement
against the Vietnam War.

Saying 'No to a Bad War'

''It's a larger number of people,'' said John Judge, ''it's more politically
sophisticated and I think people have under their belt the history of a bad war
and the realization that they can say no to a bad war - that that's
legitimate.'' Mr. Judge, a field worker for the Central Committee for
Conscientious Objectors, was also active in the antidraft movement in the late
1960's and early 1970's.

Mr. Judge said that his group had received some 45,000 phone calls since
President Carter proposed registration in his State of the Union Address and had
mailed out about 130,000 ''objector cards'' since then. ''Over 15,000 young
people have registered with us as objectors,'' he said.

Most of the organizing so far has been done through umbrella organizations like
the Mobilization Against the Draft and the Committee Against Registration and
the Draft, groups that have brought together partisans of a variety of clashing
ideologies.

At a recent meeting in a San Francisco living room to discuss antidraft tactics,
for example, Milton Mueller, national director of Students for a Libertarian
Society, a group that opposes both the draft and high taxes, was ticking off the
groups that would be involved in a series of workshops on the draft:

''Women, labor, youth, vets, gay, third world, taxpayers ... .'' ''Taxpayers?''
asked a quizzical representative of the Socialist Workers Party.  ''Yes,
taxpayers,'' replied Mr. Mueller with a triumphant grin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

3 Journalists Get Medals For Heroism in Vietnam

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 138 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 14


The Marine Corps awarded Bronze Stars yesterday to three journalists who had
rescued a mortally wounded marine under enemy fire during the Tet offensive in
1968. The medals are the first to be given to civilians for Vietnam war heroism.

The three journalists were Alvin Webb, of United Press International; David
Greenway, then of Time Magazine and now with The Boston Globe, and Charles Mohr
of The New York Times. They were covering a battle in Hue on February 19, 1968
when a marine was shot through the throat.

Accompanied by a Marine sergeant, the reporters carried the injured man to
safety through the devastated streets of Hue. Mr. Greenway and Mr. Webb were
wounded by an enemy rocket that fell near the group.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW 'MOTHER COURAGE' TRANSPLANTED

BYLINE: By Frank Rich

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2094 words


When it comes to sheer guts, no play this season can beat the new version of
Bertolt Brecht's ''Mother Courage and Her Children'' at the Public. Director
Wilford Leach has staged an elaborate and iconoclastic revival: The cast is
black, and the script has been adapted from Brecht by the black American
playwright Ntozake Shange.  About the production, which ends its run today,
there will be no quibbles here. Who wouldn't want to see Gloria Foster and
Morgan Freeman play all the great roles in theatrical literature? This ''Mother
Courage'' features some of the best actors, black or white, in New York; they
give the play a passionate reading.

But what play are they doing? The text of Miss Shange's ''Mother Courage''
amounts to a whole new show, and it raises some troubling questions. What are an
adapter's responsibilities to the original work? What are a playwright's
obligations to history? Is it right to call a play ''Mother Courage'' when it in
many ways violates the spirit of the drama we associate with that title? The
motivations behind Miss Shange's adaptation may well be pure, but the result is
a case study of what can happen when an exercise in literary adaptation goes
wildly astray.

Certainly the adaptation cannot be objected to in principle. Brecht would have
approved; he was fond of rewriting classic theatrical texts himself. And
certainly Miss Shange, the author of ''For Colored Girls,'' would seem the ideal
candidate to redo ''Mother Courage.'' Like Brecht, she is a poet with a
radicalized political consciousness. It can even be argued that Miss Shange is
entitled to move the play's setting from 17th-century middle Europe to another
time and place; it all depends on how and why the relocation is done. By
resetting Brecht's play in post-Civil War America and making the title character
an emancipated slave, Miss Shange has landed in a quagmire. She ends up
betraying Brecht and distorting American history.

To understand what has gone wrong in Miss Shange's ''Mother Courage'' it helps
to remember the original. Shameful as it seems, ''Mother Courage'' has had only
one other major local production since Brecht wrote it in 1939, and that was the
short-lived Jerome Robbins staging (with Anne Bancroft and Barbara Harris) in
1963. Even so, the play lives on as a classic of the modern repertory. By
telling the story of Mother Courage and the adventures of her three children on
the fringes of the Thirty Years War, Brecht created a damning picture of
capitalism's spiritual ravages at their most extreme.

Mother Courage is a small-time businesswoman who runs a wagon canteen. She
survives a holocaust by exploiting both war and peace, victors and vanquished,
for modest financial sustenance. She is neither villainess nor heroine, but is,
as Brecht put it, ''a great living contradiction.'' Though she will do anything
to assure her children's survival, she nonetheless loses her two sons when she
haggles too long over business deals. And yet she just can't help herself. In
her world, profiteering is the only game in town, the only way to feed her
family. She is the ultimate product of a bankrupt status quo: The system has
stripped her of the right to make moral choices and stripped her human virtues
of their meaning. As the critic Richard Gilman has written, Mother Courage's
final trudge forward at the end of the play is no cause for celebration: She is
''a survivor only in the narrowest bodily sense.''

Such is the depth of Brecht's ironic vision that ''Mother Courage'' easily
transcends simple categorizations; it's not just an anti-war play or a Marxist
tract or a tribute to the human spirit.

Miss Shange's version is another matter: The anti-war aspects are muted, the
Marxism is skewed, sentimentality is embraced, and a bizarre element of
anti-black propaganda is thrown into the mix. Much of this stems from Miss
Shange's strange choice of wars. Her ''Mother Courage'' is set in the Southwest
territories of 1866-1877, and it principally concerns a disconnected series of
skirmishes in which American troops completed the clearing of the West by
slaughtering the Indians.

In contrast to Brecht's Thirty Years War - a religious struggle waged by equally
culpable antagonists who together wreaked havoc on a helpless peasantry - the
battles of Miss Shange's play are conflicts involving clearly defined good guys
and bad guys. This immediately alters Brecht's point in a substantial way. In
his ''Mother Courage,'' war (or, for that matter, peace) is a meaningless state
that serves no purpose except to perpetuate a malevolent ruling class. It
doesn't matter which side Mother Courage has financial dealings with, for both
sides are the enemy. Everyone is out to grind her down; she is the trapped,
innocent victim of an entire system.

In Miss Shange's version, Mother Courage is thrust into a class and racial war
where the antagonists are anything but interchangeable.  The bad guys are the
government soldiers, the ruling class, and their victims are a defenseless
proletariat, the Indians. As a result, Miss Shange's protagonist, unlike
Brecht's, does have a moral choice. And for her Mother Courage, the choice
should be clear; she has, after all, just lived through the Civil War. If she
now does business with the oppressive Army, she is a villain; if she refuses,
she is a heroic resister. Either way, Brecht's complex work is transformed into
a simplistic melodrama about right and wrong.

Worse still, Miss Shange's Mother Courage, as well as her two sons, capitulate
to the bad guys. The sons (one of whom is half-Indian, no less) join up with the
Colored Cavalry - the so-called Buffalo Soldiers who were recruited by whites to
fight against the Indians - and the mother does business with their superiors.
While these actions parallel the text of the original play, their meaning
becomes quite different in the context Miss Shange has chosen. When Brecht's
Mother Courage says ''in business you ask what price, not what religion,'' it is
a nihilistic fact of life. When Miss Shange's Mother Courage, at the same point
in the play, implies that she would just as soon trade with rebel whites as
anyone else, she is consciously siding against her own interests. She is no
longer a pawn of historical forces beyond her control but an active
counterrevolutionary siding with whites against her own people.

Perhaps Miss Shange would insist that her Mother Courage had to capitulate to
whites to survive, just as Brecht's Mother Courage had to serve all comers to
keep going. But is it really true that freed slaves, in the aftermath of the
Civil War, had no option but to become collaborators in a new campaign of white
genocide against the Indians? It would take a rather jaundiced reading of
American history to claim so.

Some blacks did, of course, join the Buffalo Soldiers. But during part of the
time that Miss Shange's play covers, many more were active participants in
Reconstruction governments in much of the South. When blacks later lost their
freedom to a new, white supremacist South, it was not because the former slaves
abandoned their democratic ideals for easy cash or because they left the South
to fight Indians out West. The blacks' government was taken away from them - by
whites - in a violent spree of vigilantism. As W.E.B.  DuBois wrote in ''Black
Reconstruction,'' ''The white laborer joined the white landholder and capitalist
and beat the black laborer into subjection through secret organizations and the
rise of a new doctrine of race hatred.'' In Miss Shange's ''Mother Courage,''
such a secret organization, the Ku Klux Klan, finally does show up (in the
next-to-last scene) - and Mother Courage's daughter valiantly warns a
neighboring black town of their arrival - but by then we've had an entire
evening of watching cowardly blacks sell themselves out to white interests for
simple expediency's sake.

How did Miss Shange paint herself into this corner? To fulfill her mission of
resetting ''Mother Courage'' in black America, she seems to have seized on some
events that superficially correspond to those of Brecht's play without carefully
considering how those events would square with the true meaning of the original
text. Once the events were chosen, they became an idee fixe from which she
refused to depart. By grafting far-from-representative black sellouts on to the
epic theater of ''Mother Courage,'' Miss Shange has condemned a whole generation
of black people by inference. If a white had written this play, he would have,
quite rightfully, been accused of racism.

If Miss Shange had reshaped the entire work, she might have solved some of these
problems. But she has not done that; she has only retranslated the play into
black English. Perhaps if there were major white characters in this ''Mother
Courage'' - her versions of DuBois's landowners and capitalists or the greedy
bigots of Lillian Hellman's ''Little Foxes'' - we could see why some blacks did
have no choice but to become collaborators with their enemy. This fact can't be
explained away by the social system dramatized in Brecht's play - which is still
the only one to be found in Miss Shange's version - because the system that
prevailed in the Thirty Years War is not an accurate description of
Reconstruction America. So confusing is Miss Shange's mixture of Brecht and
Indian wars that on the night I saw her play, an audience of blacks and whites
was actually cheering Mother Courage at the end. This shouldn't happen in an
honest production of Brecht's drama - one that upholds the writer's socalled
''alienation effect'' - and it certainly shouldn't happen in Miss Shange's
version, where Mother Courage is demonstrably evil.

However much the audience might blamelessly misread it in the theater, it seems
that Miss Shange really did set out to concoct a ''Mother Courage'' that
vilified its central characters. In an article in The Village Voice of May 19,
she says so: ''My 'Mother Courage' begins with the first thirty years of
struggle by the first mass of freed slaves to become American, the first thirty
years of our culpability in the genocidal activities of the cavalry, the
exploitation of non-English speaking peoples, the acceptance of the primacy of
the dollar. If I must come to terms with being a descendant of imperialist
assimilationists who were willing if not eager to murder and destroy other
people of color, in the name of a flag that represents only white folks, then
let me use a vehicle conceived in the heartland of one of history's most cruel
ideoloigies, Nazism.''

According to this historical perspective, a ''Mother Courage'' about Jews of the
Nazi era would be one that focused on the handful of Jews who survived the death
camps by collaborating with their captors; a ''Mother Courage'' about blacks who
fought in the Vietnam war would focus on those gung-ho black G.I.'s who survived
by piling up the largest Vietnamese body counts. By all means there are plays to
be written about such people, and Miss Shange might write a great one. But
''Mother Courage'' is not that play.

Perhaps the writer's true modus operandi is revealed elsewhere in the same
piece, where she says that her choice of ''Mother Courage'' for adaptation was
''arbitrary'' (from a list that also included ''Death of a Salesman,'' ''Cat on
a Hot Tin Roof'' and ''Marat/Sade'') and that her intention was to attack the
''oppressive authority figure'' of white culture by making a ''demon classic
bend to my will.'' She adds that by tackling Brecht she would also resolve a
personal dilemma: She had forgotten about her own work and was involved ''in
fruitless combat with myself'' about ''the works of dead white men.'' On this
point she is entirely right. Such combat is fruitless. A black writer indeed has
no obligation to answer to white writers, living or dead, and for Ntozake Shange
it seems a waste of talent and energy to do so.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Gloria Foster

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BRIDGE CARDS ON THE MOVE

BYLINE: By Alan Truscott

SECTION: Section 2; Page 53, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 818 words


Bridge has been played in some peculiar settings, and many of these have been
military: the trenches at Plevna, in modern Rumania, where the first recorded
game of ''bridge'' was played just over a century ago; the headquarters of
General Eisenhower, where he played with his staff while awaiting news of the
North African landings; military hositals in Vietnam, where doctors between the
arrivals of casualties. On a physically higher level was the school roof near
London, England, where this columnist played during World War II on the
assumption that moonlight would be present and German bombers absent.

Playing while on the move is common in the comfortable lounges of the
fast-vanishing ocean liners and in the relative comfort of commuter trains.
Games in the air are rarer, partly because plane designers are less far-sighted
and considerate than their train counterparts in providing reversible seats.

A novel and perhaps unique form of travelling bridge was recently reported by
Bill Saunders of Tenafly, N.J. Since bus bridge and auto bridge are impractical,
he and a group of friends have found the ideal compromise: a vanpool. Each
weekday morning, with door-to-door service at about half the cost of public
transportation, they play bridge en route to their offices in such respected
institutions as Avon Products, Bristol Myers, J.C.Nielson, Booz Allen and
Chemical Bank.

The bridge is swift but not always skilled. On the diagramed deal, for example,
North's response of two hearts to one club was far from standard: Perhaps he was
not fully awake at 7.30 A.M., a strange hour for bridge-playing. Naturally
expecting a powerful hand opposite him, South launched into Blackwood and was
disappointed to find that his partner held only one ace.

The auction suggested to West that his partner might hold an ace, so he might
have tried the attacking lead of a diamond against six no-trump, settling the
issue immediately. But he led a spade, which turned out to have some virtue. It
forced out the spade ace and gave South some communication problems.

The best way to try for four club tricks would not be obvious in a leisurely
evening game. At breakfast-time playing at 55 m.p.h. in a crowded van it is not
surprising that South failed.

The normal play of cashing the ace-king of clubs was not available since
dropping the doubleton queen would not help. The opening lead had tangled the
entries so that South could not hope to run both clubs and hearts in that
fashion. As it happens, unblocking the jack would succeed, but he could not
reasonably play for queen-ten doubleton.

With only one entry to the dummy, South could not consider playing East for both
honors, for that would require two leads from the North hand. The right play was
to cash the ace of clubs and then run hearts, leading the jack eventually from
the dummy in the hope that West began with a doubleton ten. As it happens the
fall of the ten under the ace would be revealing, and South might well judge the
position correctly and drop the queen eventually to make the slam.

South ran all his hearts and led the club jack, a reasonable plan.  When this
lost to the queen he was down three, a painful thing to happen to anyone. And
when South realised that the ridiculous play of the ace and king of clubs would
have brought success, he had to be restrained from jumping out of the van, over
the side of the George Washington Bridge, and into the Hudson River.

NORTH S 4 H A Q J 10 8 5 3 D 5 4 C J 3 2
WEST EAST S Q 8 7 6 2 S K 9 3 H 7 6 4 H 9 2 D K 9 2 D A 10 7 6 3 C Q 10 C 6 5 4

SOUTH(D) S A J 10 5 H K D Q J 8 C A K 9 8 7
Both sides were vulnerable. The bidding: South West North East 1 C Pass 2 H Pass
4 N.T.  Pass 5 D Pass 6 N.T.  Pass Pass Pass

West led the spade six.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Diagram

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BATTENING DOWN FOR THE STORM

BYLINE: By ERNEST DICKINSON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 9, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1157 words

DATELINE: WILLOUGHBY, Ohio


Harry E. Figgie Jr., solidly constructed, hands in pockets, strolls under the
brick arcade. As he discusses the Georgian Colonial style of the buildings in
this wooded suburb of Cleveland and pauses to greet a gardener by his first
name, he could be mistaken for a university president. Certainly the
headquarters of A-T-O Inc., the corporation of which he is chairman and chief
executive, looks more like a college campus than the soon-to-berelocated seat of
a multinational conglomerate.

But despite Mr. Figgie's soft voice and gentle demeanor, there is a glint of
steel in his eyes when he talks about the measures he plans for A-T-O, a widely
diversified industrial and consumer products company that managed to increase
earnings per share by 28.8 percent during the 1974-75 recession. With another
economic downturn under way, Mr. Figgie wants a repeat performance.

''I am running this business entirely differently now,'' he said.  ''For the
first time, I have told every division, 'Either you give us a positive cash flow
or we fold you.' And we are doing that. I closed two divisions in 1979 and two
and a half divisions so far this year.'' Mr. Figgie is also demanding tighter
control of working capital and has halted capital spending.

Still, the tough-minded 56-year-old Mr. Figgie has opened more divisions than he
has closed in the 16 years since he bought a failing fire-protection company
with sales of $22 million and built it into the A-T-O of today, a complex of 36
divisions with annual sales of more than $690 million that was assembled under
the strict provision that, if one sector of business experiences hard times,
other areas should be able to pick up the slack.

''The divisions are into very attractive growth areas of the economy,'' said
Arthur G. Davis, an analyst with Prescott, Ball and Turben in Cleveland who has
followed the company. ''They should be the beneficiary, for example, of
increases in military spending and the concentration on aerospace and commercial
navigation. The various opportunities for growth enable it to eliminate a couple
of the weaker divisions that have some deep problems. This could give a
significant boost to the earning power of the whole company.''

Mr. Figgie's background is as varied as the companies he has collected. He has
earned four academic degrees, including a master's in business administration
from Harvard and a law degree from Cleveland Marshall Law School. In 1953, he
went to work for the consulting firm of Booz, Allen & Hamilton, leaving nine
years later to take a group vice presidency at A.O. Smith in Milwaukee, a metal
products maker.

In 1963, Mr. Figgie found backers to buy the ''Automatic'' Sprinkler Corporation
of America in Youngstown, Ohio, a money-losing fire-protection company. ''The
firm's net worth was $8.6 million,'' Mr. Figgie said. ''We were able to buy it
for $7.2 million. We raised $1.3 million and borrowed most of the rest from
banks.''

After 12 months with Mr. Figgie in charge, the company that had lost money in
all of the previous five years achieved a 9.6 percent pretax profit. Its assets
of $9 million in 1963 have grown to more than $500 million.

Through a series of acquisitions, Mr. Figgie expanded the original lines of
business from fire protection and security to construction, mining and
material-handling, sporting and athletic goods, electrical and electronic
products, food products and machinery. Many of the company's brand names are
well known: American La France fire engines, Sher-Wood hockey sticks, Rawlings
sporting goods, Safeway scaffolding and Rusco electronic systems.

The company has also nurtured several internal services, such as insurance claim
investigation and computer software development, into companies that do business
externally as well. Now, it is moving into real estate. A 1,000-acre site it
recently purchased near Richmond, Va., will become the location of a new
headquarters complex next year, although the company will retain some operations
here.

Despite its appearance as a random assemblage of unrelated companies, the
acquisitions that make up A-T-O were chosen with care and according to strict
criteria set by Mr. Figgie: They were in growth areas of the economy and,
although many had high-recognition names, most were in trouble for one reason or
another.

''We couldn't afford blue chip entries,'' Mr. Figgie said. ''I was looking for
sick companies that I could turn around.'' They also had to fit into a
predetermined mix at A-T-O of industrial, consumer, technical or defense and
service-related enterprises so that, when some companies were rolling into a
recession, others would already be on the way out.

Mr. Figgie said that one of the things he learned as a consultant was that the
bigger you are, the longer it takes you to die. ''A single mistake can kill a
small company,'' he said. ''So, in the first few years, I was in a sweat to get
us up to $300 million in sales. Then, by 1970, I was ready to begin the process
of consolidation and internal growth.''

By the 1970's, only 1 percent of A-T-O's growth came through acquisitions, yet
the company has reported higher earnings per share on a quarter-to-quarter
comparison in 35 of the last 36 quarters.

Nevertheless, Mr. Figgie said he does not have profits - $17.6 million last year
on revenues of $691 million - where he wants them yet. He said that 93 percent
of the company's divisions were meeting the goal of a 4.6 percent after-tax
return on sales, but that the remaining 7 percent were still ''sick.'' Another
weakness, Mr.  Figgie conceded, is the company's debt-equity ratio. In 1963, it
was 6 to 1. It is now down to 1 to 1, but the goal is to reduce it to 3/10 to 1.

The company also suffers from a lingering image problem. In 1968, its stock hit
a high of $74, then dropped percipitously. By 1970, it had reached a low of $6.
Analysts blamed the plunge on the overall decline in the stock market during the
period, but they also pointed to an acquisition by Mr. Figgie of a defense
supplier that was locked into a contract with increasing losses. A subsequent
change in military strategy in the Vietnam War eventually resulted in the
closing of the entire division, depriving A-T-O of the profits it had expected.

Recent earnings, however, appear strong, with per share results of $2.41 last
year, compared with $2.13 in 1978 and $1.53 in 1977. But the market still
remains wary of A-T-O; the stock now trades between $8 and $13.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Ernest Dickinson is a freelance writer based in Chappaqua, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
OPEC Makes A Stiff Bow to Oil-Price Unity

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1576 words


The Disorganization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is small comfort to oil
consumers. Last week's price-setting meeting of producers in Algiers was
exceptionally acrimonious, but it ended, in the words of Kuwait's oil minister,
in ''a semblance of unity'' on price increases.

The 13 cartel members agreed to an Iraqi formula: a new ceiling of $37 a barrel,
which is about the price such ''hawks'' as Libya, Algeria and Nigeria are
already charging for their oil, in return for an increase of the current
benchmark floor price for Saudi light crude, from $28 to $32 a barrel.

Saudi acquiescence was grudging and tentative, however, reflecting concern that
any increase would further undermine consuming economies hit hard by previous
OPEC decisions. As the meeting broke up, Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani told reporters,
''I have agreed to nothing. I will not raise my prices.'' The next day, however,
after Kuwait, Venezuela, Qatar and Iraq had announced $2 increases starting in
July, the Saudi oil minister began to hedge. ''I don't rule out going up by some
amount, perhaps not the whole $4, but maybe a dollar or two,'' by the next
meeting in September, he said.

OPEC will be 20 years old in November and the Saudis would like to celebrate
with a return to price unanimity and are banking on market forces to help. To
that end, for now they will continue to produce 9.5 million barrels a day, a
million more than the Saudi norm before July 1979, to keep supply in excess of
demand.

The strategy seems to be working. Diplomats in Teheran said last week that Iran,
which officially charges $36 a barrel for its Saudilike light crude, sold two
tanker-loads to India for between $32 and $33 a barrel.

Khomeini Warns Of Internal Strife

Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini warned Iranians last week that their Islamic
Republic ''could be destroyed by those who are on our side.'' He should know.
For more than seven months, the fate of the Iranian revolution, not to mention
53 American hostages, has been clouded by the Ayatollah's refusal to permit the
emergence of a strong central government in Teheran. His statement last week
reflected concern over continued feuding between his secular and religious
supporters.  But, as in the past, he refused to take a side and the disharmony
persisted.

A rally in Teheran of 30,000 Mujaheddin, a movement that calls itself both
leftist and Islamic, was attacked by several thousand stone-throwing
''Hezbollahi,'' more pure Partisans of God. Police said 300 people were hurt and
the Mujaheddin said one of their members was killed. Earlier, the Iranian Army's
revolutionary tribunal announced that it had uncovered a ''plot'' in a unit
assigned to the restive Kurdish region and 11 soldiers had been arrested.

The main factions competing for power in Teheran are led by the secular
President, Abolhassan Bani-Sadr, and the Islamic Republican Party, which
controls the Parliament. The fate of the American hostages is the string in
their tug of war. Religious xenophobes among the Islamic Republicans have
demanded that the hostages be tried for espionage. Last week, however, Mr.
Bani-Sadr warned that such trials could have ''unforeseen consequences'' for
Iran. Another lay politician, former Deputy Prime Minister Sadegh Tabataba'i,
also said he was opposed to trials. Instead, he urged that the hostages be freed
''as soon as possible.''

The Very Same Mr. Clark

When the American hostages were seized Nov. 4, the man President Carter sent to
intercede with the Islamic authorities was Ramsey Clark, the former United
States Attorney General who, early on, had supported the Iranian revolution. Mr.
Clark was not received in Teheran. This month he was, and he headed home last
week to face possible prosecution for violating a Presidential ban on travel to
Iran.

He was also falling smack into a political-legal storm stirred up by President
Carter's comment, in a shirtsleeve news conference on a flight to Nebraska, that
it was his ''inclination'' to prosecute Mr.  Clark and his ''guess'' that the
Justice Department would seek civil or even criminal penalties against him. The
President also referred disparagingly to ''American dissidents'' and asserted
that ''visits by misguided Americans like Clark'' could only make it harder to
gain the hostages' release.

Beyond the questions raised over the propriety of the remarks, Mr.  Carter
seemed to undercut his new Secretary of State, Edmund S.  Muskie, who had
indicated just two days earlier that the Administration would go easy on Mr.
Clark and the nine other Americans who went with him. The purpose of the travel
ban, Mr.  Muskie said, was to safeguard American lives, ''not to punish people
who violate it.''

Attorney General Benjamin R. Civiletti denied that the President's comments
would prejudice proceedings against Mr. Clark. If he is prosecuted, that is.
Some legal experts questioned the constitutionality of the travel ban, which the
Administration based on a 1977 act permitting economic sanctions against a
foreign country for national security reasons. Constitutional lawyers noted that
while the United States Supreme Court has upheld the power of the State
Department to stamp passports invalid for travel to certain countries, it has
never said the Government can prosecute someone for going there anway.

South Africa Hits SWAPO in Angola

As the United Nations Security Council last week was approving a resolution
condemning South Africa's internal policy of apartheid and its ''military acts''
against neighboring states, Pretoria was showing what it thought of the United
Nations, its neighbors and plans for elected black majority rule in South-West
Africa.

The white Government disclosed that ground troops and aircraft had struck deep
into Angola to attack bases of the South-West Africa People's Organization, the
guerrilla group that has been fighting for nearly 15 years to end South African
control of the territory also called Namibia.

Prime Minister P.W. Botha told Parliament that South African troops had
destroyed the operational headquarters of SWAPO, killing more than 200
guerrillas while losing 16 of its own men. The invasion, which Mr. Botha called
a ''shock attack'' and which reportedly lasted two or three days, was the most
elaborate strike since one in May 1978, which killed 600 blacks. The victims
then apparently included civilian refugees.

Less dramatic events, but with perhaps more ominous implications for a United
Nations settlement under negotiation for more than three years, were under way
in Windhoek, the capital of South-West Africa.  Officials announced last week
that they would form a ministerial council, equivalent to a cabinet,
representing local blacks and whites and led by a white supported by South
Africa, Dirk Mudge.

McNamara Retiring From World Bank

Robert S. McNamara, who led the international aid community in recognizing that
poor countries need food before they need industry, said last week that he is
leaving the World Bank.

In 12 years as president, he tripled the bank's lending, in inflation-adjusted
terms, from less than $1 billion in 1968 to $11.5 billion this year. His
sometimes controversial priorities included rural development and birth control
in the poorest countries, and improvement of health, education, nutrition and
housing from the bottom up. He also channeled funds into a search for gas and
oil in many of the 100 developing countries on the bank's $100 billion loan
list. With rising energy costs creating unmanageable burdens, he speeded up
project payments in a way that will help poor countries with their
balance-of-payment deficits.

Mr. McNamara, who will be 65 years old when he retires next year, went to
Washington in 1961 as President Kennedy's Secretary of Defense. A ''whiz kid''
manager who had risen to president of the Ford Motor Company, he applied
computerized systems analysis to reducing waste in defense spending. Then the
Vietnam war ballooned his budgets and he became a reviled target of antiwar
protestors.

At the bank he has spoken for the conscience of the rich nations, stressing the
''social dimension'' of development without, however, losing the highest ratings
for the bank's bonds on the money markets. Shifting focus from loans for dams
and steel mills, he argued that it would take years for benefits of the big
projects to filter down to burgeoning populations already straining food
supplies. ''Man cannot live by G.N.P. alone,'' he said.

Possible successors mentioned in early speculation included other former Cabinet
officers Cyrus Vance, Elliott Richardson and William Simon, John Turner, a
former Canadian Finance Minister, and Edward Heath, the former British Prime
Minister.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Barbara Slavin and Milt Freudenheim

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF AHMED ZAKI YAMMANI

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JAPAN WILL WATCH VOTE FOR ATTITUDES ON DEFENSE

BYLINE: By HENRY SCOTT STOKES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1081 words

DATELINE: TOKYO


The immediate questions as Japan prepares for elections next Sunday are who will
be Prime Minister after the death of Masayoshi Ohira last week and whether the
Liberal Democratic Party, which has ruled for 25 years unfettered by coalition
partners, will have to take one on to hold a majority in Parliament. But
undercurrents of opinion on what may be the key issue for Japan in this decade -
the pace and extent of rearmament - may also be brought to the surface by the
vote.

Japan currently spends less than one percent of its trillion-dollar gross
national product on the military, far below the average for Western industrial
powers. Even if armed forces pensions and other items normally counted in North
Atlantic Treaty Organization defense budgets are included, the total comes to
less than 1.5 per cent of G.N.P., as compared to more than 5 percent for the
United States.

Those Japanese who argue for higher defense spending, including the arms
manufacturers, some powerful figures in the business world and in the ruling
party and some opposition politicians, say that Japan is not doing enough to
protect itself within the framework of a security pact with the United States.
Washington provides Japan with its only strategic defense - intercontinental
ballistic missiles, Polaris submarines and early warning systems.

Advocates of a bigger contribution say Japan should increase its defense budget
at least by annual increments of 0.1 percent of G.N.P. The money, they say,
should be spent on conventional weapons and other hardware, mainly military
aircraft. They rule out expansion of the ''Self-Defense Forces,'' as Japan's
239,000-member armed forces are known, in deference to pacifist sentiment dating
from Japan's devastating defeat by the United States, its first in 1,500 years
of recorded history.

Steeling for Japan's Defense

The chief supporters of a bigger defense budget are elderly businessmen, many of
whom are financiers for the Liberal Democratic Party. They include Shigeo
Nagano, the 79-year-old head of the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry and a
former steel magnate, who argues for increasing defense spending to at least 2
percent of G.N.P.; and Hosai Hyuga, who is 74, a tycoon from the Kansai and also
a steelman by background; he has called for national conscription to replace the
present volunteer army.

Under Prime Minister Ohira, support for their views was not overwhelming among
Liberal Democrats in general or in the powerful bureaucracy, from which the
party recruits many of its leaders. Mr.  Ohira and his ally, former Prime
Minister Kakuei Tanaka, pointedly snubbed the arms lobby during Mr. Ohira's
18-month tenure.

Leaders of other Liberal Democratic factions, however, such as former Prime
Minister Takeo Fukuda and, in particular, Yasuhiro Nakasone, a populist and an
effective orator who is considered a possible future Prime Minister, lean toward
higher defense spending.  Among their supporters are almost all of the Liberal
Democratic right-wing, including the score of former members of the defunct
parliamentary club, Seirankai. Meanwhile, Ichiro Nakagawa, a hawkish former
Seirankai leader, is forming his own faction with support from the
novelist-politician, Shintaro Ishihara.

Another well-known hawk is Hiroomi Kurisu, a former chairman of Japan's Joint
Chiefs of Staff who was fired two years ago for, among other controversial
views, questioning in public the principle of civilian control of the armed
forces. He is running for Parliament now as a candidate for the Democratic
Socialist Party, a moderate opposition group and a possible coalition partner
for the Liberal Democrats if they fail to win a majority alone.

Mr. Kurisu's campaign has one plank - rearmament. ''We have to make our
contribution to world peace,'' the former general insists. His decision to run
on the Democratic Socialist ticket is suggestive. It signals a slowly broadening
support among Japanese for such policies as increased arms spending, legislation
empowering the armed forces to act in emergency without prior approval from the
Prime Minister, who is commander in chief under the 1947 ''peace constitution,''
and an official secrets act to fend off prying journalists and spies - policies
that had minimal support in the last decade even as the United States was
withdrawing from Vietnam and Soviet sea and airpower were expanding in the Far
East. A few years ago, Mr. Kurisu would probably have joined the Liberal
Democrats. But the Democratic Socialists, who broke from the Japan Socialist
Party in 1969, now espouse defense policies that are indistinguishable from
those of the ruling party.

The Socialists, the main opposition party, are in theory opposed to defense
spending and seek to abrogate the 1960 security pact with the United States. But
they, too, appear to have been swept along by the ''defense mood'' and Socialist
candidates no longer stress the defense platform in their speeches. Moderate
conservatives, such as Kiichi Miyazawa, also a possible future Prime Minister,
argue that Japan must share responsibility for maintaining a stable world order.

Since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan last year, the United States has called
on Japan to increase defense spending, but has not said by how much. The Chinese
took a similar position even earlier.  During a visit to Tokyo in late 1978,
Deputy Prime Minister Deng Hsiaoping upset Japanese Socialists by urging
rearmament to meet any Soviet threat. The Russians responded with charges of a
revival of militarism in Japan, the identical accusation made by China until
1972, when the two Oriental powers re-established diplomatic relations.

In Japan, strong support for Mr. Kurisu's candidacy in Tokyo or a surge of
interest in Mr. Nakasone's undeclared candicacy for Prime Minister would
indicate electoral backing for cautious rearmament.  That such men could hold
power at all signals a dramatic change in popular attitudes. Twenty years ago
today, Socialists and Communists staged the biggest demonstrations in postwar
Japan in a vain effort to prevent ratification by Parliament of the United
States-Japan defense treaty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A SOCIETY IMPERILED BY NO AVAILABLE OPTION

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 440 words


To the Editor:

''There was very little planning for unexpected contingencies,'' says the report
on the helicopter raid in Iran prepared for Senator Tower (news story June 6).

here was no alternative plan of action prepared when the investigative team
failed to get the door of the Three Mile Island reactor building open.

The entire U.S. nuclear-waste management program has been at a standstill for
over a decade because as each proposal (the salt mine at Lyons, Kans., the
retrievable surface storage facility) was rejected, there was no available
alternative.

There is no realistic alternative to the MX missile, say Department of Defense
analysts.  ''No alternative available'' threatens to become the unofficial motto
of U.S. society as we move into the increasingly technological 1980's.

Not that this rhetoric is new. In 1945, Truman saw no alternative to the nuclear
bombing of Japan. During the Vietnam War, we had to destroy villages to save
them. Nixon had no alternative other than the Watergate coverup to ''save the
Presidency.''

But those were basically political choices, and the claim of no available
alternative has been a convenient retrospective excuse at least since the time
of Thucydides. What is new, and increasingly frightening, is the extent to which
politicians and public alike are becoming unknowingly committed to a future out
of their direct control because of the lack of technical alternatives.

When the issue of technical determinism first arose in the 1960's and 70's, it
was seen largely as a political issue, a matter of preempting political choices
and co-opting public opinion. But now it is raised in a new and more frightening
guise; where there are no options offered, neither politics nor choice is free
to act at all.

Perhaps it is not too late for Congressional and public voices to be raised
demanding that those who are determining our technical future, both in the
military and in the civilian realm, provide us in advance with a list of options
in case of failure, a set of fall-back positions designed to prevent future
faits accomplis.

Otherwise, given present trends, it is all too easy to imagine some future
regulator, general or President, given ''no available option'' other than to
allow great public harm, take action that would initiate a major war.  GENE I.
ROCHLIN Berkeley, Calif., June 6, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: DRAWING

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT THE KREMLIN DOES'NT WANT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 187 words


To the Editor:

Leonard Bernstein says that his June 10 Op-Ed article, ''Just Suppose We
Disarmed,'' is a fantasy. Obviously, he wishes to be taken as seriously as would
a composer of a musical fantasy.

But does his essay play?  If we disarmed unilaterally, he asks, would the
Russians come over and administer ''so huge, complex and problematical a society
as ours?'' In viewing the matter thus, Mr. Bernstein, for all his musical
prowess, has clearly mistaken a fantasy for a burlesque. It is simply ludicrous
to imagine that what the Soviets want is literally to govern the world, to
''take over'' all 170 or so nation-states.

Instead, their ideology and their latter-day actions - from Havana to Kabul to
Hanoi - indicate that they wish to control the world. And there is a difference
between outright ruling and directly or indirectly controlling.

As a conductor, Mr. Bernstein himself might appreciate this distinction, since
it is not required that he actually play each instrument in the orchestra; only
see to it that it is played the way he or the score wishes.
ALBERT L. WEEKS, New York, June 10, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE AID FOR EL SALVADOR IS CALLED NONLETHAL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1076 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA


Carter Administration officials, when pressing Congress for passage of $5.7
million in emergency military assistance for El Salvador on March 25, insisted
that the request was for ''nonlethal'' equipment that ''will help strengthen the
Army's key role in reforms.'' The package was approved a week later. According
to Congressional testimony on March 25 by Franklin D. Kramer, Assistant
Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, the aid would consist
of $3.7 million for trucks and transport vehicles, $316,000 for riot-control
gear, $1.2 million for communications equipment, and $400,000 for ''various
other equipment to include trailers.'' The rest of the outlay was for
transporting the materiel. What Mr. Kramer neglected to disclose in his public
testimony was that the aid package in fact included combat-related equipment
that stretches the definition of ''nonlethal'' beyond credibility. The Defense
Security Assistance Agency had provided Congress with a list of the items in the
military-aid proposal that was more detailed than the one made public by Mr.
Kramer. The members of Congress who saw the list - it was given to the House and
Senate Appropriations Committees, the House Foreign Affairs Committee and the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee - accepted the ''nonlethal'' designation
despite the nature of the equipment. When this gear reaches the field, however,
any distinction between lethal and nonlethal will have been lost. As repression
by Salvadoran security forces escalates daily in the countryside, this gear
becomes vital to the junta's waging of counterinsurgency war.

Under the Freedom of Information Act, the American Friends Service Committee has
obtained copies of the ''Letters of Offer and Acceptance'' from the Department
of the Army that detail the military aid approved by Congress. To be delivered
(some equipment is en route, the Army says) are 7,500 CS tear-gas grenades, 250
''Manpack'' field combat radios, thousands of batteries, and an unspecified
number of tear-gas-grenade launchers. The sale of 50 portable PVS-2B
night-vision devices blurs the supposed distinction between lethal and nonlethal
weapons: These electro-optic devices are used for observation and nighttime
weapons targeting. Night-vision-weapons technology and related equipment like
the 12 ''Image Intensifiers,'' also included, were perfected for use in Vietnam.
To help security forces preserve so-called law and order, the Administration is
sending three communications-monitoring sets at more than $38,000 each. An Army
aide says that security forces will use them to monitor the airwaves and track
the exact locations of clandestine-radio transmitters: ''It's perfect for use
against guerrillas and insurgents.''

Was there an attempt to keep the extent of the aid package from public scrutiny
- particularly the night-vision instruments and the image-intensifiers?

If little public attention has been given to the Pentagon list, even less has
been paid to private arms transactions between United States firms and the
Salvadoran police, Government agencies and private citizens. Despite the
volatile situation, Washington has apparently not restricted commercial export
of weapons to El Salvador. In January, the Commerce Department licensed the
export of $8,000 worth of ''nonmilitary'' shotguns and spare parts to that
country. This year, the State Department's Office of Munitions Control expects
to issue licenses for up to $250,000 worth of arms from private corporations for
export to El Salvador, ''mostly for carbines, handguns and rifles,'' a
Congressional source said.

As part of its new aid package for El Salvador for fiscal 1981, the
Administration has asked Congress to approve even more overtly combat-oriented
equipment. It includes helicopters, jeeps, patrol boats, aircraft engines and
parachutes.

United States interest in maintaining Salvadoran stability has effectively
fostered repression and subjected the nation to 50 years of military rule
supported by Washington. In the 1960's, El Salvador was a laboratory for
military counterinsurgency specialists and police technicians. The United
States' Office of Public Safety set up a ''model police system,'' trained 448
Salvadoran policemen, organized riot-control units and emphasized urban patrols.
The Office also helped automate repression by establishing a central
policerecords system and a ''modern telecommunications network for the National
Police and National Guard with a direct link to the Central America/Panama
Security Network.'' From 1950 to 1979, the Pentagon spent $16.7 million more on
training and equipping Salvadoran armed forces.

The current military-civilian junta rules under a state of siege.  It proclaims
itself a moderate alternative to extremists on the left and right. But even
implementation of its agrarian-reform plan seems designed more to eliminate
popular opposition than to achieve progressive change. According to a March
report by Amnesty International: ''Troop movement by Army and National Guard
units that were announced ... for the implementation of the land reform, have in
fact involved the disappearance and killing of hundreds of campesinos in
villages supporting opposition labor organizations.'' San Salvador's Roman
Catholic Archdiocese said on May 15 that it had documented 1,468 deaths at the
hands of security and paramilitary forces since January. The Carter
Administration's show of force in support of the junta may cost our country far
more than $5.7 million. ''It may be the most badly spent $5 million your
Congress has ever appropriated,'' said Napoleon Navarro, who directs the
Church's radio in El Salvador. ''It may sow anti-Americanism in a country which
is not basically anti-American.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Thomas Conrad is a researcher with the National Action/Research on the
Military-Industrial Complex, a division of the American Friends Service
Committee, a Quaker organization. Cynthia Arnson is an associate of the
Institute for Policy Studies, in Washington, D.C.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

QUEST FOR A FATHER

BYLINE: By Michael Norman; Michael Norman is a freelance writer.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4813 words


In every era, we struggle to come to terms with the essentially insoluble
conflict that arises out of society's demand that we be fathers and sons rather
than selves. - LESLIE FIEDLER.  Only two kinds of calls come in the middle of
the night; one brings very good news, the other very bad. I get calls from my
mother, peculiar calls that are an exception to the rule. They neither frighten
nor cheer. My mother is simply oblivious to time zones. An impulse that seizes
her at, say, midnight in Colorado, rocks me from bed at 2 A.M. in New Jersey.
One night, three years ago, an hour or so before dawn, my mother in a fit of
insomnia was struck with an idea. She asked - no, she insisted - that I find my
father.

My parents divorced when I was 5 years of age. I'm told that in the years that
followed my father visited only on occasion. The last visit, the only one I
remember, came when I was 11. My father, along with his new wife and infant
daughter, took me out to lunch. I sat in a booth facing these strangers and
could think of nothing to say. My father tried to prompt me. ''Michael,'' he
asked, ''have you thought about what you want to be when you grow up?'' I gave
my stock answer of the time. ''A veterinarian,'' I said, ''I want to be a
veterinarian.'' Those were the last words we were to exchange for more than two
decades.

Now, that long silence seemed to trouble my mother. ''I want you to look him
up,'' she said. ''You're a reporter. You know how. Reporters are always finding
people. I'm sure he wants to see you. I know he'd want to hear from you. Promise
me, I want you to promise me you'll do it. O.K.?''

In matters of family, my mother was mostly a private woman. She kept to herself
whatever feelings of guilt she bore for my nomadic and disjointed upbringing.
But she had lately undergone a religious conversion. She had been born again,
the past had a new beginning and it was time to set things right. In fact, the
light from her epiphany was so bright she thought that those close to her would
want to sit in the glow. Some of us, however, still preferred the shadows.

I was tired and resented the call. I promised I would find him. I thought that I
was lying.  I had all but forgotten my father. I could not hear him, could not
see him, could not feel his touch. The voice of family and blood that summoned
others was faint to me. I had come to accept being fatherless. My mother had
remarried twice, but these surrogates, the first callous and indifferent, the
second generous and thoughtful, could not, either with jackboot or gentle
handling, change my course. As a boy, I learned to run for the open field when
the rest of the pack made for home. They had their fathers; I was self-reliant.
And it seemed to me in the always faithful logic of childhood that I had neatly
turned a liability into an asset.

What, now, was to be gained from a reunion? If, as a child, I had little need of
my father, I needed him even less at the age of 32.  Not that I had grown up
alone and isolated. When my own counsel betrayed me, as it often did, I was
lucky enough to have someone close by to keep me from rushing over the edge. At
first it was my mother, then my second stepfather and, now, for the last eight
years, my wife. I did not want to enlarge my circle to make room for a stranger,
and I guessed that my father might feel the same way. After all, he had a second
family, a new life, and no one welcomes an interloper. There was great risk for
both of us. Still, I wondered.

Other than our last lunch together, I had only one childhood memory of my
father. He was leading me up a flight of stairs in his mother's house. At the
top of the landing was a small room with a couch in it and a shelf on the
opposite wall. He sat me on the couch, removed my shoes and told me it was time
for a nap. On the shelf was a picture of a small girl in a ballerina dress. I
asked about it. He said it was my mother. I laughed. He laughed. I fell asleep.

I knew little else of him. I thought he lived in Baltimore or somewhere near
there, and I was sure he once worked for a company called ''Cat's Paw,'' though
what he did there I could not say. And there was one final piece of evidence.

My mother kept tucked in the back of a dresser drawer a small, black-and-white
photograph of my father. He had dark, wavy hair and was wearing glasses. He was
bare chested, seated at a small wooden table in front of an army field tent. The
picture was badly framed and out of focus. It was difficult to make out his
features. My mother explained that the picture was taken in Europe during World
War II. When I looked at that photo, I thought of my father as boys always think
of soldiers; I believed him to be brave. I carried this notion from childhood,
through adolescence and into combat, where I learned that bravery was merely an
act of self-preservation.

In the weeks following my mother's call, I culled my memory for other
recollections of my father, but the effort yielded nothing. I looked for him in
that small chamber of the mind that holds the images of childhood. I found no
companion, no guide, no advocate, no protector, no mentor, no kinsman - in
short, none of the things a boy expects or a man wants to remember.

My father was an enigma, a figure surrounded by questions: Where did he live?
What did he do? Were we alike or antipodes? As it turned out, the answers were
unimportant; I wanted more than simple biography from my father.

Yes, I've found him. As my mother had said, he was easy to locate.  I had only
to ask an operator for his telephone number and address.  Yet it took me three
years to ask that question, three years from the night my mother first elicited
her promise. I had waited, at first, because I did not want to find him. Then,
when I did, I waited for the ''right time,'' that ineffable moment that never
comes. I waited to be prodded, but no one, other than my mother, spoke up.
Finally, I got the kind of push I needed.

Two hours after dawn on Sept. 5, 1978, the son became a father, the father a
grandfather. The line continued, unknown to part of itself. I watched my son
emerge, first the head, then buttocks, then legs - the next generation, mottled
and squirming, no longer connected by cord, not yet attached to the breast, for
the moment in limbo and alone. I cannot say for sure that I thought of my father
then, not directly anyway.

Instead, I thought of the past and its architect, my mother. The daughter of a
Boston pharmacist, Hadassah Goodman married Bernard Goldman in 1944, gave birth
to a son in 1947 and separated from her husband five years later. A talented and
ambitious woman, she parlayed a quick mind and striking good looks into a
successful career in television. Along the way, she changed her name. Hadassah
Goodman Goldman became Pam Good, and I became Mike Good.

We moved often, from one state and one job to the next, until my mother landed a
network slot in New York. Through it all, I knew little about being a part of a
family, and I knew nothing about being a Jew. My mother never spoke of her
birthright, never practiced a formal religion and, except for Christmas, had
little time for ceremonies or rituals.

Of course, I knew my father's name was Goldman. But as a child, I never thought
of myself as a Jew. I was pinned to the present, and my father was part of the
dispossessed past.

When my mother remarried - I was 11 - it was to a blond, blue-eyed Episcopalian
who was the lighting director on her show. She bore him five children. When the
oldest was 6, he walked out on her. My mother and I have rarely talked about
this man. I knew him as well as any boy knows a stepfather he dislikes and
fears. I remember only his malevolence - he wielded the rod often and without
warning - and his hypocritical demand that I attend church.

I was 17 when my mother remarried again. Even though I came to respect and
admire her third and present husband, I kept the name of the second, certified
as it was by time, law and school records. And years later, when I married and
told my wife who and what I was, neither name nor clan was important to her.

Yet at the moment of my son's birth, I heard in his wail the voice of family. I
had reached forward, and I thought that perhaps the time had come to reach back
as well. Still, I waited, through my son's first year and half-way into his
second. Religious heritage was no longer the issue. I had accepted my own Jewish
birthright, my father's legacy, and when my son was born, I passed part of it
along to him - to Joshua.

No, the issue, the basic issue, was an old one. A son uses his father's example
to shape an identity. Even if he rebels and is unlike the father, he still makes
the man his measure. He looks for his father in himself and looks for his self
in his father. We act out our roles thus, says the critic Leslie Fiedler,
because society demands it, and the demand is the same whether the father is
part of the present or locked in the past. I had a fractured identity, a
self-image fashioned from the example of stepfathers, teachers and others. But
it had served me well enough, and, in finding my father, I knew I might find a
different, and unacceptable, self.

One night early this spring, the telephone rang. It was very late, and I knew it
was my mother. This time, she did indeed have bad news. ''Michael,'' she began,
choking, ''Michael, I want you to - you must - your grandmother -'' My
stepfather took the telephone and provided the details.

The old woman was seriously ill, lying in a hospital bed in Illinois. The doctor
had made his tests and was discouraged by the results. She had been sick before
but not like this. He advised an immediate visit.

My mother and stepfather were there when I arrived. They looked spent. The old
woman was asleep, quietly taking oxygen from a tube in her nose. She was 84, but
until this instant had never looked it.  Even in her past infirmities, she had
seemed to me a survivor. She complained, but never yielded. My mother was her
only child, and they had spent their lives conducting a private, unending war.
My mother fought to escape, my grandmother struggled to recapture her.

It had been a long trip for my mother and stepfather from Colorado, and they
returned to their motel to shower and rest. I sat beside the old woman, watching
her breathe. The room was barren, antiseptic and unsettling. I shifted my chair;
my grandmother sighed, then awakened.

She said she was feeling better and wanted to talk. She asked about my wife,
Beth, and the baby, about jobs, about money. Were we O.K.?  Yes, fine. Did we
have enough to eat? Plenty. So what's new? Not much, I said. I had been thinking
about the past, thinking about my father.

''I remember him quite well,'' the old woman said. ''They were very young when
they got married. I told her to wait, but what could I do? She wanted to get
married, and that was that. It was the time of the Second World War. She said,
'Mom, I love him.' I bought her a gold sequined gown to match his brown uniform.
He was away for a long time in France after they were married. When he came back
and you were born, the three of you lived with Sam and me in my house in Chelsea
(near Boston). I always liked him. He was quiet. He had good habits, Michael. I
remember he came to me and begged that the divorce shouldn't go through. He
said, 'What am I going to do about my boy?' That really broke his heart. You
know, Michael, you should look him up. I've always thought you should look him
up. He'll be happy to see you.''

Her story was a revelation, a portrait of a man deeply hurt by the loss of his
son. Yet I wondered how accurate her recollections could be after all these
years. What's more, the old woman had a habit of aggrandizing the past, of
remembering things the way she wanted them to be. But I wanted to believe her,
and, at that moment, I decided to find my father.

''Where do you think he lives?'' I asked. ''Baltimore?'' ''No,'' she said,
''Wilmington, Del. His people have lived in Wilmington all their lives. You look
for him there, Michael. It will be interesting when you meet. You'll notice his
eyes. They're just like yours.'' She had already put us together and, in my
mind, so had I.

Two days later, my grandmother stabilized, as the nurses put it, and forced the
doctor to admit he might have been a little premature with his warnings. I took
an afternoon flight back to Newark, and Beth met me at the airport. I told her I
was going to find my father.

The next night I called the Wilmington operator and asked if she had a listing
for a Bernard J. Goldman. Yes, she said, there is only one, and she gave me the
number. I waited an hour to make the call. I still had doubts.

If my father was alive and if, as my grandmother had said, he was once so
distraught about losing his son, why hadn't he tried to find me? I could not
imagine abandoning my own boy.

I picked up the receiver, reviewed in my mind what I wanted to say and dialed
the number. A young woman answered.  ''I'm looking for a Bernard J. Goldman,'' I
said. ''Is he there?'' ''Yes, just a minute.'' ''Hello.'' It was a man's voice
this time, strong and clear.''Is Bernard J. Goldman there?'' I repeated.
''You're speaking to him,'' came the answer.  I hesitated. My chest was moving
toward my backbone, and I had trouble drawing breath.''My name is Michael
Norman, but it used to be Michael Goldman, and I'm looking for my father.'' He
hesitated. ''... ah ... I had a son named Michael Goldman ... ah ... he would be
about 35 or 36, something like that?'' ''He's 32.'' I said, ''I think you're my
father.'' I waited for the voice to come back. I had prepared myself for nothing
beyond this point. I could feel the pulse in my palm.  ''Well, if you're my son,
I'm very pleased to hear from you.'' ''How are you?'' I asked, fumbling for
something less banal to say after more than two decades of silence.  ''I'm
fine,'' he said. ''Where are you calling from?'' We traded details of geography
and family. I told him about Joshua and he talked about his two daughters. No
other son, I thought to myself. Then he asked why I had decided after all this
time to contact him. I reviewed the reasons: my mother's call, my grandmother's
urging, my own curiosity, a desire to give my son part of the past. ''I often
wondered what I would tell the boy when he asked me about my father,'' I said.
He listened a while longer, then asked me for my address and telephone number.

''I'd love to see you,'' he said.  ''Me, too,'' I came back. ''We have a lot to
catch up on.'' ''Yes,'' he said, ''we do. You know, your name comes up
frequently with my family. I had a feeling deep down that one of these days I
would hear from you. I'm very pleased you called. Really, it's wonderful.''

We planned a reunion in two weeks. I would go to Wilmington and perhaps spend
the night. We agreed to talk again in a week to make the final arrangements. He
sounded excited, and he used the word ''wonderful'' again. I said, ''Goodbye,
Dad,'' and hung up the receiver.

My father was no longer an anonymous outsider from the past. I was about to open
my family circle and admit him. But, after years of indifference, did he have
the right to enter? Was I really willing to let this man treat me as a son? I
was glad we were going to wait a week; it gave us both a chance to change our
minds.

On Tuesday, April 22, I telephoned my father, and we agreed to meet on the
following Saturday. I would take the afternoon train down to Wilmington, spend
the night and return late Sunday. He said his family was anxious to meet me.
''Do you think we'll recognize each other?'' he asked. ''Well, I don't know,'' I
said. ''I'm told we look alike.'' He laughed. We said goodbye.

We could have described ourselves or promised to wear a particular hat or coat,
but by silent agreement we had set ourselves a test. If we were father and son,
we would know it, see it across the eyes or in the mouth, spot it in the
hairline or set of the jaw. At least, that's what we hoped.  THIRD JUMP

In the days that followed, I focused my mind's eye but could not bring my father
into full view. I guessed that he was taller - I am 5 feet, 8 inches - and
broader, and I imagined that he had large hands. I had no evidence, no clues, no
testimony from which to draw this picture. But I had an unerring sense it was
accurate.

Saturday came too quickly. Beth drove me to the station and made me promise to
call that night with a report. She counseled calm, but a man at full gallop
hears only the sounds of his feet striking the ground.

I boarded the train, found a seat by the window and opened a book.  But I felt
claustrophobic, so I stepped between the cars to get some fresh air. The feeling
wouldn't pass; then, when it did, I became light-headed. I walked to the club
car, bought a sandwich and orange juice and gulped them down. That helped, some.
But I was restless, losing control. I snatched my bag from the overhead rack to
see if I'd forgotten anything. I hadn't. When we reached Philadelphia, I
seriously considered leaving the train.

I was afraid, of course, afraid that one of us would disappoint the other. The
child in the man wanted badly to please the father and wanted the father to
please him. But I also knew that this first meeting with my father could be the
last. He had walked away 21 years ago and could easily do it again - and I was
no longer a wellarmored boy. I had loosened my breast plate. I was exposed.

A voice came over the public address system: ''In approximately three minutes,
we will be arriving in Wilmington Station. Please check the overhead rack.
Wilmington, Wilmington Station next.''

I stepped down onto the concrete platform. It was raining. The sky was ashen. I
looked about, but the platform was empty. The train had arrived 15 minutes late.
Had my father grown tired of waiting and left? No, no, he wouldn't do that. He
was probably just sitting in his car with the motor running. I found a stairwell
at the corner of the platform and took it down one flight to where it opened
into a small waiting room crowded with people. Some were seated on banks of
plastic chairs that formed a narrow aisle down the center of the room. Others
milled about in front of the ticket windows or the newsstand.

I put down my bag. At the far end of the room, a small group - a man, a woman, a
teen-age girl - huddled restlessly. I glanced in their direction. The man looked
back. I wondered ... He was staring at me now. Suddenly, he bolted from his spot
and shouted, ''Michael!?''

He had gray hair going to white. I tried to find his eyes but they were screened
behind a pair of glasses. His face, though, was long and shaped like mine. He
was wearing burgundy shoes, dark trousers and a light blue windbreaker that had
the words ''Brandywine Country Club'' embossed on the front. He was short, maybe
5 feet 6, noticeably shorter than I. His hands were small. And as he came toward
me, he moved with a slight limp.

''Dad?'' I said, still not sure, and put out my hand to greet him.  He seized it
and in an instant pulled me to him and embraced me.  ''Michael,'' he said,
''it's been so long, Michael ... Michael.''

I stiffened. I could not bring myself to return the affection of this man I
still considered a stranger. I could not in one moment, as my father was doing
so well, close the distance that two decades had put between us. Still, I did
not want to push him away now that we had finally come together. The public self
let its hand rest loosely on his shoulder, but the private self stepped back to
observe, to analyze and, if necessary, to protect.

''How are you?'' I said, ''it hasbeen a long time.'' ''I'm fine, Michael, just
fine. I'd like you to meet my family.'' He turned to the woman and teen-age girl
next to him, his wife, Doris, and daughter, Andrea, who is 16 years old. They
were smiling.  Both had blond hair, the mother's neatly coiffed, the daughter's
hanging loose in natural curls. The girl had some of her father's face; in fact,
she looked remarkably like me.

On the way to lunch, we filled the car with small talk. I was just beginning to
feel at ease when Doris turned in her seat and in a cool, uncompromising voice
said, ''Tell me, Michael. I wonder. Why after all these years did you bother to
look up your father?'' She was suspicious.

I retold my story. Doris seemed satisfied, and later at the country club, she
pulled me aside for a few private words while my father parked the car. ''I want
you to know,'' she said, ''that your father has been looking forward to your
visit. It means a great deal to him. He has talked about you often. He's a very
sentimental man.''

Now I understood her concern. I had not come to Wilmington to punish my father
for past wrongs, but it was now evident that I had the power to do so. I
reassured her. I told her I simply wanted to get to know him, to discover part
of the past and to decide for myself about the future. She was smiling again.

At lunch my father removed his glasses and proved my grandmother right. We did
have the look of one another. ''And you have the Goldman nose,'' he said. We
groped for common ground.

Then he asked for some personal history, and I gave a brief recitation: a stint
in the Marine Corps and Vietnam, college and a degree in literature, newspaper
and magazine and television jobs, now freelance writing. It was a resume instead
of a biography, a filling in of spaces with one-dimensional facts. The public
self talked freely, the private self was held back.

As for my father, he said he was a sales manager for a company that leased
fleets of cars to other companies. He had worked at the same job for the last 20
years and lived in the same home for the last 16. He said he filled his time
with his family, his job, his golf game and the various social functions of his
club and synagogue. He was in reasonably good health, except for an arthritic
hip that caused him to limp. The worst crisis he had suffered through over the
last two decades had been a hernia operation. He was 63 years old.

I took it all in carefully, sifting through the details, trying to find one,
just one, to which I could connect. But we had no common ground. My topography
rose and fell sharply. His seemed flat.

Of course, my father was not in any sense a formidable figure or man of myth. I
did, however, expect someone different from the man sitting beside me. But
different how? From whom? I watched him eat his lunch and listened to him talk.
And then I saw it -he was different from the people who had always surrounded
me, the eccentrics and self-promoters I had watched as a child and the restless
achievers I now counted among my friends. Next to them, others seemed pale. But
it was the measure that was askew, not my father. He was unaffected. He did not
posture or advertise himself.  He seemed content and, at first, I did not know
what to make of it.

It was midafternoon when we arrived at my father's home, an unadorned, one-story
ranch house in a development on the outskirts of the city. At first glance, the
place was indistinguishable from those around it, but then I saw the large
boulder sitting in the middle of the front yard. My father laughed when I asked
about it. ''We told the builder to leave it there,'' he said. ''We figured
people would always be able to find us.''

We talked the rest of the day, through a roast-beef dinner and into the evening.
Then we piled back into the car and went to an ice-cream parlor for dessert. At
the table next to us, my father spotted an acquaintance. They chatted, then my
father gestured to me. ''I'd like you to meet my son, Michael,'' he said.

''It's nice to see you,'' the man said, ''Do you live in Wilmington?'' ''No,'' I
answered, ''New Jersey.'' ''Oh, well, do you get down here very often?''
''No-o-o,'' I said slowly, ''not very often at all.'' My father caught on and
looked pleased. We now had something in common, even if it was only an inside
joke.I got up early the next morning. The rest of the family was asleep, and I
used the solitary moments to look again at some photo albums my father had shown
me the day before. There were pictures of him as a child, and in uniform, the
last of which was labeled, ''Belgium, 1945.'' The next pictures were taken in
1957, when he met and married Doris. My mother and I, of course, accounted for
the gap. But I knew the story of those years. I had my mother's version of it,
and, the night before, I had gotten my father's.

They met while he was at officers' candidate school at Camp Edwards on Cape Cod.
It was a blind date. She was ''a nice Jewish girl,'' he said. They married six
weeks later; then my father left for combat in France. After I was born, he held
three jobs in as many cities. He managed merchandise and sold credit. What
happened next is a matter of dispute, but the marriage was clearly in trouble.
My mother went her way, and my father his.

I heard a stirring in another part of the house. My father came into the room,
rubbing the sleep from his eyes, and asked if I wanted to take a ride to get
some provisions for breakfast. It was the first time we were alone together.

We rode in silence for a while, then my father repeated something he had said at
lunch just after I arrived. ''One thing, Michael, one thing I want you to know.
I never signed an adoption paper. Your mother's and stepfather's lawyer sent
them to me, but I never signed them.'' He paused for just a moment. ''I often
thought about finding you, but I didn't know where to look, didn't know what
name you were using.''

I could have challenged him, could have shown him a dozen ways to have found his
son, but I kept silent. I did not have to hold my father accountable for the
past; it was clear he was doing that for himself.

I kept silent, too, because at that moment I had as much of the past, or the
truth of it, as I wanted or needed. And I knew now that it was possible to make
the past fit the present. I could be both myself and my father's son, free yet
connected, my own creation and at the same time part of the man sitting next to
me.

There was still some distance between us, but the gap had narrowed, and in time
I hoped it would close. It was enough for now to accept the idea of having a
father, an idea I had rejected as a child and resisted as a man.

That afternoon, the family drove me to the station. We said our goodbyes, and I
promised to bring Beth and Joshua back in a few weeks. I boarded the train and
began to search for a seat. In the aisle in front of me was a woman who had
chatted briefly with my father and Doris at the station while I was occupied at
the ticket window. Now she was struggling with an oversized suitcase. I helped
her lift it to the rack, she thanked me and I turned to go. ''Just a minute,''
she said, ''you're the Goldman boy, aren't you?'' I shifted my bag from one hand
to the other. ''Yes,'' I answered, ''I am.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of author and father

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT'S GOT INTO THE VOTERS THIS YEAR

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4789 words


Cokie Roberts is a reporter for National Public Radio; Steven V.  Roberts covers
politics for The Times.
By Cokie and Steven V. Roberts

: ''I wish there were more choices. I'm not really in favor of any of them. I'll
probably toss up a coin and not even vote. Either way I voted, I'd feel I wasn't
doing the right thing. ... My parents were Republicans, but I felt that if I
went Republican I'd just be following in their footsteps. I try to do things
differently.''- Roger Beury, 27, mechanic, Conshohocken, Pa.

''I'm just really confused. Things keep changing every time you pick up the
paper - it's strange. You just wish someone would come along you could have
confidence in, who knew what he was doing and could turn this country around.''-
Catherine Prince, mid-50's, pharmacy clerk, Terre Haute, Ind.

''In the primary, I thought perhaps I could write in a candidate.  But when it
finally came down to it, I felt like it wouldn't do any good. So just before the
polls closed, I finally went down there and cast a ballot for Kennedy. It was
very frustrating. I wanted somebody else.''- Mike Moukawsher, 27, lawyer,
Groton, Conn.

That's the way it's been during the election season of 1980. Voters across
America have been tossing coins, flipping and flopping, throwing up their hands
in confusion. The whole country, it seems, has been waiting until five minutes
before the polls close and then rushing in to cast their ballots. And after they
do it, they still feel frustrated. The campaign song of 1980 is not ''Happy Days
Are Here Again.'' It's ''I Can't Get No Satisfaction.''

Singing that song is the Volatile Voter, every political reporter's favorite
cliche. Like some elf or hobgoblin, old V.V. has assumed almost mythical
proportions, a peripatetic creature who shows up everywhere, confounding
predictions and expectations and making a lot of experts look foolish.

Who are these obstreperous creatures anyway? What forces have shaped their
character and outlook? What impact have they had so far, and how are they likely
to influence the rest of the political year?  Like a torch thrust into dry
tinder, the peculiar circumstances of 1980 have fueled the explosive nature of
the electorate.  Extraordinary dissatisfaction with the available candidates has
spawned widespread dismay and indecision. Outside events, from the collapse of
Afghanistan to the collapse of the economy, have shaken many basic assumptions.

And now that the primaries are over, and attention is focusing on the
conventions and the election to follow, the unhappiness and uncertainty that has
characterized the campaign so far shows no signs of abating. But the tinder was
already there, waiting for the torch. Massive changes have been altering the
face of the American electorate for a generation, and in one sense, the Volatile
Voter is closely related to a whole host of characters who are already
populating the political landscape - independents and reformers, nonpartisans
and ''new'' politicians, ticket splitters and fencesitters.

These changes leave few areas of life untouched: rising education and income;
the decline of the big cities of the Northeast; the rise of the Sun Belt; the
rebelliousness that has undermined the authority of parents, priests and party
bosses; the influx of younger voters; the impact of television. All this creates
a political environment that turns the most hardened professional clammy with
apprehension.  ''In my eight years in politics, I've never seen the electorate
so volatile and changing,'' says Representative Barbara A. Mikulski, a
streetwise legislator from Baltimore. ''It changes overnight, because people
don't feel committed to anyone.'' Representative Christopher J. Dodd, running
for the Senate from Connecticut, echoes the thought and adds: ''Today, 24 hours
is a lifetime.''

This sense of trepidation also infects political managers, the folks who make a
living from their ability to plan for the future.  ''The biggest thing we're all
worried about,'' says Robert Keefe, a consultant to President Carter's
re-election campaign, ''is that you take a tack in strategy and spend time and
resources establishing a given theme. Then something happens in October to make
you look silly. It's a what's-going-to-happen-next kind of thing.''

The scene was a tract house in Hoffman Estates, one of the suburbs that sprouted
up in the farmland near O'Hare Airport outside Chicago, the sort of place where
the residents have no accents and the industry no pollution. This is Volatilia,
the natural habitat of the Volatile Voter.

The occasion was a home mass, a ritual designed to make the Roman Catholic
Church more appealing to white-collar professionals. After the ceremony, while
he held a glass of rose wine, Ray Kurowski said that the mass, like Senator
Edward M. Kennedy, was ''too liberal'' for his taste. ''I was brought up with
very old-fashioned ideas,'' he said.

And yet Ray Kurowski was not conventional enough to follow the politics of his
father, a Polish immigrant who raised his family in South Bend, Ind., where he
worked as a tool and diemaker. ''My father was very Democratic-oriented,'' he
explained. ''He was an immigrant when he came to this country and he was very
dependent on people to look after him. He had the blue-collar outlook, a strong
union man.''

Ray Kurowski went to college, became a computer-systems analyst, moved to the
suburbs and joined the Republicans. ''My father felt that you couldn't get ahead
without security; you needed organizational backing,'' he explained, sipping his
wine. ''I feel it might be nice to have that, but I don't need it. I make my own
breaks. I'm not as dependent on handouts.''

The concept of Volatile Voters is not universally accepted. Ben J.  Wattenberg,
author and television personality, feels that journalists, particularly on
television, have created an appearance of volatility that is not justified.
''Particularly in the early primaries, there was intense media coverage,'' he
says. ''They handicapped each primary as a separate event rather than as part of
an organic process. Particularly, they paid attention to the polls, which are
notoriously difficult to interpret in primaries because of the low turnout. So
you get the sensation of volatility when something doesn't happen that you
expect to happen.''

The perception of volatility was enhanced this year by the vast increase in the
number of primaries, 35 in all. Many candidates in primaries are practically
unknown, adding to voter uncertainty. And when voters know they are not at the
moment electing a President, they are more likely to indulge their whims or cast
a protest ballot. Roy Wetzel, an analyst for NBC News, says of primary voters:
''They read everything. They are more active and concerned, and that's why
they're so volatile.''

Whether or not primaries are always volatile, this year, voters seem profoundly
unhappy with the available choices. This pervasive lack of confidence in the
political alternatives flows from many factors. In the last 20 years, no
President has served two full terms: one was shot; one was driven from office by
an unpopular war; one resigned under threat of impeachment, and one was
defeated.

Moreover, the shocks of those two decades have shattered the bond of trust that
once existed between the press and politicians.  Disillusionment has fed on
itself leading to harsher scrutiny of public officials, and while that scrutiny
certainly conveys many benefits, politicians, at least, feel that the press has
gone too far, been too critical. These politicians usually fail to mention the
advertising campaigns, often harshly critical, they have used so effectively
this year against their opponents - a technique that itself hardly enhances
public confidence in the process.

They were dressed in matching white and maroon uniforms - ''We look like a
bowling team'' - and they were eating lunch at a Wendy's in Terre Haute, Ind.
Dr. David Hay is a dentist and Joy Caskey, his assistant; neither one is very
happy. ''I just have to say,'' said the dentist, ''that I haven't been turned on
for any candidate since Jack Kennedy.'' Since then, there's been Vietnam and
Watergate, Agnew and Abscam. Did that affect his outlook? ''Sure, it has a
negative effect,'' the dentist replied. ''You can't be exposed to this amount of
distrust and not react negatively to the whole political system.''

Miss Caskey feels that television contributes to these negative feelings. ''One
thing I resent most about the news media,'' she asserted between spoonfuls of a
chocolate freeze, ''is that the President signs off his news conference at 9:28
- then some commentator comes on and tells me what he said, and immediately they
start in on the things he did wrong.''

If President Carter feels the press has undermined public confidence, many
analysts think the President has done a fair bit himself. One pollster, for
example, says, ''The fact of the matter is that we now have very limited
expectations from the President, and that's what Carter has done. He's really
obliterated any sense of a vision of the future, of where the country's going.
Jimmy Carter has sold us a bill of goods - that we can't really solve our
problems.  Today, he says, the job of President is beyond the ability of any
man.''

Honey Creek Square in Terre Haute, Ind., air-conditioned and anonymous,
surrounded by parking lots and interstates. America's new crossroads, where
Volatilia shops:

Jan Perry had just finished work at an advertising agency and was sipping a
Coke. ''Anybody,'' she asserted, ''who promises me he's going to take care of
everything, I don't believe him, because he can't. Nobody's going to make it all
better.

''We want to find someone we can believe in. We want to feel like we did when
the U.S. hockey team beat Russia. We want to feel good about America. We want
someone to see us through the hard times. But there's just nobody.''

Hard times. Things may seem out of control because they are out of control. Iran
and Afghanistan, inflation and interest rates. As the old saw goes, if you keep
your head while everybody around you is losing theirs, maybe you just don't
understand the situation.

We lived through the California earthquake of 1971 in Los Angeles, and at times
this year an analogy has seemed unavoidable. After that tremor, many people
showed up with deep-seated anxieties. The reason, psychologists say, is that
something very basic, the earth itself, had proved unreliable. The most
elemental assumptions were thrown awry. Perhaps something like that has happened
politically. How many Americans expected their country to seem so helpless in
the face of a small Middle Eastern country? Didn't most of us expect that our
standard of living would always improve? Wasn't life always supposed to be
better for our children?

For better or worse, the events of this year are only the latest links in a long
chain of events that have been altering the basic ground. The pollster Louis
Harris says that in June 1979, 38 percent of the voters identified themselves as
Democrats, down from 51 percent in November 1976. Republicans stayed at 24
percent during that time, while independents jumped to 37 percent from 23
percent.  More significantly, Harris reports that about two-thirds of all voters
now split their tickets, three times the number 20 years ago.

Tom D'Alessandro, former Mayor of Baltimore, gives the basic reason for this
shift when he says, ''Politics have changed because people have changed.'' One
change has been the rising level of education. On primary day in Chicago, we
spent the morning in the 23d Ward, a heavily Polish and Italian district on the
city's southwest side. At ward headquarters, Timothy J. Gibbons expounded on his
29 years in the Chicago organization. ''The Democratic Party used to be blue
collar,'' rumbled Gibbons, a shrewd, rotund man who holds a patronage job in the
city's electricity department. ''But it's getting more sophisticated all the
time. We have second- and third-generation people now and we're running into
college graduates. The husband and wife are both working; they read Time and
Newsweek and things like that. And you have TV. Let's face it - today you have
to present a good candidate, you can't run the old political hacks.''

Vincent Grosso lives in a suburban New Jersey town called Turnersville, and
works as an accountant for a hospital. It's a short ride, but a long journey,
from South Philadelphia, where Grosso grew up. ''Traditionally, the family was
Democratic,'' he recalled one day. ''I kind of followed in their steps till I
found out on my own.

''My parents were from the old country and they settled in any area that was all
Italian. They were comfortable there. They couldn't speak English, my father was
a laborer, and the whole neighborhood was Democratic. He felt he got a fairer
shake from the Democrats than the Republicans.''

Vince Grosso went to college, got married, bought a house.  ''Breadand-butter
issues come to the fore. I took a closer look at the political leaders and what
they were doing. I had more information available to me, through reading. My dad
didn't have that, because he couldn't read. But I made a basic decision to look
at other parties.''

The old organization rested on one thing: dependency. The fathers of Ray
Kurowski and Vince Grosso felt they needed protection because they lacked
education and saleable skills. The party provided information, security and
jobs. But Civil Service reforms have eliminated a good many patronage jobs
outside of Chicago. More important, rising income levels have liberated more
workers from their reliance on patronage, and altered their basic economic
selfinterest.

In Peoria during the Illinois primary, Joe Zagnoli, an official of the
rubber-workers union, bemoaned the lack of union support for Ted Kennedy and
said, ''We've done such a good job negotiating contracts that we've made
Republicans of the rank and file.''

A generation ago, the members of Zagnoli's union belonged to the working class,
and when Democratic liberals talked about social programs to help the
underprivileged, the union members thought that meant them. But as Gene Davis,
head of the carpenters' union in Peoria, put it, ''We're middle-class people
now, not working-class people the way we used to be. Our members pay more than
their share of the tax burden. When someone says the Federal Government should
throw money at problems, we realize most of that money is coming out of our
pockets.''

We were in Milwaukee one night and heard Ronald Reagan give a speech at Serb
Hall, a historic bastion of Democratic politicians. In the back, cheering her
blond head off, was Chris Schenk, a 25-yearold accounting clerk in tight jeans,
who paused for a moment and explained: ''I don't believe my taxes should pay for
some black girl who's on welfare to have an abortion.'' In one sweeping sentence
she managed to link together taxes, race, welfare and abortion - all issues that
are shaking loose long-standing political allegiances.

Nearby we ran into Edward Barlow, a middle-aged county worker who had come to
listen to Reagan. The son of a boilermaker for the railroad, Barlow described
his family as ''dyed-in-the-wool Democrats'' and explained: ''They were Irish
immigrants, and many of them got jobs through the old D.P.W., the Department of
Public Works. And they all liked Roosevelt.''

But Edward Barlow no longer feels that dependency, or that loyalty. Government
programs that once helped his family are now anathema.  ''Of late, many of the
Democrats have become too liberal in their spending,'' he said. ''They spent
through the 30's and 40's, and caused the inflation we have today. Things always
catch up with you from the past.''

The current political upheaval is part of a broader turmoil in the culture at
large. Individualism and ''do your own thing'' are watchwords for a generation.
'' It's quite clear,'' says Mervin D.  Field, a California analyst, ''that
allegiance to a party is unimportant. It doesn't have high status - it's square,
unenlightened.'' Listen to Dominic ''Mimi'' DiPietro, Baltimore City Councilman
and political sage, on this subject:

''Years back, I used to go to the homes in my neighborhood, and I used to talk
to the parents. The parents were the bosses of the voters in those days. And we
used to get the votes. But now that's changed. Everybody's their own boss.''

Basil De Luca works at the family vegetable stand in the Italian market in South
Philadelphia and lives nearby. His sister is a waitress at the family
restaurant, the Villa Di Roma, down the block and his uncle is the maitre d'.
Here, maybe, is some allegiance some loyalty?

Not quite. ''My family has always been Democrats for as long as I can
remember,'' says Basil, now 27. But this year he's for Ronald Reagan, someone
''sturdier'' than Carter. Does it feel strange to vote Republican? ''Yeah, yeah,
it does,'' says the young man. ''I used to go in and vote straight Democratic,
no matter who was running. I usually go the way my father does. He's the man of
the house, the boss. That's the Italian way.''

So what happened? ''I listen to the news now, late at night,'' says Basil De
Luca. ''I'm changing myself.''

Another trend runs through many of these stories - mobility.  Whether it's Vince
Grosso leaving for Turnersville or Ray Kurowski for Hoffman Estates, the
incessant movement of Americans scrambles traditional patterns of behavior and
ties to institutions - party and parish, union and neighborhood, lodge and
family. Here's Maurice L.  Arel, Mayor of Nashua, N.H., explaining the impact of
mobility in his rapidly growing town:

''At one point you could take ethnic groups and put them together and work with
them to support a candidate, but you can no longer do that. They've split up.
The strong national ties are really not there anymore. The old Greek
neighborhood doesn't exist anymore, they've spread out all over town.''

The other great demographic shift today, from the Frost Belt to the Sun Belt, is
adding to the national quotient of political unpredictability. V. Lance
Tarrance, a Houston-based pollster, points out that, in 1978, William P.
Clements became the first Republican elected Governor of Texas in 104 years.
Clements did it, says Tarrance, by understanding that one-quarter of the
electorate had arrived in the state since 1970 - and appealing directly to them.

Back in Boston, Clare Frain remembers, ''there were two parties, the Catholics
and the Republicans.'' And since Mrs. Frain and her husband, Richard, were
Irish, they were party loyalists. Being Irish was only part of it. ''We were
very poor,'' recalls Dick Frain, ''and I was brought up in the Depression. My
mother and father always said that it was Hoover who got us into it and the
Democrats who got us out.''

Dick did vote for Jack Kennedy in 1960, the last time his Irish Catholic
loyalties influenced his vote. ''I thought it was good to break that taboo,'' he
said. But now Frain lives in the suburbs of Chicago, and works in middle
management for a drug company. He dosn't look for the Irish name or the
Democratic line. He does not feel the Depression in his gut - not in his nice
ranch-style house with the deep shag rug in the living room. The ghosts who once
looked over his shoulder when he went into the voting booth are all back in
Boston.

''When we moved to the Midwest,'' said Clare Frain, ''that's what did it.''

The strength of various traditional American institutions, which once served as
anchors for the political process, has been further weakened by the rise of
special-interest groups - progun and proprayer, antiabortion and antidraft.
Through the use of sophisticated computer techniques and direct mailings, these
groups can cut across the older, broader institutional lines and re-orient the
electorate around narrower and more intemperate attitudes. The head of that
union in Peoria doesn't just compete against television for influence. He also
has to compete against the National Rifle Association.

The Cata Club is a workingman's bar in Peoria, a place for beer and bull
throwing. Jerry Toler, lean and wiry, a 41-year-old repairman at a Caterpillar
Tractor plant, was perched on a bar stool a cue's length from the pool table.

''I'll tell you what,'' he said. ''I might vote Republican for the first time in
my life.'' Part of the reason was economic. ''Hell, I was better off five years
ago than I am now.'' And part of it was Ted Kennedy's backing of gun-control
legislation. ''I don't want anybody telling me whether I can own a gun or not.

''But I'm a Democrat,'' Toler insisted. ''I'm a workingman. I believe in labor
unions.'' Well, then, did he know that his union has endorsed Kennedy?
''Nope,'' he replied, ''but it doesn't matter anyway. The union don't tell me
how to vote. You might have 10 leaders saying we'll back this guy, but 3,000
others who say no.''

The biggest stick that is stirring up the pot of political fluidity is
television. We are a plugged-in society, plugged in to the tube, which all but
assumes the role of parent, or teacher, or lover. If candidates can raise enough
money to buy television time, they do not have to work their way up, wait their
turn, build a network of loyalty and support. The sole criterion for success
becomes ability to perform on the tube.

''No one will admit this,'' says Fred Dutton, who has run campaigns for 25
years, ''but the biggest single question in any Presidential campaign is how to
get on the Cronkite show.''

To many analysts, how television reports elections heaps fuel onto an already
volatile mixture. ''TV is entertainment,'' asserts Joe Rothstein, a political
consultant, ''and therefore information has to be entertaining.'' Sidney
Blumenthal, author of a new book, ''The Permanent Campaign,'' adds that
political campaigns are reported as if they were some kind of regular television
series. Thus, there is the constant demand for new episodes, new dramatic
situations that can be presented, and resolved, in a short period.

''TV cannot and will not discuss issues in great depth,'' says Lance Tarrance.
''All it conveys is the physicality of a man. Does he look warm? Does he look
nervous? Does he have it all together?'' All this only adds to the tenuous and
fickle nature of the candidatevoter relationship. ''The essence of TV,'' asserts
Joe Rothstein, ''is that the candidate becomes a very personal figure for the
individual in the living room. And so if that person says something that's
outrageous or embarrassing, people feel it personally. They're not so detatched
as when the read it in the paper.'' This personal quality, this lack of
detachment, gives television so much of its power.

Take, for instance, the experience of Ted Kennedy. Probably the most important
single hour of the political season was Roger Mudd's famous interview with
Kennedy early in the campaign. The candidate's failure to answer even the
simplest question, as he twitched and squirmed under the relentless eye of the
camera, inescapably conveyed a sense of self-doubt and a lack of preparation.
But that one hour virtually wiped out 17 years of experience and service in the
Senate. Ted Kennedy was transformed, almost overnight, from the hard-working
heir of a glorious legacy to ''the bad Kennedy,'' a bumbler and an incompetent.

Vincent's Lite Lunch, a neighborhood cafe in Boston's North End: A man named
Joe, a maitre d' in a local restaurant, was having bean soup a few days before
the Massachusetts primary. ''I'm not sure like I was before,'' Joe said. ''I
might still vote for Kennedy, but it depends on the last week.''

This is a heavily Italian area, strongly loyal to the Kennedys. So what
happened? ''Kennedy was always well liked by a lot of people,'' Joe replied.
''But since this Presidential thing came up, he seems like a desperate man, a
man who's always up-tight, not calm and sure of himself. This is the first time
I've felt this way.''

As Fred Wertheimer, senior vice president of Common Cause, puts it, television
is like those magnifying glasses kids used to play with. It concentrates the
heat so fiercely that it burns up the subject that's being studied.

But the instant candidate of the year has to be John Bayard Anderson. With
virtually no recognition outside his home district in Illinois, with no base of
support or long-established loyalties, he has built his candidacy almost
entirely on direct impressions conveyed through television. It began during the
Iowa debates, when Senator Anderson used the exposure to set himself apart as
someone a bit different. If Kennedy came across to many as ''desperate,''
Anderson often came across as frank and honest.

The Anderson Saga reached its high point on the night of the Massachusetts and
Vermont primaries, when Walter Cronkite anointed him with the title of Serious
Contender by interviewing him at the outset of the CBS special-election show.
Those big, silly earphones Anderson was wearing that night could have been a
crown.

Primary night in Chicago, the ballroom of the new Marriott Hotel: Drinks for $2
apiece and not much cheer of the nonliquid variety, since Senator Anderson was
losing. But four young people, all aspiring professionals in their 20's,
captured the essence of Anderson's appeal.

''I think he's honest; he's being open with the people,'' said Dave Handelman,
who's in advertising. ''He says what he believes in.'' Kristine Keith, another
advertising type, chimed in: ''I've never really been in politics before. I only
registered two months ago. I was never interested until Anderson came along. He
just seems to relate very well with people our age.''

''He speaks softly - he's the opposite of Kennedy,'' added Michael Keith, a
dental student and Kristine's husband: ''Kennedy just yells, yells, yells.''

Dave Handelman considered Kennedy but didn't like the yelling either. And then
there was Mayor Jane Byrne and the Chicago organization: Anybody they liked,
Handelman didn't.

''We were raised in an era to think independently,'' added Dan Fuller, a banker.
''And Anderson appeals to that.''

What do we have to look forward to this fall? Anderson is not the only candidate
who appeals to the Volatile Voter. Jimmy Carter made his reputation by running
against Washington, against party and tradition; like Anderson, his past was
largely unknown and irrelevant. Carter appealed to voters four years ago, and
appeals today, mainly as a man of ''decency,'' a candidate who relates very
well, directly with the voters. As for Ronald Reagan, it goes without saying
that he is a master at television, a man who uses the medium perhaps better than
any candidate of his era, a performer who can stay in the glare of the magnifyng
glass and not burn up - at least not yet. And he is from the heartland of
Volatilia - California - where he has twice demonstrated his ability to appeal
across party lines and defy expectations.

So we should stop being so surprised. The unpredictable has become predictable,
the unusual commonplace. If there is any pattern to American politics today, it
is the absence of pattern. We all live in Volatilia now.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MYTHIC HISTORY

BYLINE: By MARY GORDON; Mary Gordon is the author of ''Final Payments.'' Her new
novel will be published next February.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1969 words


CHINA MEN By Maxine Hong Kingston.  308 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $10.95.

AMONG Maxine Hong Kingston's earliest memories of her father are the sounds of
his cursing. He slams his iron down and mutters obscenities; the obscenities
refer to women. The sexual violence of his language shocks her; she has seen him
as attentive, charming, a silent magician, an enchanting escort. Can he mean
what he says? Does he hate all women? Does he hate her?

At the beginning of ''China Men,'' Mrs. Kingston says to her father: ''What I
want from you is for you to tell me that those curses are only common Chinese
sayings. That you did not mean to make me sicken at being female. 'Those were
only sayings,' I want you to say to me. 'I didn't mean you or your mother. I
didn't mean your sisters or grandmothers or women in general.' ''

For a woman to try to comprehend the hatred of women by a man who has offered,
in other contexts, the possibilities of tenderness, two paths are open. She can
see herself as exceptional, set apart from the race of women, or she can see men
as radically different from herself, the Other, controlled by mysterious forces.
It is clear that Mrs. Kingston cannot set herself apart from other women. Her
first book, ''The Woman Warrior'' was a brilliantly realized attempt to
understand herself in relation to Chinese women, mythical and actual. At the end
of that book, she is still a stranger to both Chinese and American ways, but she
knows that her own fate is inextricably bound up with that of the women who came
before her. ''China Men,'' using the same techniques as ''The Woman Warrior'' -
the blend of myth, legend and history, the fevered voice, relentless as a
truth-seeking child's - is impelled by Mrs.  Kingston's need to understand the
men with whom she is connected: her father, grandfather, brother, mythic
figures.

She has always known that males are different. Early in her childhood, she
adopts the theory that males do not feel pain; to test her theory, she
brutalizes the weaker boys in her class. They do not cry. '' 'See,' I told the
girls, 'Boys have no feelings. It's some kind of immunity.' It was the same with
Chinese boys, black boys, white boys, Mexican and Filipino boys. Girls and women
of all races cried and had feelings.''

Mrs. Kingston begins her quest for understanding with her own father. But
whereas her mother, Brave Orchid, was full of ''talkstory,'' her father does not
speak. ''You say with the few words and the silences: 'No stories. No past. No
China.' '' So she must piece together the few facts she has and invent the rest,
a myth grown out of unknowing, foreignness.

As a child, Maxine Kingston's father is singled out as a scholar.  He is freed
from the physical labor that is his brothers' lot and, after passing his
Imperial examinations (the last ever offered), he becomes the village teacher.
Mrs. Kingston's descriptions of his pedagogical failures ring sickeningly true
to anyone who has ever had a bad day's teaching. His career becomes a nightmare
of his students' indifference, brutality, intimidation. At first, the children
are only bored. But soon, they grow uncontrollable:

''They stole vegetables from the neighboring gardens; they played war; they
staged shows on the top of the tables. He tried locking the door on the late
boys and got some satisfaction from their shadows bobbing and passing like
puppets at the windows, but they worried him when they disappeared. Where did
they go? The school looked like a crazy house, like a Sung Dynasty painting of a
classroom showing kids putting boxes over one another's heads, drawing cartoons
of their teachers, lying on their backs and spinning chairs and tables with
their feet.''

At the time of the father's greatest despair, village men who had emigrated
return home with stories of America. Out of some peculiar need for
self-justification, they perpetuate the very myths about America that must have
caused them untold suffering. ''In their hunger,'' Mrs. Kingston says, ''the men
forgot that the gold streets had not been there when they'd gone to look for
themselves.'' When one grandfather suggests that life in America is lonely, his
wife shouts at him, calls him an idiot and a crazy man, curses him for bringing
bad luck to a lucky night.

So Mrs. Kingston's father sails to America, endures the humiliation of
immigration, and moves eventually to New York, where he adopts the American name
Ed - after Edison - and opens a laundry with two Chinese partners, who have
named themselves Roosevelt and Worldster.  They work hard but live lives of
bachelor conviviality, racing through take-out meals, using newspapers as
tablecloths, dancing with blondes in their Western suits. ''The Gold Mountain
was indeed free: no manners, no traditions, no wives.''

Freedom disappears when Mrs. Kingston's father sends for his wife from China.
She cooks the partners complicated meals; she insists upon the keeping of
holidays. She carries with her all the restraints of the old country. ''The men
let holidays pass. If they didn't go to the bother of keeping it, a holiday was
another free day. It was that free a country. They could neglect attending the
big public celebrations ... and no one minded. No neighbors looked askance. And
there were no godly repercussions.''

As a punishment for his wife's violation of this male Eden, the partners cheat
Mrs. Kingston's father out of his share of the laundry. Penniless, he and his
wife take the train to California, to start a life of poverty and
disappointment. Never again will her father be happy.

Long before Mrs. Kingston's father thought of coming to America, his father and
father-in-law had made the lonely journey as sojourners: immigrants intending to
return home. Bak Goong, a maternal grandfather, worked on a sugar plantation in
Hawaii, and Ah Goong, considered mad because he exposed himself at the family
dinner table and preferred girl to boy babies, helped build the railroad in the
Sierra Nevada mountains. Mrs. Kingston's success at depicting the world of men
without women must be the envy of any woman writer who has tried to capture this
foreign territory. Her understanding of the lacerations of crushing physical
work and the consolations of community is expressed in nearly perfect prose. She
describes Ah Goong's tunneling into a mountain: ''When the foreman measured at
the end of twenty-four hours of pounding, the rock had given a foot. The
hammering went on day and night. The men worked eight hours on and eight hours
off. While Ah Goong slept, he could hear the sledge hammers of other men working
in the earth.''

On the Hawaiian sugar plantation, men care for one another, assuming the tasks
of women: ''At the very end of the day, the men exchanged remedies. They scraped
one another's backs with spoons to get rid of rheumatism and arthritis. For heat
sickness they scraped necks with the edge of a coin cooled in water. ... Several
people not from the same village believed in 'passing fear over fire,' which
means lifting one who has been badly frightened and passing him over a fire. ...
Everybody thought that his way of doing things was the way all Chinese were
supposed to do them.''

Nowhere is Mrs. Kingston's technique - the close focus, the fascination with the
details of survival strategies, the repetitive, fixated tone - more successful
than in her description of the plantation workers' talking into the earth in
defiance of the silence imposed upon them by white bosses. The men dig holes and
shout their longings, their frustrations, down the hole to China, frightening
their overseers, who leave them alone:

'' 'Hello down there in China!' they shouted. 'Hello, Mother.' 'Hello, my heart
and my liver.' '' 'I miss you.' 'What are you doing right now?' 'Happy birthday.
Happy birthday for last year too.' '' 'I've been working hard for you, and I
hate it.' '' 'Sometimes I forget my family and go to clubs.' ... 'I've become an
opium addict.' 'I don't even look Chinese any more.' 'I'm sorry I ate it all by
myself.' ...

''They said any kind of thing. 'Blond demoness.' 'Polynesian demoness.' ...  ''
'I want home,' Bak Goong yelled, pressed against the soil, and smelling the
earth. 'I want my home,' the men yelled together. 'I want home. Home. Home.
Home. Home.' ''

Once again, the men usurp the place of women and ignore the weight of history:
they make up customs. Bak Goong says, ''We can make up customs because we're the
founding ancestors of this place.''

In comparison with these tales of her ancestors, the story of the brother who
goes to Vietnam is a disappointment. Unlike his forebears, the brother neither
emigrates nor mutilates himself to avoid conscription. A pacifist, he joins the
Navy because he thinks that there he has the smallest chance of killing and
being killed. It is an American compromise, one his father and grandfather would
have been incapable of making. The brother goes through the experience with the
detachment that has become commonplace in reports about Vietnam. He is aware of
the peculiarity of being an Oriental sent by Westerners to fight Orientals, but
it does not torment him. Since Mrs. Kings-ton's particular genius is most suited
to illuminating incomprehensible lives, the brother's life, being more
understandable, does not call up her highest gifts. And her approach,
concentrating on detailed observation, bypasses the need for judgment, but
Vietnam is still too close for us to believe that it can remain unjudged.

Still, ''China Men'' is a triumph of the highest order, of imagination, of
language, of moral perception. It is full of wonderful stories: Of Kau Goong,
the giant uncle, river pirate, murderer; of Uncle Bun, fixated on Communism and
wheat germ, who turns paranoid and returns to Red China; of Mad Sao, haunted by
the starved ghost of his mother. Mrs. Kingston also includes several ancient
myths and a section on the laws relating to Chinese immigration. But the
straight myth and the straight history are far less compelling than the mixture
she creates in the stories of her own ancestors.

Simone de Beauvoir has described how men come to understand women: ''He loves
her to the extent that she is his, he fears her in so far as she remains the
other; but it is as the fearsome other that he seeks to make her more profoundly
his - and this is what will bring him to elevate her to the dignity of being a
person and lead him to recognize in her a fellow creature.'' In ''China Men,''
Mrs. Kingston has achieved this kind of understanding, but from the other side,
the side of the woman, the daughter and victim. Hers, then, is a victory not
only of comprehension, but also of forgiveness.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TALK WITH MRS. KINGSTON

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY PFAFF; Timothy Pfaff is an associated editor of California
Monthly..

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3058 words


''WHAT I am doing in this new book is claiming America,'' declares Maxine Hong
Kingston. ''That seems to be the common strain that runs through all the
characters. In story after story Chinese-American people are claiming America,
which goes all the way from one character saying that a Chinese explorer found
this place before Leif Ericsson did to another one buying a house here. Buying
that house is a way of saying that America - and not China - is his country.''

Long snakes of galley proofs line the walls of the living room and small dining
room of the Honolulu home she and her husband Earll, an actor, bought in 1978.
''We never really made a decision to stay here,'' she notes, though they have
lived on the island of Oahu with their son Joseph for the last 12 years. But the
deal on the new house was clinched when they discovered an office upstairs,
''the very writer's garret of your imagination.'' Their New England-style house
looks good-naturedly incongruous in its setting. Five kinds of ginger bloom in
the yard, which ends at a precipitous mountain slope lush with vegetation.
Directly inside the front door is a place for leaving snowboots.

Her eyes sometimes wander to the proofs on the nearby table, but the barefoot
author seems at ease, relieved that this siege of writing is at an end -and
delighted by perhaps the most unusual honor of her career. A few days after the
final revisions of ''China Men,'' Mrs. Kingston became a Living Treasure of
Hawaii. A Honolulu Buddhist sect honored her - primarily for ''The Woman
Warrior,'' her eloquent account of growing up Chinese-American - during a chant-
and incense-filled ceremony at Honpa Hongwanji Temple. ''Hawaii has all kinds of
traditions and ceremonies that are not immediately apparent,'' Mrs. Kingston
says. ''I didn't know about this one until I was made a part of it. This
tradition comes from ancient China via modern Japan. In the same way that we
designate paintings and monuments and mountains as treasures, they designate
certain people as Living Treasures.''

At 39, Mrs. Kingston is unusually young to be so honored (''in Japan you have to
be at least 80''); she is also the first Chinese-American Living Treasure.
''During the ceremony, the Buddhist priests talked about their own experience of
coming to Hawaii and wanting to be a part of its culture,'' she recalls. ''They
decided that one way was to honor some of Hawaii's treasures. It makes me feel
really good to be honored by them. It feels as if the islands are saying 'You
can be a part of Hawaii too.' I think this is a hard place to belong to.''

Her musical voice, which can elongate, accent and repeat words tellingly, has a
vigor that works in curious counterpoint to the ceaseless, hypnotic bird songs
outside. She starts at a volume just above the birds (''I still think of my
speaking voice as inadequate''), but talk of ''China Men'' soon elicits
confident, protracted statements.

Mrs. Kingston insists that she approaches other writers' work as a ''fan'' and
seldom can see that someone else's writing has influenced hers. One book that is
a major influence (''I wish I had written it'') is William Carlos Williams's
''In the American Grain.'' ''Williams retold the American myth, which I think is
exactly the right way to write American history. His book starts with Leif
Ericsson and ends with Abraham Lincoln, but his Lincoln is a woman, a feminine
force in American history. He's like an old nurse, tending to his soldiers; it's
as if he were the mother of our country.  Williams has told American history
poetically and, it seems to me, truly. In a way, I feel that I have continued
that book. The dates are even right. The earliest episode in my book is about
1850, which is roughly where Williams left off.''

As scrupulous with historical detail as she is free with plot, she nevertheless
is confronted with a problem: ''The mainstream culture doesn't know the history
of Chinese-Americans, which has been written and written well. That ignorance
makes a tension for me, and in the new book I just couldn't take it anymore. So
all of a sudden, right in the middle of the stories, plunk - there is an
eight-page section of pure history. It starts with the Gold Rush and then goes
right through the various exclusion acts, year by year. There are no characters
in it. It really affects the shape of the book, and it might look quite clumsy.
But on the other hand, maybe it will affect the shape of the novel in the
future. Now maybe another Chinese-American writer won't have to write that
history.''

''China Men'' claims America in a more literal sense as well: Its stories are
set in New York, California, and Hawaii. (As in ''The Woman Warrior,'' portions
of it are also set in China, which the author has yet to visit.) It is less a
California book than its predecessor was, even though it, too, derives much of
its substance from Mrs. Kingston's experience of Stockton, the city in
California's San Joaquin Valley where she was born and raised.

The New York sections rely extensively on stories her parents told of their time
together there, just after her mother arrived at Ellis Island in 1939. ''They
told me wonderful things about New York, and I have always had a sense that they
had a very good time there. I wrote from stories I remembered, because I knew if
I asked them again, they would just tell another version. Besides, I feel that
what is remembered is very important. The mind selects out images and facts that
have a certain significance. If I remember something that someone told me 20
years ago, then the story has lasted in that form for a very long time. I'm more
interested in things that have survived in time than I am in how people are
feeling recently.

''When I was in New York last fall to work on 'China Men' with my editor, I was
trying to feel more at home there, so I started digging up anything I could to
help me connect with the city. I suddenly realized that although I was born in
California, I was conceived in New York - so I went around telling everybody
that I was a New Yorker,'' she laughs.

Mrs. Kingston thinks of her two novels as ''one big book. I was writing them
more or less simultaneously. The final chapter in 'China Men' began as a short
story that I was working on before I even started 'The Woman Warrior.' But the
writing is different in the new book. The style is much simpler -and I think
better. I was wrestling with the language in the first book, so the sentences
are sometimes quite convoluted. After I wrote that book, I had a strong desire
to write simple sentences. I wanted to see if I could use language that is
simple and clear and still have a complicated content.''

In ''China Men'' Mrs. Kingston tells the men's stories, sagas of Chinese men who
came to America and Chinese-American men who created a new life here. ''There
are great-grandfathers from the last century,'' she says, ''and then men from
all the successive generations, down to a contemporary character I simply call
'the brother,' who is a kind of combination of my three brothers. There also are
a lot of uncles in the stories, but these are not all blood relatives. What I am
doing is putting many kinds of stories and people right next to one another, as
they are in real life. Each character is viewed from the vantage point of the
others.

''I have a father character who comes up in various guises throughout the book.
He is really only one character, but I call him different things, like 'the
legal father,' 'the illegal father,' 'the father from China' and 'The American
father.' In the course of the book, I have him coming into this country in five
different ways. I'm very proud of that.''

Like Cheever's Bullet Park and Faulkner's Yoknapatawpha County, Mrs. Kingston's
Stockton is a literary microcosm - though in her case it is more a language than
a place. ''I write about a group of people who speak a dialect of Cantonese
called Say Yup,'' she explains.  ''Say Yup is also the name of a region in
China, actually four districts. The dialect is a common language, spoken by
people many of whom historically have been illiterate and many of whom are still
illiterate today.

''Working in that dialect has posed some problems for me, especially in the area
of orthography. The Romanized spelling of Cantonese words has been worked out to
some degree, but that is not true of Say Yup. And even if it were, it would not
reflect the way that it is spoken: with an American accent. I'm specifically
interested in how the Chinese-American dialect is spoken in the California
Valley. For proper names, I have made my own orthography.  When I write dialogue
for people who are speaking Chinese, I say the words to myself in Chinese and
then write them in English, hoping to capture some of the sounds and rhythms and
power of Say Yup.''

Mrs. Kingston's knowledge of Chinese-American men derives principally from
Stockton's Chinese community (''which is not a geographically distinct place;
there isn't even one whole block that is Chinese''), where her family owned and
operated a laundry. ''In a way, I grew up in a big nest,'' she says. ''There
were always other people around, including a lot of old men who didn't have
families of their own. We had 'our old men' the same way other families had
theirs. They did magic tricks and sang songs and ran errands and babysat.
They're all gone now. Even though I suspect that the whole system is breaking
down, I still have a very strong sense that there will always be someone to take
care of me.''

The opening section of ''China Men'' makes it abundantly clear that Mrs.
Kingston is still writing from a feminist perspective. What was it like, then,
to focus her attention on the men and their stories?  ''When I was working on
'The Woman Warrior,' '' she replies without hesitation, ''I thought that there
would be a big difference between the men and the women. I thought that in the
process of writing the new book I would learn something new about how men think.
I feel that I've gone as deeply into men's psyches as I can, and I don't find
them that different. I care about men - at least individual men - as much as I
care about women, and I do have three brothers, which helps. Up to this point, I
haven't written about lover-type men. I don't know why, but right now, that's
not in the writing. Besides, it's been done well by other people.''

Although women do not figure prominently as characters in ''China Men,'' Mrs.
Kingston notes, ''There still are women who take the role of storyteller. The
women are not center-stage, but without the female storyteller, I couldn't have
gotten into some of the stories.  A great many of the men's stories were ones I
originally heard from women.

''In a way, 'The Woman Warrior' was a selfish book. I was always imposing my
viewpoint on the stories. In 'China Men' the person who 'talks story' is not so
intrusive. I bring myself in and out of the stories, but in effect, I'm more
distant. The more I was able to understand my characters, the more I was able to
write from their point of view and the less interested I was in relating how I
felt about them.''

If her feelings about her characters matter less, her feeling for characters
matters as much as ever. ''The kind of writing I do is an emotional process as
well as an artistic one. The form of what I write forces me through a series of
emotions. When I confront an ugly situation or a hateful person in my writing, I
try to present the case as I see and feel it. If I'm writing well, by the end I
have come to a resolution, a kind of love for a character based on my experience
of the way that person sees the world. There's something wonderful about a form
that lets you go from conflict to climax to resolution and then come out with a
different feeling than you began with. Most literary forms are not artificial.
They reflect patterns of the human heart.''

Her attitudes about myth have undergone changes as well. ''I have come to feel
that the myths that have been handed down from the past are not something that
we should be working toward, so I try to deal with them quickly - get them over
with - and then return to a realistic kind of present. This time I'm leaving it
to my readers to figure out how the myths and the modern stories connect. Like
me, and I'm assuming like other people, the characters in the book have to
figure out how what they've been told connects - or doesn't connect - with what
they experience.''

Mrs. Kingston has been criticized for tampering with the Chinese myths. ''We
have to do more than record myth,'' she counters.  ''That's just more ancestor
worship. The way I keep the old Chinese myths alive is by telling them in a new
American way. I can't help feeling that people who accuse me of misrepresenting
the myths are looking at the past in a sentimental kind of way. It's so easy to
look into the past,'' she says vehemently. ''It's harder to look into the
present and come to terms with what it means to be alive today.''

Since the publication of ''The Woman Warrior,'' she has had to wrestle with
questions about her place in the community of Asian-American writers and about
the degree to which her books represent the Chinese-American experience as a
whole. Now she can answer in her hard-won new style: simply and directly. ''The
one thing about which I am absolutely sure,'' she says, ''is that I am a
Chinese-American woman. That feeling affects my writing in a particular way: I
know that what I have to say is what a Chinese-American person is thinking. I
don't have to go out and make a survey; I don't have to get a committee of my
peers to correct my work. I see writing as a very solitary thing that I have to
do by myself, and polish by myself. It's a very free activity: I can think
whatever I want and write in whatever way I want. When I get it into as perfect
a state as I can, then I show it to people.''

Mrs. Kingston is a tremendously disciplined writer -''like an accountant'' with
her time. By an enviable combination of her disposition and Hawaii's
accommodating climate, she says matter-offactly, ''I can write anywhere -
inside, outside, even at the beach.'' Her working habits reflect her attitude
toward writing: That it is an integral part of living and as natural and
necessary as eating.

''I have two methods of working. One of them involves tapping the sources of
creativity, that part of the self that for me includes a higher vision of what
is going on in life. I don't have a controlled way of going about that. I might
be anywhere when it comes, and I could end up writing all over the floor or up
the walls and not know what is going on. It's like having a fit.

''That either comes or it doesn't come. The second method is following a trail
made by words themselves - by sitting down and writing, writing crazy, writing
anything, fast. The words induce the vision. That rush, that outpouring - that
vision or high or whatever it is - doesn't last very long. A lot of writing gets
done in a very short time, but it's not very good writing. Often it turns out to
be just a reminder about how something felt. It has to be reworked. Most of my
time goes into that rewriting, which I have much more control over. I come back
to the original material, think about it rationally, rewrite it and reshape
it.'' She estimates that ''China Men'' went through ''at least eight drafts,''
including galley proof revisions so extensive that the entire book had to be
reset in type.

Like ''The Woman Warrior,'' ''China Men'' ends on a martial note.  In the first
book, the battle was mythical; in the second, it is the Vietnam War. ''But
that's not as exciting as it sounds,'' the author cautions. ''It's not about
blood or hand-to-hand combat; it's about the tedium of having to live in
barracks and follow orders. I guess I'm afraid that people want to go to war
right now. And I look at my writing to see where it is going, and it keeps going
toward war. When I was writing about Vietnam, and therefore thinking a lot about
the military, all these bills to bring back the draft suddenly appeared in
Congress. I felt this tension - that I couldn't just write about it, even though
I still think that writing is my best weapon. I felt I had to do something about
it.''

As a result, Mrs. Kingston has become active in the anti-draft movement in
Hawaii. ''It's as if my writing spilled over into real life, and I felt I had to
act. It's not that I enjoy it. Anti-draft work intrudes on my life, so I just
put my resentment right back into the struggle. I don't like going to meetings
or carrying signs, but I feel that it is my duty.''

Does the future hold another battle with words for the woman warrior? ''Now that
this book is done, I'm going to take a little time off and act like a regular
person. I've told all my childhood stories that I wanted to tell, and I don't
have any more stories accumulated. Now I have nothing, but I feel good about
that, too. I feel like I am looking out over an ocean. It's a blank ocean, and
the sky is empty too. I'm watching to see what comes up over the horizon, and
that is going to be the next book. I'm going to make something out of nothing,
which is the greatest creativity. And I'm willing to wait a long time.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NON FICTION IN BRIEF

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1289 words


THE FLEECING OF AMERICA By Senator William Proxmire.  238 pp. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin. $10.95.

For the past five years, Senator William Proxmire has been awarding a Golden
Fleece of the Month to Federal agencies for wasting public money. Among the
achievements recounted in this good-humored yet serious book: Research by the
Law Enforcement Assistance Administration on why inmates wish to escape from
jail; an investigation by the Department of Agriculture into how long it takes
to cook eggs for breakfast; a study by the Federal Aviation Administration of
the physiques of airline stewardesses.

Senator Proxmire has been charged with philistinism by some of the researchers
he has baited, and probably he has taken some unfair shots. On the other hand,
the child who observed that the king had no clothes was doubtless written off as
a philistine by the king's courtiers.

The Senator's attacks on Government waste cut across party and ideological
lines. He is as skeptical of the Pentagon's insatiable desire for new weapons
systems as he is of the Corps of Engineers' infatuation with new dams. He is as
opposed to a bail-out of Chrysler as he is to a bail-out of New York City. He is
as indignant over a multi-million-dollar campaign by the Post Office to get
people to write more letters as he is over a Department of Labor grant for a
special census of Samoans in Orange County, Calif. He does not argue that such
endeavors are altogether without merit, only that the taxpayer ought not to be
subsidizing them. He calls for ''proportion, moderation, common sense'' in
Federal spending.

So thoroughgoing is the Senator's opposition to boondoggles, whether by local
politicians, defense industry executives, public works lobbyists, the health and
education establishments, limousine riding bureaucrats and others whom he
considers profligate spenders that few readers are likely to get through his
book without finding a favorite cause skewered. The special virtue of this
indictment is that it compels us to reflect, each time one of our own comes up
for appropriation, that the sum of such favorites has become a very heavy
national burden.

CRACKS IN THE CONSTITUTION By Ferdinand Lundberg.  351 pp. Secaucus, N.J.: Lyle
Stuart. $15.

As the 200th anniversary of the Constitutional Convention closes in, it will
assuredly be accompanied by a great gush of hot air about the framers and the
marvel of political philosophy they conceived.  Comes now Ferdinand Lundberg,
scourge of wealth and pow-er to protect the susceptible from the approaching
epidemic.

His medicine tastes a lot like the sort he has concocted before in ''America's
Sixty Families'' and ''The Rich and the Super-Rich'': The founders were not
demigods; they were men of property, politicians, by Hamilton! The document they
put together did not spring from uncontaminated genius, but from a set of
economic, regional and personal compromises. Yes, deals! The Government thereby
established has proved unresponsive to the people, leaving inordinate power to
the executive and the judiciary, while the legislature serves as the playground
of lobbyists.

All of this warrants discussion, but Mr. Lundberg, mired in the muckraker mode,
tends to deliver as revelation what is common knowledge, and his description of
the Constitution as ''a huge flop'' smacks more of the adversary than the
analyst.

He writes: ''The government is completely autonomous, detached, in a realm of
its own, and relates itself to the society it supervises as it alone thinks
advisable from time to time. Any idea it ever acts involuntarily, at the behest
of popular elements external to it, will not bear the slightest examination.''
Can that sentence bear the slightest examination?

Yes, the Constitution is a set of compromises. Yes, much of it does represent a
conservative spirit, personified by a strong executive.  Yes, its language has
caused problems, and uncomfortably broad powers have devolved upon the
judiciary. But if the political structure created and sustained by America's
Constitution deserves more critical appreciation than it is likely to receive in
the festivities to come, it also deserves more appreciative criticism.

THE WORLD OF OZ By Osborn Elliott.  Illustrated. 253 pp. New York: The Viking
Press. $14.95.

The impulses that prompt people to give their ''memoirs'' to the public are
rarely related to a Rousseauian need for confession.  Generally, they represent
nothing deeper or more elevated than a fancy to parade one's accomplishments, to
press a point of view, to have the final word on lingering grudges. In the case
of Osborn Elliott, the main motive seems to be to celebrate the institutions at
which he has spent most of his life - in particular Newsweek magazine, which he
edited through the 1960's and for a couple of years in the early 70's. At
moments, his book reads like a report to the board: ''Race and poverty were
paramount concerns, and we covered those matters with compassion and in great
depth.'' Such judgments sound better from outsiders.

Given his upbeat account of Newsweek's achievements during his reign, it comes
as a surprise when he is fired by Katharine Graham, but the moment is fetching:
''Then suddenly -and this can best be described in pulp fiction prose - I was in
her arms.''

Mr. Elliott displays a proprietary attitude toward the great events - war,
assassination, political commotion - that occurred while he was at Newsweek, a
not uncommon conceit among journalists. His observations are somewhat worn. The
early student protests, he reports, represented ''a simple cry against the
ballooning size and growing impersonality of American institutions ... a revolt
against an encompassing materialism.'' Now, where did we read that before? Was
it Time or Newsweek?

Many big names pass through these pages, but only Philip Graham, the erratically
brilliant lawyer who married into The Washington Post family and began to build
a new empire of American journalism before committing suicide in 1963, is
treated with more than passing attention. Otherwise, the freshest passages have
to do with the internal workings of Newsweek, especially the conflict over
Vietnam between skeptical Saigon correspondents and the more accepting
Washington staff, which the New York office had to mediate. There are a few
sharp anecdotes, like the one about Walter Lippmann rejecting an appointment
with Prime Minister Pompidou because 10 A.M. was too early for a journalist who
had succumbed to his own myth. But no one comes off very badly in these
unprovocative recollections.

Mr. Elliott's experience as a news magazine editor and then Deputy Mayor of New
York should serve him well in his current position as dean of the Columbia
School of Journalism. His record bespeaks a conscientious, reasonable,
public-spirited citizen who, when he leaves a job, can be counted on to betray
no secrets.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. REFUGEE UNIT SEEKING DELAY IN THE REPATRIATION OF CAMBBODIANS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 359 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Monday, June 16


The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees requested
yesterday that Thailand postpone a mass repatriation of Cambodians scheduled to
begin this morning, the commissioner's regional office here announced. No
official reply was received by this morning, and a United Nations' source said
the situation in the two border camps affected was unclear.

Informed diplomats suggested that the requested postponement was connected with
a visit to Vietnam by Zia Rizvi, the regional representative of the United
Nations body. Mr. Rizvi, who was returning from Hanoi via Vientiane, Laos, could
not be reached for comment.

The planned repatriation has been bitterly condemned by Vietnam and the
pro-Vietnamese Cambodian Government as a Thai, Chinese and American plot to
bolster the anti-Phnom Penh forces active near Cambodia's border with Thailand.
It was assumed by knowledgeable diplomats that the North Vietnamese authorities
told Mr. Rizvi of their strong objections, causing him to hold up the move.

Relief agencies and refugee workers have also expressed concern about the
planned repatriation. But the Thai authorities have supported the move because
of fears that the presence of about 160,000 Cambodians in refugee holding
centers may become a longlating problem.

Relief Agencies Cite 2 Fears

The international groups are worried on two grounds. One is concern about the
ability of Cambodia, still in the throes of war and famine, to provide for the
security and welfare of refugees who return. The other is concern about whether
the repatriation would be voluntary.

In one camp, Sa Kaeo, which shelters about 20,000 Cambodians, the dominant group
is made up of militant followers of the regime of Pol Pot, the deposed Prime
Minister.

Despite an international presence, the Pol Pot forces are believed to have
intimidated the majority of the camp, making freedom of choice difficult for
those wishing to stay in Thailand. The Pol Pot supporters want to return to
participate in the struggle against the Vietnamese occupation forces, but the
anti-Pol Pot refugees are fearful of being dragged along against their will.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Withdrawal at 'McNamara's Bank'

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 484 words


The World Bank is not really Robert McNamara's. It just looked that way during
the extraordinary 12 years of his tenure as its president. It's not even the
United States' or that of any of the 135 membernations. Mr. McNamara simply
served longer than three of his four predecessors, also eminent Americans, and
thus had the opportunity to leave a deep mark on the international aid agency.
When he steps down next year, he will have carried through a fundamental shift
in the global approach to poverty - a shift from power dams to pruning hooks,
from a trickle-down strategy to aid programs that begin in the ground.

That is not what might have been expected when Mr. McNamara took the job in
1968. He was a Detroit-trained hardware specialist who tragically misjudged the
Vietnam War as Secretary of Defense, partly because he put too much faith in
technology. Perhaps that experience caused him to rethink a World Bank
development strategy that, in the spirit of its time, exalted growth and gave
short shrift to fair distribution. The once invisible rural poor - there are
about 800 million of them - found they had a friend at the World Bank (more
augustly known as the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development)
eager to underwrite dirt farming and family planning.

The bank's lending coffers in Mr. McNamara's tenure have grown from $1 billion
to $11.5 billion, backed by $40 billion in capital and pledges from member
countries. Pending increases will double those totals in the 1980's. What makes
this growth the more impressive is that it has occurred through periods of
global recession, beggar-thyneighbor economic nationalism and a declining
American contribution. The bank led the way in channeling desperately needed
funds to the 29 least-developed countries; development aid to these nations grew
in a decade from 2.6 to 10 percent of their combined gross national products.

Yet these welcome gains have been outstripped by the new costs of energy. So
devastating has been the effect of oil prices, especially in the poorer nations
of sub-Saharan Africa, that the bank had to undertake emergency backups.
Ideally, petrodollar surpluses accumulated by oil producers should be recycled
in the form of development loans to the third world on generous terms. The
bank's next president faces the imposing task of finding a path out of the
energy abyss.

The United States has furnished about a fourth of the World Bank's shares and so
it has been led by Americans since its creation in 1945. The argument for
another American rests not on pride but on the need to assure continued American
commitment. By announcing his retirement a year in advance, Mr. McNamara has
properly allowed time for a sifting process that should lead to consensus on his
successor. His own outsize virtues, no less than his occasionally autocratic
ways, will help define the talents required.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AN EMIGRE REGAINS HIS LIFE IN THE LAW

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1105 words


Dung Quoc Nguyen's claim to uniqueness is not easy to verify, because the
clerk's office at the New York State Court of Appeals says the computer in
Albany, which holds the names of all 187,000 lawyers registered to practice in
New York since 1898, cannot even tell which are dead and which alive, much less
which are Vietnamese.

But as far as is known of all those lawyers, Mr. Nguyen, who is 37 years old, is
the only Vietnamese refugee admitted to practice before the New York bar.

''These are things that people should know - that some of the refugees made it,
that we are not a burden on this culture,'' Mr.  Nguyen said in a recent
interview. He was sitting in his office in mid-Manhattan, which he shares with
three immigrants from other times and other conflicts - two lawyers from Germany
(''They had to go back to law school at night,'' he said, ''like Chief Justice
Burger'') and one from Poland, a legal assistant who has not been able to pass
the bar despite years of effort.

Resentment About 'Latecomers'

Mr. Nguyen, who has adopted his given name as his American surname, is sensitive
to the effect his publicity might have on others he cares about who are still in
Vietnam. But he is sensitive also to American concern over the numbers of
refugees - Indochinese, Cubans and others -who have come to the United States in
recent years.  ''There is a resentment about some of the latecomers,'' he said,
so he is willing to discuss himself.

Mr. Nguyen's migration began in 1954, when he was 12. Vietnam was partitioned
under the Geneva agreement, and those who opposed the Communist Government of
North Vietnam were allowed to leave. His father, a newspaper publisher, took his
family south.

A High Official in Saigon

''Only 21 years later,'' he said, ''I was in my father's shoes.'' In that time
he had grown up, graduated from the law school at Hue, married Kim Dang, had two
children and become both a law professor at the University of Can Tho and a high
official in the Department of Planning in Saigon.

On April 26, 1975, four days before the city fell to the Communists, Mr. Nguyen
got a call at his Government office, telling him to have his wife and children
at a pickup point in 90 minutes if he wanted to leave. ''My wife was working for
Chase Manhattan Bank in Saigon,'' he said. ''They made the arrangements with the
American Embassy. So she bailed me out, not the other way.''

By May 6 they and a group of 80 Chase employees and their families had gone from
downtown Saigon to Tan Son Nhut Airport, to Guam, to Camp Pendleton, Calif., to
New York.

The Route to a Job

He baby-sat in their small apartment in Flushing, Queens, for six months while
his wife worked at a Chase office in Manhattan. He had some command of English
and more educational advantages than most refugees, but they had been advantages
in Vietnam, which had a system of civil law. It did not occur to him at first
that he could be a lawyer in a country of common law, in a state that requires a
person to have an American law degree even to take the bar examination.

But Chase Manhattan passed his name along to the firm of Proskauer, Rose, Goetz
& Mendelsohn, which does legal work for Chase. ''They didn't put any pressure on
us,'' said Arnold Levine, a partner there. ''They just mentioned his name.''

Mr. Levine's partners were impressed by the slight, proud, accomplished man of
33, and ''out of both humane considerations and respect for his
qualifications,'' Mr. Levine said, he was hired in November 1975 as a legal
assistant.

The job gave him an income and a law library in which to dig for the answer to a
question that had begun to occupy his mind. ''I could not afford to go back to
law school,'' he said. He considered moving to Louisiana, the one state whose
legal system, like Vietnam's, is based on the Napoleonic Code. But he wanted to
be in New York, in what he considered the mainstream.

Clerkship as School

''I believe firmly that when you have a rule, there is always the exception to
the rule,'' he said. Eventually he discovered clerkship, the lawyer's original
form of learning, which the law still allows the New York State Court of
Appeals, on petition, to offer as an alternative to law school. ''It is very
unusual, but it is still done,'' said Charles D. Breitel, Chief Judge of the
court when Mr. Nguyen applied in 1976.

Mr. Levine said that out of respect for his legal assistant, and uncertain of
the response, ''I spoke with several of my partners.'' Once Judge Breitel signed
the order allowing it in the early fall of 1976, the firm's response was to set
up the minifaculty of a formal one-year clerkship, a committee of 12 who would
tutor Mr. Nguyen in different fields of law.

Mr. Nguyen quickly learned how different the law was from what he had taught in
Vietnam. Civil law is based on statutes, while American law is a matter of the
Constitution and common law - of interpretation, precedent, collateral decisions
and conflicting ones.

''He got the benefit of working with some first-class legal minds,'' Mr. Levine
said, ''but the amount of material he was required to master in a relatively
brief period was more than we could teach.''

'A Spectacular' Accomplishment

In February 1978, Dung Quoc Nguyen took and failed the bar examination. In July,
he took it again and passed, which Mr. Levine called ''a spectactular
intellectual accomplishment'' and which Judge Breitel said he considered
''remarkable.''

But he was not immediately admitted to practice law. ''The forms required are
tremendous,'' said Alice O'Brien of the clerk's office at the Court of Appeals
in Albany, ''and it takes a lot of work to get in.'' She estimated that only 130
to 150 foreign lawyers applied to take the bar examination each year, mostly
from Britain, France, Canada and Cuba, and more from Africa than from South
America.

In February 1979, Mr. Nguyen was finally licensed to practice law, and with a
master's degree in taxation from New York University that he squeezed in along
the way, he went out on his own and applied to become a member of the New York
City bar.

He has built up contacts in the Vietnamese refugee community, which numbers
about a quarter-million in the United States and several thousand in New York.
His motive ''as the only Vietnamese attorney on the East Coast,'' Mr. Levine
said, is not entirely the normal one of building a practice.

At a local high school, Mr. Nguyen gave a free lecture recently to a few hundred
boat people, the latest and least fortunate refugees from Indochina. He spoke to
them about American immigration law.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dung Quoc Nguyen

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CARDINAL PIGNEDOLI DIES IN ITALY AT 70: DIPLOMAT WAS A LEADING CONTENDOR

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 556 words


IN THE LAST TWO PAPAL ELECTIONS

Sergio Cardinal Pignedoli, one of the leading contenders for the papacy two
years ago, died early yesterday while on a visit to his brother in the family's
hometown of Reggio Emilia in north-central Italy. He was 70 years old and
reportedly suffered a blood clot of the lungs.

A close friend and adviser of Pope Paul VI, Cardinal Pignedoli was reported to
be Paul's choice as his successor. He was again counted as a ''papabile'' - a
possible pope - when Paul's successor, John Paul I, died in September 1978 after
34 days on the papal throne.

The Cardinal was also remembered, to his regret, for having signed a statement
at an Islamic-Christian conference in Tripoli in 1976 condemning Zionism. He
said afterward that he was a victim of an incomplete if not mistaken
translation.

A former Italian Navy chaplain from a poor family, Cardinal Pignedoli had held
high offices in the Roman Catholic Church since his appointment as archbishop in
1950, when he became papal nuncio to Bolivia and then to Venezuela.

Visited 150 Countries

Regarded within the church as moderate to liberal, Cardinal Pignedoli was one of
the Vatican's most active diplomats. He made official visits to some 150
countries. When in Rome, he was also known to stroll near the Spanish Steps and
strike up conversations with the young, which made him suspect to some of his
more conservative colleagues in the church.

He had a reputation for both discretion and for candor. ''He knows how to keep a
secret - and knows many,'' an assistant said of him in the early 1970's, when he
was Secretary of the Sacred Congregation for the Evangelization of the Peoples,
the Vatican's missionary agency. But his political candor had been well known
since it earned the displeasure of Mussolini during World War II.

Mussolini, in a speech in February 1941, urged his countrymen to conduct a
campaign of ''hatred'' against Britain. The future Cardinal, then a chaplain in
the Italian submarine corps, replied by writing an appeal to Italian servicemen
that was printed in an official student newspaper in Rome.

''Hatred is one of the basest feelings and dishonors any uniform,'' he wrote.
''You, my soldier friends, must combat it in yourselves and in your men. The
civilization of your land and tradition of our ancestors bid you look at the
enemy with chivalrous loyalty, to acknowledge his valor and greatness. Silence
those who speak words of hatred. They bring dishonor to a country. Fortunately,
you will hear very few of them.''

The response of the Mussolini Government was to seize the newspaper and suspend
its publication for a month.  After the war, Pope Pius XII gave the priest
special assignments and put him in charge of plans for the 1950 Holy Year, which
he handled so successfully that the Pope made him an Archbishop and sent him to
Bolivia as nuncio, or ambassador.

Father Pignedoli was later named Archbishop of Milan, served as papal nuncio in
Africa and as apostolic delegate in Canada, and conducted a peace-seeking
mission in Vietnam in 1966. In 1973, he was named a Cardinal and head of the
Secretariat for Non-Christians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sergio Cardinal Pignedoli

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 17, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A SUMMARY OF ACTION TAKEN IN 1980 SESSION BY THE NEW YORK STATE LEGISLATURE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 3967 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, June 16


Following are some of the major actions taken by the New York State Legislature
during its 1980 session, which Special to the New York Times recessed Sunday
morning:

ALBANY, June 16 - Following are some of the major actions taken by the New York
State Legislature during its 1980 session, which recessed Sunday morning:

Finance

Governor Carey's call for fiscal austerity clashed head-on with the
Legislature's election-year desire not to trim back spending programs that help
their constituents.

In the end, the budget was passed through an extraordinary combination of a
take-it-or-leave-it budget handed to the Democraticled Assembly by the
Republican-led Senate; Governor Carey's vetoes of more than $240 million of
spending items, and the Legislature's successful efforts to override some of
those vetoes and negotiations to restore others.

The tensions caused by the budget fight put a major new strain between Governor
Carey and the Assembly Speaker, Stanley Fink that was not resolved until the
very end of the session.

The state's huge spring borrowing -nearly $3 billion - was stalled for weeks
while the financial community waited to see what the Legislature would do. The
delay ironically saved the state about $90 million as the record interest rates
of the spring began to drop.

The final budget was $14.965 billion, the largest in the state's history. It
increased aid to education by $319 million to $3.99 billion, and moved the state
another step closer to complying with an expected court order to end disparities
in per-pupil expenditures for education around the state. The Legislature also
managed to restore cuts Governor Carey had made in the programs of the State
University and City University. But Republican efforts to pass additional tax
cuts - never taken entirely seriously by the Democrats amid the budget cutting -
were blocked.

Aid for local programs increased a total of $866 million, to $8.4 billion. The
state operating budget grew by $769 million, to $4.3 billion.

The Governor succeeded, through his vetoes, in limiting revenuesharing aid to
local governments to approximately the same amount as last year, to the dismay
of many legislators, county executives and particularly Mayor Koch, who would
have received $70 million of the $117 million increase the Legislature was
seeking.  Nevertheless, $962 million in unrestricted revenue-sharing aid went
into effect.

Criminal Justice and Courts

SIGNED

Providing tougher controls on possession of loaded illegal handguns on the
street.  Allowing inmates to be paroled for purposes of deportation.  Allowing
courts to give juries copies of statutes relevant to their deliberations.
Making confidential records of youthful offenders available to the Division of
Parole.  Giving tenants and neighbors greater power in getting prostitution and
illegal gambling operations closed down.  Giving judges the power to block
prosecutors' efforts to bring back cases that were adjourned in contemplation of
dismissal.  Permitting jurors to serve on more than one jury during their term
of jury service.  Letting an attorney withdraw from a case without consent of
the client, if the judge approves and all other attorneys are notified.
Allowing attorneys to keep psychological and polygraph tests of defendants
confidential unless they are to be used in the defense.  Increasing penalties
against use of incendiary devices to commit arson.  Changing the way consecutive
sentences are served to provide longer terms for those convicted of several
serious crimes.  Providing that fingerprints and photos be returned if a person
arrested for a felony or misdemeanor is eventually convicted of only a
violation.

PASSED

Defining more clearly and registering those entitled to be called peace
officers, and setting up training requirements.  Appropriating $7.7 million for
expanding the number of correction officers and additional operating funds for
expanding correctional facilities.

Making courts, rather than state psychiatric hospitals, responsible for the
custody of persons acquitted of crimes because of insanity.  Requiring state
psychiatric hospitals to inform law enforcement officials and potential victims
in advance of the transfer or release of a person found incompetent to stand
trial.

Allowing sentences of lifetime probation, given to drug dealers who cooperate
with the police, to be terminated after five years of good conduct.

Outlawing hazing and requiring colleges to shut down organizations that practice
it.  Permitting courts to require that restitution be made to the victim of a
crime by the convicted defendant.  Limiting a parole board's discretion by
requiring judges to set a minimum one-year term in felony sentences.
Restricting disclosures by stores of information about shoplifting incidents
involving children under 16.

VETOED

Restoring death penalty for some murders.

KILLED

Expanding prison system through bond proposal Merging the state's trial courts
and providing for appointment of judges rather than election.

Banking and Insurance

SIGNED

Prohibiting banks from settling disputes with depositors by seizing money -such
as Social Security and Supplemental Security Income checks - that is directly
deposited to checking accounts by the Federal Government. Also requiring
explanation of the reason for the seizure.

Allowing graduated mortgages that permit lower payments earlier in their terms
and higher payments later on.  Requiring stock life insurance companies to have
approval from the Insurance Superintendent before changing their bylaws.

PASSED

Deleting a section of the insurance law allowing companies to drop maternity
coverage when a client changes to a new type of policy, for instance from
individual to group coverage.

Requiring health, life and automobile insurance policies written after July 1981
to be written in clear language and requiring a language improvement in fire
insurance policies written after July 1982.

Forbidding insurance companies to charge young or unmarried drivers more for
automobile theft insurance.

KILLED

Increasing services that savings banks are permitted to provide, and raising
ceilings on interest rates charged on credit card purchases and some consumer
loans.

Business, Industry, Labor

SIGNED

Allowing domestic steel to get preferential treatment in bidding for New York
State public works projects.  Insuring that businesses, such as retail stores in
shopping malls, are permitted to close one day a week if they desire.
Protecting car rental services from being sued for renters' parking violations
and making it easier to pursue renters for these violations.

Letting theaters and filmmakers use fireworks for performances.

PASSED

Permitting casino gambling in the state through several versions of a possible
constitutional amendment.  Allowing public employees to work in horse-racing
activities or have an interest in a horse.  Authorizing New York City to impose
an 8 percent tax on the transfer of taxi medallions.Banning the sale of
drug-related paraphernalia.  Allowing people to pay for purchases at wineries by
credit card.Bringing state government workers under the protections of the
United States Occupational Safety and Health Act and requiring that workplace
conditions that are considered hazardous be corrected.

Expanding the bonding capacity of the Job Development Authority from $150
million to $300 million by a constitutional amendment.  Prohibiting the
unauthorized, malicious removal or destruction of newspapers delivered on
another person's property.

KILLED

Eliminating mandatory retirement for all state and some municipal workers except
for judges and court employees.  Protecting public television stations from
lawsuits resulting from programs they are required to air on ''public access''
channels.  Increasing the minimum wage for farm workers.  Permitting New York
State wines to be sold in grocery stores.  Making it easier for the Industrial
Commissioner to take action against ''sweatshop'' conditions and home work below
minimum wage.  Providing unemployment benefits to people who quit their jobs
because of sexual harassment.

Education

SIGNED

Setting up a daily lottery to benefit education.  Letting undergraduate students
get tuition assistance program awards for more than one degree at the same
level.  Making more students eligible to get higher levels of state tuition aid
as ''emancipated'' from their parents.  Extending for two years a waiver against
teachers holding a second public job.

PASSED

Redefining College of Staten Island and New York Technical College as senior
colleges, entitling them to full state aid.  Establishing the Walt Whitman
Memorial Poetry Award, with a $5,000 stipend.  Restoring $1 million in financing
for experimental pre-kindergarten programs.  Allowing school districts to
purchase fresh eggs, fruits and vegetables directly from local farmers without
competitive bidding.  Increasing penalties for falsification of student records.
Transferring the rate and standard-setting function for the education of
institutionalized children to the Commissioner of Education from the
Commissioner of Social Services.

KILLED

Requiring continuing education programs for professionals.  Banning corporal
punishment in schools.

Welfare and Family

SIGNED

Letting state boards of visitors inspect family care homes and community
residences for the retarded.  Increasing Medicaid reimbursement rates for
hospital outpatient clinics and emergency rooms.  Allowing child support orders
issued in other states to be enforced as if they had been made in New York
courts.

PASSED

Requiring judges to distribute property in divorce settlements on the basis of
each party's contribution to the marriage instead of by title.

Advancing funds to the providers of community residential services for the
mentally retarded and developmentally disabled.  Having the state assume 100
percent of the cost of starting new community residential programs for the
mentally disabled.Requiring written treatment plans for patients released from
all facilities providing inpatient psychiatric care, not just state psychiatric
hospitals.

Assuring ombudsmen entrance to nursing homes, adult homes and health related
facilities.  Requiring all employees of a nursing home, not just licensed
health-care professionals, to report when they think a patient has been abused
or neglected.

Allowing local social service districts and voluntary child care agencies to
receive information frm the State Central Registry of Child Abuse and
Maltreatment.

Taking first-degree assault in domestic violence cases out of the jurisdiction
of family courts.  Allowing the courts, upon the request of a relative, to seize
the person and property of any person over the age of 15 who has suffered a
radical change in personality and behavior as a result of his association with a
''cult.''

Passing along a 14.3 percent cost-of-living increase in Federal Supplemental
Security Income.  Tightening requirements that public assistance must follow in
looking for work to keep their benefits.  Allowing the state to set up a storage
facility of human breast milk for babies who cannot digest formulas but whose
mothers died in childbirth or produce an inadequate supply of milk.

KILLED

Increasing the basic grant for welfare recipients.  Requiring judges in child
custody fights to consider giving the two parents joint custody before other
options.

Taxes

SIGNED

Allowing works of art from out of state to be taxed at the rate of their state
of origin in the event of the owner's death.

PASSED

Requiring that cooperative apartment buildings be assessed as if they comprised
rental rather than cooperatively owned units.  Authorizing counties and New York
City to defer real property tax levies against realty owned by persons over 65.
Assessing agricultural property to reflect the agricultural value of the land as
opposed to the market value and placing a one year freeze on assessments.

Exempting from state and local sales tax earnings up to $600 by persons under 16
years old.  Raising income ceilings for senior citizens to be eligible for
certain property tax abatements and exemptions.

KILLED

All proposals involving full-value property tax assessment.  A Republican
program of tax reductions on business and personal income.
pu 1st and last add SUB BILLS
1ST & LAST ADD SUB BILLS

Consumer Affairs

SIGNED

Prohibiting car dealers from reneging on trade-in allowances they have agreed to
for used cars.  Making it a crime to solicit funds by impersonating a police
officer or other public servant.  Letting credit unions with share capital of
more than $5 million to issue first mortgage loans.  Requiring creditors to give
annual statements of interest paid to consumers who have paid more than $50 in
interest charges, for tax purposes.

Prohibiting stores from passing shoplifting records of juveniles on to credit
bureaus and requiring them to inform parents if they are keeping such records.

Exempting professional societies' free referral services from liability for
damages resulting from the referrals.

PASSED

Requiring owners and landlords to give two years of utility bills on demand to
prospective buyers or tenants who want to know their possible energy costs.

Allowing tenants to have fuel oil delivered to their buildings if the landlord
fails to supply heat and then deduct payment for the fuel from rent.

Streamlining professional disciplinary proceedings.  Prohibiting car rental
agencies from requiring a credit card to rent a vehicle and refusing cash.
Increasing penalties for substandard work or overcharges by auto repair shops
and allowing restitution to the consumer.  Forbidding car rental agencies to
deny a lease to anyone because of race, color, national origin or sex.  Allowing
private citizens to bring suits for up to $1,000 against merchants who place
false advertising or make other deceptive claims.

Health and Environment

SIGNED

Permitting municipal hospitals to treat Workers Compensation cases and to be
reimbursed for those services.  Extending the Westchester County deer hunting
season to 61 days, from 30.  Allowing free bow-hunting and trapping licenses to
persons over 70 years old and to disabled veterans.  Establishing ''medigap''
insurance to supplement the Federal Medicare program.  Giving Bronx-Lebanon
Hospital leeway in repaying a $2.7 million debt to the state.  Allowing the
Department of Environmental Conservation full discretion in taking shad from the
Hudson River.  Allowing New York City Board of Health penalties to be enforced
as money judgments through the courts.  Requiring installers of ureaformaldehyde
foam insulation to give written notice of its possible irritant effects.

PASSED

Setting up a panel to study the effects of the defoliant ''Agent Orange,'' which
has spurred health complaints from Vietnam veterans.  Permitting marijuana use
for cancer and glaucoma sufferers.  Requiring employers to advise their
employees they may be working with toxic substances and to keep records of their
workers' exposure.  Increasing penalties for carters who spill toxic wastes.
Allowing former mental patients to move in court to have their records sealed.
Establishing revitalization agency for Love Canal and appropriating $5 million.
Authorizing the Public Health Council to define a list of environmentally
related diseases and requiring that physicians and hositals report incidents of
these diseases to the State Health Department.

Encouraging localities through technical assistance and money to set up resource
recovery facilities.  Creating an authorization process for companies storing
nuclear waste away from the reactor such as West Valley.  Empowering New York
City to begin a solid waste recovery program.  Enabling municipalities too small
to develop a sewer system but too large to rely on septic tanks to get Federal
funds for a suitable system.

Requiring restaurants to post first aid instructions for dealing with customers
choking on food.  Changing references from venereal diseases to sexually
transmissible diseases in provisions relating to their control.  Authorizing a
three-year demonstration program to determine whether early intervention would
aid physicians suffering from alcoholism, drug abuse or mental illness and
guaranteeing those who participate will not be reported to the Board of
Professional Medical Conduct.

Appropriating $2 million for heroin rehabilitation programs.  Toughening the law
protecting moose.

VETOED

Repealing provision that controlled substances be dispensed in containers marked
with orange labels.

KILLED

Issuing $150 million in bonds to clean up hazardous wastes.  Requiring the state
and private companies to set up a tracking system of hazardous materials in the
state from manufacture to disposal.

Allowing anyone who has suffered exposure to toxic materials to file suit for
two years after they discover the damage.  Requiring informed consent to an
abortion and that ''incapable minors'' obtain a court order for the procedure.
Prepaying hospitals for Medicaid payments more quickly.  Broadening New York's
generic drug dispensing requirements.  Restricting smoking in almost all public
places.

Transportation

SIGNED

Permitting left turns on red lights onto one-way streets.  Letting the
Department of Transportation and local governments set up special bus lanes on
highways and roads.  Authorizing special license plates for the handicapped
Increasing penalties against leaving the scene of an accident without reporting
it.

PASSED

Supplying aid for the state's transportation systems, primarily the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority. Included was a new tax on the gross receipts of oil
companies, intended to hold the fare increase on New York City's buses and
subways to 10 cents and on commuter lines to 20 percent.

Stamping the state's advertising slogan ''I H NY'' on license plates
manufactured after Jan. 1, 1981.  Limiting contributions by local governments to
station maintenance on commuter lines to 1977 levels.  Authorizing a rail
project in New York State for which the Port Authority Board plans to spend $37
million.  Requiring school buses to stop at all railroad crossings, whether
carrying children or not.  Tightening plea bargaining for persons charged with
driving while intoxicated and increasing the mandatory period for license
suspension of a first offender to 90 days from 60 days.

Increasing from three years to seven years the period within which a third
drunken driving offense results in mandatory revocation of a license.

Requiring the immediate license suspension of a person charged with drunken
driving who refuses a breath-analyzer test and setting a $100 fine for refusal.

Permitting judges to suspend the license of a driver who fails to pay a traffic
fine.

VETOED

Extending the Town Highway Improvement Program.

Government

SIGNED

Broadening New York City's power to authorize fireworks displays in the making
of movies and plays Requiring the state to establish fuel economy standards for
its automobile fleets.  Increasing to 400 the number of noncompetitive state
Civil Service positions that can be filled by handicapped persons.  Requiring
the state to reimburse counties for performing autopsies on inmates who die in
state prisons.  Changing the method of succession the event of a vacancy in the
office of New York City mayor, to provide for election sooner.

PASSED

Requiring state agencies to report on the information they keep on
individuals.Allowing public employees to work at race tracks and to own and race
horses.  Requiring New York State to set up accounting procedures under socalled
generally accepted accounting principles.  Requiring state agencies to reimburse
court costs to citizens who win freedom of information suits against them.
Mandating that each polling place have at least one entrance providing access to
the physically handicapped or elderly voters.  Increasing the Municipal
Assistance Corporation's borrowing power from $8.8 billion to $10
billion.Extending New York City income and commuter taxes.  Authorizing New York
City to increase taxes on hotel rooms, underground vaults, parking garages and
taxi medallion taxes.  Appropriating $5.5 million for renovating portions of the
Harlem Valley Psychiatric Center for use as a juvenile prison and to operate the
facility for its first few months.

KILLED

Financing of state election campaigns with public funds.Authorizing New York
City to increase taxes on pinball machines.  Allowing municipalities to join
their resources to provide their own insurance coverage.

Energy

SIGNED

Extending for 26 months the state's emergency set-aside program for gasoline and
other fuels.

PASSED

Requiring labels on electrical power use in refrigerators, freezers and
dishwashers to promote energy conservation.  Authorizing the Energy Research and
Development Authority to finance the development of alternative energy
production facilities and to issue project revenue bonds for financing
conversion of industrial fuel users from oil to coal.

Requiring home heating oil burner service contractors to conduct oil burner
efficiency tests.  Allowing homeowners to get low interest loans up to $4,000
for the cost of windmills and solar heating and cooling systems.  Banning the
sale of gas-burning appliances with pilot lights.

KILLED

Giving the State Power Authority broad new powers to import cheap hydroelectric
power from Canada and to construct coal-fueled generating facilities.

Housing

SIGNED

Allowing tenants whose landlords fail to provide heat to purchase their own fuel
and deduct the cost from their rent.  Allowing fire-door exits in apartment
building cellars to be locked if they can be easily opened or unbolted from
inside without a key.  Allowing localities that tear down unsafe buildings to
sue the owners for demolition and legal costs.

PASSED

Increased protection against eviction for the elderly and the handicapped in
buildings becoming co-ops, and regular notification of progress in obtaining
needed 35 percent approval for conversion.

Requiring housing court to hold sessions at night.

KILLED

Stabilizing finances of the Mitchell-Lama housing program.  Extending of rent
stabilization to loft tenants.  Increasing to 51 percent in percentage of
tenants needed to approve a co-op conversion plan.

Miscellaneous

SIGNED

Changing Memorial Day to conform with the Federal holiday, on the last Monday in
May.

PASSED

Forbidding animal shelters to use decompression chambers to put animals to
death.  Financing the purchase of bulletproof vests for every policeman in the
state who patrols the street.  Allowing binding arbitration of any contract
dispute involving the state police.  Increasing the fee for taking the New York
State bar examination from $50 to $140.

VETOED

Establishing Senior Citizen Day as an ''officially recognized day.'' Allowing
police officers to work as traffic directors or security guards at events for
which a temporary beer and wine permit has been issued.

Weakening current laws against police soliciting or making contributions to
political parties.

KILLED

Requiring the installation of water meters in all newly constructed or renovated
buildings in New York City.  Revitalizing of the Fulton Fish Market area in
Manhattan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Richard Brown and Governor Carey

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 17, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
A PHILANTHROPIST IN POLITICS: STEWART RAWLINGS MOTT

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 551 words


''Nothing but big money for radic-lib candidates,'' said the notation next to
Stewart Mott's name when it turned up on the socalled enemies list of the Nixon
White House. And in fact that has become Mr. Mott's political persona, nearly as
well-known as the vast vegetable garden he has cultivated atop his East Side
quadriplex penthouse and the $2 million that is said to be his yearly income.

In 1970, Mr. Mott stood up at a board meeting of the General Motors Corporation,
whence his fortune came, and criticized the company for refusing to speak out on
the Vietnam War and failing to do enough about the population explosion, two of
his most constant causes.

He once said: ''At about the time that I was 18 I realized that the population
explosion and the possibility of nuclear annihilation were the most important
problems facing humanity. I decided to do something about it if I had a
chance.''

Mr. Mott did have a chance; he had the money, and he broke into politics. He did
it in a big way in March 1968 when he used full-page advertisements in 10
newspapers to pledge $50,000 to the Presidential candidacy of Nelson A.
Rockefeller if others would contribute double the amount.

Since then the shaggy-haired philanthropist, whose father, Charles Mott, was
once the largest stockholder in General Motors, has given $210,000 to Eugene J.
McCarthy's 1968 Presidential bid, held folk music festivals to promote peace and
love and contributed $400,000 to the 1972 Presidential campaign of Senator
George McGovern. He has taught gardening at the New School for Social Research,
formed a political fund-raising committee called People Politics and celebrated
his 40th birthday with a Middle Ages party that included wassailing and medieval
costume.

Mr. Mott's life has always been a peripatetic mixture of politics, publicity,
money and eccentricity. So that when he broke publicly with John B. Anderson's
Presidential campaign yesterday, complete with public grumblings and hot words,
his attitude seemed of a piece with his rather unusual career.

Stewart Rawlings Mott was born on Dec. 4, 1937, in Flint, Mich., the middle
child of three born to Ruth Rawlings Mott, a former teacher, and Charles Stewart
Mott, who had sold his wheel and axle business to the fledgling General Motors
in return for stock. At the time of his death in 1973, the elder Mr. Mott's
holdings were estimated at $500 million.

His son attended Massachusetts Institute of Technology, but after three years
left to hitchike around the world. He received his bachelor's and master's
degrees from Columbia, and spent a year working at a variety of his father's
businesses.

But in 1966 he found his niche in philanthropy, founding a nonprofit group
called Spectemur Agendo after the family motto, ''Let us be known by our
deeds.'' It concentrated on such issues as abortion law reform and sex research;
later he would move on to political efforts in New York as well as a number of
national campaigns.

In 1979, when he sent out a newsletter about a coming trip to China and asked
acquaintances and friends to help update his now legendary mailing list, Mr.
Mott described himself thus, ''There has been a lot of publicity about my work
because I'm a fairly colorful and unique personality in the field of
philanthropy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Stewart Mott

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 18, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CARTER'S PERILING SEOUL;
by Ernedt W. Lefever

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 745 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Administration is showing extreme displeasure with the new military-civilian
junta in South Korea. President Carter has urged the regime to ''move as rapidly
as possible toward a completely democratic government,'' adding that ''in the
meantime we are making sure that Korea is kept secure.''

Punitive signals followed rapidly: Economic missions to South Korea were
postponed, two Asian Development Bank loans were held up, and visits by
high-ranking Americans must now be cleared by Richard C.  Holbrooke, Assistant
Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs. Negotiations for an
Export-Import Bank loan, however, have been allowed to proceed.

Mr. Carter and his aides are distressed because the liberalization that followed
the assassination of President Park Chung Hee in October was cut short by the
new emergency Government. But they fail to recognize that it was precisely this
relaxation that encouraged the student-led insurrection in Kwangju that brought
on the crackdown.

The Administration's response is bound to undermine a loyal ally under
relentless siege by a Stalinist North Korea backed by Moscow.  Mr. Carter seems
unaware that South Korea, like most third-world countries, has virtually no
democratic tradition, no experience with competitive politics, and little
concept of a loyal opposition. He seems to believe that Korean dissidents are
authentic advocates of democracy and human rights rather than a mixture of naive
utopians and power-hungry ideologues determined to pursue ill-defined goals
illegally and by force. Like many Western liberals, he seems to regard mobs of
youths as agents of desirable change and middle-aged generals as barriers to
progess.

The combination of Korean realities and Mr. Carter's outlook, if translated into
American policy, could spell yet another Administration disaster. In South
Korea, as in South Vietnam a decade ago and in Iran and Nicaragua two years ago,
a strong central government is essential to the survival of the state and to
constructive economic and political development. In the three earlier cases,
Washington in the name of democracy or human rights put pressure on a besieged
allied regime to reform and make common cause with its domestic adversaries.
Thus, it gave aid and comfort to the regime's internal enemies and their
external supporters, both marching under the banner of ''national liberation.''
With Soviet assistance, Hanoi ''liberated'' South Vietnam and Cambodia; with
Fidel Castro's help, the Sandinistas ''liberated'' Nicaragua; with K.G.B.
agents, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini ''liberated'' Iran. In each instance,
freedom was set back; in each, America lost an ally; in each, our policies
spawned by misguided moralism have been partly responsible for catastrophic
consequences.

If Mr. Carter's righteous indignation persists and drives him to revive his
earlier determination to withdraw ground troops from South Korea, we could lose
an ally whose strength is essential to the defense of Japan and the Western
Pacific.

Mr. Carter's foreign policy stance suggests he is profoundly confused about
ends, means and consequences in the real world. There is little evidence that he
understands the moral limits of politics.  In ethical and practical terms, the
first task of government is to govern; the second, to govern justly; the third,
to govern democratically. To insist that the authorities in Seoul govern
democratically when they find it exceedingly difficult to govern effectively and
justly is to ask the impossible and to invite disaster.

Mr. Carter's ignorance of history and romantic utopianism feed upon one another.
He does not understand that democracy can be sustained only by a democratic
culture and ethic and that even peoples with this heritage often fail to achieve
effective, just, democratic governments. Demands for perfection play into the
hands of the totalitarians, who exploit the rhetoric of democracy and liberation
to confound the innocent as they tighten and expand brutal rule.

Ernest W. Lefever is president of the Ethics and Public Policy Center, a
''think-tank.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 18, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

600 CAMBODIAN REFUGEES RETURNING HOME VOLUNTARILY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 359 words

DATELINE: KHAO I DANG, Thailand, June 17


About 600 Cambodian refugees left two camps in eastern Thailand for the
Cambodian border today at the start of a voluntary repatriation program directed
by Thai authorities and the United Nations. However, most refugees here refused
to join in the program.

A group of 506 came from a camp here that has a total population of 130,000.
Those heading back to Cambodia left by bus for the border camp of Nong Chan,
where 6,000 refugees have been receiving food from international agencies.

In addition, 98 Cambodians were taken from a nearby settlement of Sarok Kok to a
border-crossing point.  It is the first organized mass repatriation program
since Cambodian refugees began streaming into Thailand last fall. In recent
days, Vietnam and the Vietnamese-backed Government of Cambodia have denounced
Thailand for organizing the repatriation, calling it an attempt to intervene in
Cambodian affairs to ''sabotage the revolution.'' They have also warned the
Thais that there would be retaliation.

Most of the Khao I Dang refugees who elected to return home were family groups,
including a large number of children and one 83-yearold woman who traveled with
her two sons to search for relatives. Most of those electing to return were
believed to want to rejoin families or are fed up with life in the overcrowded
camp.

The United Nations coordinator for the repatriation, Zia Rizvi, said yesterday
that Thai and United Nations officials cannot guarantee safety for those
returning to Cambodia. The role of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, he said, was to oversee the ''voluntary character'' of the move.

Some 200,000 Vietnamese soldiers have remained in Cambodia since the Pol Pot
regime was driven from Phnom Penh in January 1979 and replaced by the
Vietnamese-backed Heng Samrin Government. Since then, soldiers loyal to the two
men have been waging a guerrilla war throughout the Cambodian countryside.

Tomorrow, the repatriation program is due to move to the Sa Kaew camp. There,
relief officials fear that supporters of Pol Pot may seek to intimindate
thousands of refugees into returning to fight forces loyal to Heng Samrin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Cambodian refugees

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 18, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY BUDGET HEADING UPWARD;KEY QUESTION IN CAPIITAL IS HOW FAR

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


Through the din of debate over the nation's military budget that started last
fall, one conclusion has emerged clearly: Spending for the military is going up.

Still unclear is how far.  ''Despite the ups and downs,'' said a knowledgeable
budget official on Capitol Hill, ''there really seems to be a consensus for
higher defense spending.'' Officials in the White House and in the Pentagon
agreed.

Even so, disputes persist over just how much money the nation will spend over
the next several years for military prepardedness. That is the new focus of the
military debate, and the issues will not be resolved for many months.

The debate goes well beyond the military budget for the fiscal year that begins
Oct. 1, because the sum set for that will be the base from which budgets for the
four following years will be calculated.

$1 Trillion in Five Years

Although that base point has not been agreed on yet, the trend lines are all up.
The Government is projected to authorize about $1 million million in military
spending over the coming five years, rising from about $168 billion in 1981 to
about $260 billion in 1985.

That will not all be real growth, by any means, because inflation will consume a
good part of the increases. But military budgets will rise from about 25 percent
of the Federal budget to about 28 percent.

President Carter and Secretary of Defense Harold Brown have repeatedly argued
for steady, sustained growth with the rate of military spending pegged to the
gross national product, which is the sum of the nation's goods and services. In
March, however, they revised their earlier projection and raised the military
spending target from slightly over 5 percent of G.N.P. this year to 5.7 percent
by 1985. That took into account the costly operations in the Indian Ocean and
the rising price of fuel.

Congress, however, has shown itself dissatisfied with that, the Senate more so
than the House. Assuming they compromise on their differences, the Congressional
target would be about 6.1 percent of the gross national product by 1983.

Higher Rate for Joint Chiefs

An even higher objective has been set by Gen. David C. Jones, the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The nation's senior military officer said in recent
Congressional testimony that military spending should reach 6 to 7 percent of
the gross national product as soon as possible.

The speed with which military spending rises will depend upon two things.  The
first is what Congress does in its budget resolutions, which set overall budget
ceilings; in its authorizations, which set the framework for military
procurement and operational expenditures, and in its appropriations, which
provide funds.

The second is what President Carter does in preparing the budget for the
following fiscal year and his projections for the years beyond. Since he prefers
military spending to rise more slowly than does Congress, he could accept a
higher base set by Congress for this year but then project slower growth to
reach his original target. Or the Administration could accept the new base but
continue to project the 4 to 5 percent real growth to which it has committed
itself.

Officials in the Pentagon said that the military authorization bills before
Congress were good indicators of the trend since they will provide the authority
to carry out spending programs. The Administration asked for $46.9 billion for
next year to buy weapons and equipment and to develop new weapons. The Senate
Armed Services Committee raised that to $51.9 billion while the House voted
$53.1 billion.

Two Pledges Limiting Carter

Administration officials said that the President was somewhat constrained by two
pledges. He made one to the Senate last fall to increase military spending as
part of an arrangement to obtain approval of the treaty with the Soviet Union to
limit nuclear arms.

The Administration has also promised allies of the United States in the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization that it would increase military spending by no less
than 3 percent in real terms each year.  Reinforcing that commitment has been
the Administration's pressure on allies to do the same.

The high point in United States military spending in the last two decades came
from 1967 to 1969, in the war in Vietnam. As that conflict drew to a close,
military budget dropped sharply until 1975, when President Ford started them
back on an upward curve.

President Carter, however, stepped back from President Ford's projections in
line with his campaign promises to cut military spending. In his first military
budget, for instance, Mr. Carter proposed an authorization of $126 billion, as
against Mr. Ford's projected $135 billion.

Shift in Five-Year Plan

Mr. Carter's first five-year projections, in January 1978, would have kept
military spending below that foreseen by President Ford.  Only this year did Mr.
Carter shift to bring the outlook back to that of Mr. Ford and then to climb
higher.

The President changed his outlook for several reasons, beginning a year ago when
the Joint Chiefs of Staff said in effect that they would support the proposed
arms limitations treaty if the President rectified what they considered to be
serious shortcomings in military readiness.

Then came the furor over the Russian combat brigade in Cuba, the seizure of the
hostages in Iran, the Soviet incursion into Afghanistan and increasing public
concern with the growth in Russian military power.

The President revised his military budget upward in March but even that did not
satisfy Congress, which added more to it. The President and Secretary Brown have
tried to roll that back with letters to Congress in recent weeks but with only
moderate success.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: chart of changing projections in milatary spending

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 18, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN ISSUES,TROUBLE SENATOR CHURCH'S RE-ELECTION BID

BYLINE: By RICHARD BURT

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 945 words

DATELINE: BOISE, Idaho


While some 30 members of the Boise Kiwanis Club wolfed down stacks of pancakes,
Frank Church, Idaho's senior Senator, talked about the nation's energy problems
and his efforts to gain Government funds for the state's small, growing gasohol
industry.

But it soon became apparent that his audience at the breakfast session wanted to
talk about foreign policy. He was asked why the hostage crisis in Iran had not
been resolved, why the American military had failed in its effort to rescue the
hostages, why Washington had not stopped Moscow from moving troops into
Afghanistan, and why Mr. Church, as chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, did not seem able to do anything about these problems.

The meeting was only one of many campaign appearances Mr. Church, a Democrat,
has made in his drive to be re-elected next November for a fifth term. But he
and his aides say the session was typical of his encounters with Idaho voters
these days.

Like his liberal colleagues in other states, Mr. Church faces an electorate that
is worried about America's apparent inability to protect its interests around
the world and seems increasingly inclined to blame foreign policy ''doves,''
such as Mr. Church.

Not surprisingly, Mr. Church's critics in Idaho, including his Republican
opponent, Representative Steven D. Symms, have been quick to capitalize on this.
In speeches and political advertisements, Mr.  Symms cites Mr. Church's support
for the Panama Canal treaties, the new strategic arms accord with Moscow and the
Carter Administration's cancellation of the B-1 bomber to argue that the
55-year-old Senator has been a leading force for ''unilateral disarmament'' and
''appeasement.''

Mr. Symms has been aided in this effort by a local political lobby group that
calls itself Anyone But Church. The group is financed by the Virginia-based
National Conservative Political Action Committee, which is spending $1 million
this year in an effort to knock several prominent Democratic liberals out of the
Senate, including Alan Cranston of California, John C. Culver of Iowa and George
McGovern of South Dakota.

As a result Mr. Church is facing his toughest political battle since he was
elected to the Senate 23 years ago.  ''If you are asking whether I can win this
election on foreign policy issues, the answer is probably no,'' Mr. Church said
in an interview in his Boise office. ''There is a general feeling that things
aren't going well abroad and we can't do anything about it.''

''The natural reaction is that our problems must have something to do with
military weakness,'' he added. ''I don't believe that, but this is the current
that is running here like everywhere else.''

Mr. Church's reputation as a leading foreign policy liberal has created
political problems for him before, particularly in the Vietnam War, when his
opposition to American military involvement in Southeast Asia emerged as a major
issue in his 1968 race. But Mr.  Church believes that his early opposition to
the war gradually became a political asset as even conservative Idahoans grew
disillusioned with President Johnson's policies.

If Mr. Church was a maverick in foreign policy in the 1960's, this was not the
case in the last decade, in which a group of liberal Democrats and moderate
Republicans was successful in pushing through legislation, such as the 1973 War
Powers Resolution, meant to limit a President's prerogatives to wage war.

Mr. Church emerged as a dominant figure in Senate foreign policy circles,
sponsoring amendments in the early 1970's that ended the American bombing of
Laos and Cambodia and heading a select committee that in 1975 investigated
abuses by the Central Intelligence Agency, among other activities.

Active Role for Panel

In 1978 Mr. Church became chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, declaring
that he was determined to return the panel to a position of influence. In the
last two years the committee has played a more active role, with Mr. Church
making sure that it provided strong backing for the Carter Administration's
Panama treaties and efforts to conclude new arms control agreements with Moscow.

In the process, however, Mr. Church has become a target for Mr.  Symms and other
conservatives in Idaho. ''Our foreign policy was never more chaotic than when
Frank Church became chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee,'' Mr. Symms
said.

In part, the Church campaign is dealing with this criticism by depicting Mr.
Symms as an extremist.  But as his campaign slogan of ''Idaho never had a better
friend'' makes clear, Mr. Church's main strategy is to emphasize local issues in
the campaign and to remind voters that, as a ranking Democrat in the Senate, he
is well-situated to get help for his state.

When he does talk about the Foreign Relations Committee, he stresses that ''my
chairmanship has been very valuable to the people of this state.'' He said that
recently, for example, he held up the completion of an international sugar
agreement until a provision was inserted that protected Idaho's beet industry.

For the time being, Iran and Afghanistan seem to have overshadowed local issues
in the campaign, leading some local politicians to contend that if Mr. Church is
to win next November he will have to adopt a more hawkish stance on foreign
policy. His critics suggest that he has already begun to do this, contending
that his strong denunciation last fall of Moscow's stationing of combat troops
in Cuba was designed to aid his re-election.

Mr. Church called this assertion a ''bum rap,'' adding that he had long opposed
Soviet political and military moves in Cuba and around the Caribbean.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Senator Frank Church

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 18, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Pretrial Garwood Hearing Halted; Court-Martial Is Scheduled July 7

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 157 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., June 17


A military judge today adjourned a pretrial hearing for Pfc. Robert Garwood, who
is accused of collaborating with the enemy in Vietnam, and tentatively scheduled
his court-martial for July 7.

The judge, Col. R.E. Switzer, also criticized the marine's lawyers for
presenting 62 pretrial motions.  The 34-year-old private faces court-martial on
charges of desertion and collaboration with the enemy in his nearly 14 years in
Vietnam.

Colonel Switzer told Private Garwood's lawyers that some of their motions should
have been combined. He requested a ''more orderly presentation of the matters''
when the hearing resumed June 30 to hear final motions. The court-martial had
originally been scheduled to begin June 30 with jury selection.

Private Garwood returned to the United States last March and has been stationed
at Camp Lejeune since then. He maintains that he was taken prisoner in 1965 and
was unable to return until last year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 19, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

223 MORE QUIT CAMP FOR CAMBODIA

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 391 words

DATELINE: SA KAEO, Thailand, June 18


Thai military officials reported that 223 Cambodians left for home today from a
refugee camp here in eastern Thailand on the second day of a repatriation
program bitterly condemned by Vietnam and the Cambodian Government it backs in
Phnom Penh.

At least 2,000 others in the camp housing more than 24,000 were said to be
waiting to be processed. The camp is dominated by Cambodians who are supporters
of the ousted Government of Prime Minister Pol Pot, and some refugees leaving by
bus today for the 40-mile ride to the frontier told reporters that the forces
under Mr. Pol Pot had organized their departure.

Vietnam and the present Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government headed by
President Heng Samrin have accused Thailand of backing the Pol Pot guerrillas
and have condemned the repatriation program as a hostile act.

A majority of the refugees who left today are women and children, but at least
five of the men said they were soldiers going back to fight the Vietnamese. Most
of the departing women said they were returning to Cambodia to be @re united
with their husbands or other relatives from whom they were separated in the
fighting of last October that drove them into Thailand.

Some Have Left Other Camps

Yesterday, 506 refugees departed from the Khao I Dang camp, which houses a total
of 130,000, and 98 others left for the frontier from the nearby settlement of
Sarok Kok.

Each adult leaving the Sa Kaeo camp today was closely questioned in private by
United Nations refugee officials and Thai army officers as to whether they were
leaving willingly and were not coerced by the followers of Mr. Pol Pot who
virtually run the camp.

Many refugees who elected to stay behind told reporters they were doing so out
of fear for their safety in Cambodia despite some threats from followers of Mr.
Pol Pot here. Some of the refugees estimated that about 5,000 people whom they
described as hard-core Pol Pot supporters would willingly return to the western
areas of Cambodia controlled by Pol Pot guerrillas and that 3,000 or more others
would go back because they had been bullied into leaving.

The repatriation program was begun by the Thai Government and United Nations
refugee officials in response to what they said were pleas from some of the
thousands who poured into Thailand last fall to be allowed to return home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Cambodian family

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 19, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

KOREAN EX-PREMIER WILL QUIT POLITICS

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 968 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, June 18


Former Prime Minister Kim Jong Pil and nine other politicians and former
Government officials accused of corruption have agreed to turn over their
fortunes, estimated to total $147.6 million, and retire from politics in
exchange for a Government promise not to prosecute them, the Martial Law Command
announced here today.

The announcement culminates a monthlong investigation into their alleged abuse
of power conducted by the country's martial law authorities, who have
consolidated their grip on the Government following proclamation of nationwide
martial law on May 17.

Mr. Kim, who was one of the aspirants to the presidency in elections expected to
be held next year, had allegedly accumulated a total of $36 million during 18
years of association with the Government of the late President Park Chung Hee.

The announcement said that he and the nine others had agreed to end their
political careers. That means that Mr. Kim, who is 53 years old, cannot run for
the presidency in the elections promised for next spring.

Discussing the announcement, one army officer close to the investigation
commented: ''It means he is finished as a politician.''

Aides to President Park Listed

The statement amounted to the first time that the Government has publicly
acknowledged corruption among the country's top politicians and other leading
public figures. Prominent figures on the list include Lee Hu Rak, former
director of the Korean Central Intelligence Agency and President Park's chief of
staff for many years; Park Chong Kyu, former chief bodyguard to the slain
president and currently a member of the National Assembly, and Lee Se Ho, former
army chief of staff and commander of South Korean forces in Vietnam.

According to the 44-page announcement, Mr. Kim, who was also the founder of the
Korean Central Intelligence Agency and of the governing Democratic Republican
Party, controlled vast properties ranging from a dairy farm and a tangerine
orchard on Cheju Island to a newspaper company in Seoul. Most of these holdings
had been widely known, but this was the first time an investigative effort was
made to determine them.

Military investigators said they had uncovered at least 34 secret bank deposits
for Mr. Kim inside the country, totaling about $7 million. Whether any overseas
accounts were discovered was not known.

Methods allegedly used by Mr. Kim, who served as Prime Minister from 1971 to
1975, included coercion of businessmen to make campaign contributions to the
Democratic Republican Party; collection of ''cooperation fees'' in exchange for
his promise to put pressure on the Government to further their business aims;
investment of these funds in illegal real estate transactions, and attempts to
dodge taxes on his properties by placing them under a scholarship foundation.

Big Jewelry Collection Found

Investigators searching his house found a big collection of jewelry and antique
paintings, including a sword made of gold weighing over two pounds, the
announcement said,

His brother Kim Jong Nak, president of the Korea Tacoma Shipbuilding Company, a
joint venture with an American company of that name, was accused of having
collected $15 million with the help of Kim Jong Pil.

The Kim brothers have often figured in press reports about rebates allegedly
given by Japanese contractors who supplied equipment to South Korea for a subway
system.

No American or Japanese business organizations were named in the announcement,
and a few Korean companies were identified by initials only. None of the Korean
businessmen who allegedly bribed some of the politicians was listed. The
announcement said that the Martial Law Command had ''exercised restraint'' about
identifying ''unethical businessmen'' to avoid worsening the country's current
economic slump.

In a separate briefing paper issued to the press, the Martial Law Command said
that the properties and money surrendered by their owners would be turned over
to the Government's national welfare fund. The fund presumably is for providing
relief to needy people.

Anticorruption Steps Proposed

It also hinted that a law would be enacted soon requiring politicians and other
public figures to list their personal wealth publicly so that corruption could
be checked. It said that a public management system for election campaigning
would be introduced to stop candidates from spending excessive amounts.

Martial law officials said privately that the current anticorruption campaign
was being carried out as part of wide-ranging social and political changes being
promoted by Lieut. Gen. Chon Too Hwan, head of the Defense Security Command.

General Chon, a paratroop officer considered by many here to represent a
hard-line policy reminiscent of the control exercised by President Park, has
virtually taken charge of the civilian Government through the Special Committee
for National Security Measures, formed on May 31.

Promoting a ''political purification'' movement, he has vowed to remove from
politics persons regarded as corrupt and those considered to have leftist
sympathies, such as Kim Dae Jung, a dissident leader under detention for alleged
''instigation'' of the anti-Government rebellion in Kwangju last month.

Kim Dae Jung was not mentioned in the announcement of the corruption
investigation today, nor was any other opposition politician. Kim Young Sam,
president of the opposition New Democratic Party, is currently under house
arrest.

Other men listed in the announcement are Kim Chin Man, former deputy speaker of
the National Assembly and currently an Assembly member; Oh Won Chol, who was a
secretary to President Park in charge of development of heavy industries, and
Chang Tong Un, former director of the Veterans Association and president of the
Housing Corporation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 19, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WHERE'S WOODSTOCK

BYLINE: By Steven Doloff

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 731 words


In a literature class of 19- and 20-year-olds, while drawing a few limited but
perhaps useful analogies between the political enthusiasms of British Romantic
writers and many American writers in the 1960's, I happened to mention
Woodstock.

''Where's Woodstock?'' I asked, to give a few note-takers time to catch up, and
also, out of curiosity, to poke around in whatever residual associations
remained in connection with what came to be called ''The Movement.'' No one
knew. ''What happened there?'' No one knew. Surprised, I told them. Some took
notes.

As it occurred to me later, they were all 8 or 9 years old in 1969 and, many
being black and of Hispanic origin, might have felt culturally dissociated from
it anyway, had they even been of age at the time. And times have changed. I
teach in a business school whose enrollment over the last few years has risen
side by side with our nation's economic preoccupations. While my students are
probably as naive and idealistic as students have always been, they are so
almost exclusively with respect to their professional expectations and
individual futures. As for ''movements'' and politics in general, not a yip can
be heard, not a grumble.

Yet while my students' respective experience and concerns, in differing from
those of many of my 1960's college peers, ceased to surprise me, I remain
surprised at my own sudden sense of responsibility in bearing witness to the
1960's. A part of my generation's adult experience along with a part of what
seems its distinctive zeitgeist has already barreled down the mass media's hall
of mirrors into history like the Civil War. As this same generation inevitably
crosses the teacher's desk in its many corporate and professional as well as
academic forms, the chair we find on the other side is unexpectedly hot. For in
taking that seat we must acknowledge finally becoming a part of ''the
Establishment,'' and accountable not only as caretakers and interpreters of the
lessons (good and bad) bequeathed by earlier generations, but also by our own.
What's more, the same personal accountability we so vociferously demanded from
our teachers in the 1960's we begin to owe now, even unasked for, to our
students.

Conscience reminds us we are still ''either part of the problem or part of the
solution,'' because the same economic, ecological, racial and geopolitical
problems are still with us. They appear from our now-less-pristine point of view
more enduring, and we, ourselves, frailer and more complicitous, either by sins
of commission or omission. The solutions seem less dramatically obvious, more
tedious, and often thankless and lonely. And yet, self-doubt and complexity
notwithstanding, the 1960's generation is closer to the social and economic
levers of power than ever before. So, too, the responsibility, more than ever
before, is ours to tell the truth and act according to the values we wish to
pass on.

If only to establish an honest dialogue with the youth who are beginning to
regard us as authority figures, we should talk about the 1960's and our own past
aspirations, failures, naivete. We have learned why it is necessary to make any
present small generation gap more negotiable than its famous predecessor, which
contributed to cracking America in half when faced with the ambiguities of the
Vietnam War.

Considering all the events of the 1960's - the military nightmare, the social
issues, the political confrontations - is it also important for my students to
know about a rock concert held in Woodstock, N.Y.? Yes, if they are taught to
understand it for what it was: an adolescently self-indulgent,
news-media-distorted, profitmotivated and politically exploited historical event
that, for three days in August 1969, spoke for and to a utopian idealism as
close to the heart of this country and as necessary for its spiritual wellbeing
as the memory of any famous battle or leap in the gross national product.

''Is that on the final exam?'' You bet.

Steven Doloff, who teaches English at the Taylor Business Institute, is working
on a novel about the 60's generation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 484 words


World News Briefs;
BOLIVIAN POLICE OFFICIAL SAYS RIGHTISTS PLAN NEW ATTACKS

SANTA CRUZ, Bolivia, June l9 (Reuters) - A senior police officer said today that
militant rightists who seized the center of the city yesterday could be
preparing new attacks.

Police Chief Wilfredo Aguirre said he feared new attacks by the rightists, who
were routed by students and workers in clashes that left one student dead.

Members of the right-wing Falange Socialist Party seized the main square
yesterday after other Falangist groups had taken over five radio stations and
the headquarters of the Provincial Governor.

The Falangists, who were protesting alleged United States interference in
Bolivia's internal affairs, also threw stones at the American Consulate here.

Left-wing politicians criticized the authorities for failing to intervene
against the rightists.  They called the attacks part of a plot to thwart general
elections scheduled for June 29.

LIBYANS INVITE ARAB ALLIES TO WEIGH EGYPT'S 'THREAT'

BEIRUT, Lebannon, June 19 - Libya, accusing Egypt of preparing to wage a war,
has invited Arab allies to an emergency meeting in Tripoli to consider the
situation.

Jana, the Government-controlled Libyan press agency, said that Foreign Minister
Ali Abdel Salam Turayki yesterday invited the Foreign Ministers of Syria,
Algeria and Southern Yemen as well as the head of the political department of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to meet with him on Sunday.

The Libyan Government has termed the decision by Egypt to enforce martial law in
border areas with Libya "a unilateral declaration of war."

2,000 CAMBODIANS LEAVE REFUGEE CAMPS IN THAILAND

KHAO I DANG, Thailand, June 19 (AP) - About 2,000 Cambodians have left refugee
camps in Thailand and returned to their country this week in a voluntary
repatrition program, United Nations officials said today.  But thousands remain
- there are 130,000 in this camp alone - and United Nations officials believe
many will choose to stay in camps rather than return home.

Thai and United Nations officials say the repatrition is voluntary, but Vietnam
and the Hanoi-backed regime in Phnom Penh say the program is a plot to send Pol
Pot guerrillas into Cambodia "to sabotage the revolution."

World body officials in Bangkok said they would continue to make sure hat the
refugees were returning voluntarily.

GRENADA PREMIER UNINJURED AS BOMB EXPLODES AT RALLY

ST. GEORGE'S, Grenada, June 19 (AP) - A bomb exploded today at a political rally
where Prime Minister Maurice Bishop was to speak, killing at least two people
and wounding 20.  Mr. Bishop,the apparent target, was uninjured.

The police said the bomb was placed under the speakers' platform on which the
Prime Minister was standing.

Mr. Bishop, a leftist, said later over the Government radio station that the
bombing was the work of "imperialism and its local agents."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Letters;
A NATION GETS READY TO SACRIFICE ITS YOUTH

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 500 words


To the Editor:

Not for the first time, this nation is showing itself more interested in the
arithmetic of inflation than in the arithmetic of death as it moves toward the
registration of young men for the draft.  Some honorable voices in the
electorate and in the Congress have been raised in protest, but once more the
majority are having their way at the expense of the plans, and perhaps the
lives, of many of our youths.

But then, the majority of Americans who are not 19 or 20 know that they will not
be drafted, and it is always easy to be patriotic with other people's lives.  To
be sure, some of us who are not 19 or 20 were in the armed forces in earlier
wars, but is that a reason to inflict an increasingly devastating weaponry on
the youth of today?

And if those wo were in fact killed in earlier conflicts could speak from their
graves, does anyone really suppose they would encourage us to escalated the arms
race, to force our young men into the involuntary servitude of conscription, to
push them out into the napalm?

Nor is that all, for beyond the effect on ourselves - the increased tensions
which could lead to war, the dehumanization of the spirit in the armed forces
and the danger of mutilation or death in combat - is the effect on others who
share this lifeboat planet with us.

Do we have the right to identify other nations as "enemies" and to prepare
ourselves to destroy them?  Are we entitled to lay claim to the resources to the
sources of the Persian Gulf when we are already overfed, overheated,
overtransported?  Of course, the Russian commissars and Iranian mobs have done
their share to pollute the well.  But after Vietnam and bombing of Cambodia, are
our hands clean?

It is into this situation, murky with every nation's doubtful motives and often
corrupt means, that we intend to conscript our 19- and 20-year-olds.  Nations
have always been willing to sacrifice their youth in this way because
preservation of national "honor" is less difficult than understanding others and
building peace.

But is this really what we want of our young men? Do we not rather want their
voluntary help in fighting poverty, in nourishing the environment, in developing
alternative energy sources - in solving the real problems that the world is
sorely beset with?

I do not remember that the Administration or Congress has spent much time
consulting young men about the matter.  And the young do not constitute a
powerful lobby, with millions of dollars to urge its views on the public.  The
choice lies largely in the hands, and in the conscience, if we have it, of those
of us are older.

What will we ask of them? Will it be the stale and dangerous assertions of
nationalism and possible war, which require war, which require the enslavement
of the young to purposes they have not chosen of their own free will?  Or the
positive challenges of peace, in which we seek, but do not compel, their freely
given participation?
JOHN ERVIN JR., Minneapolis, June 16, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of giving of sacrifice

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Foreign Affairs;
TOO MUCH DOUBT IS DEBILITATING

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: BONN, June 19


When John F. Kennedy was President, wags said that he automatically picked up a
special phone which rang on his desk each day and said, "Yes, Chancellor
Adenauer, we still love you and support West Germany." He didn't stop to ask who
was calling.  Bonn's yearning ofr reassurance was insatiable.

Now, the same phone line seems to be needed, in the opposite direction. There is
no evidence of weakening in Chancellor Helmut Schmidt's dedication to the
Atlantic alliance or in his determination to deploy medium-range American
missiles, unless Moscow makes real concessions on its missile program.

Washington keeps warning Bonn not to let the Russians head off preparations for
installing the U.S. missiles, which won't be ready until late 1983.  But at
NATO, American officials say these are mainly agreements on technical planning,
political acts that need not be affected even if the Russians did accept a
deployment moratorium, and they show no sign of interest in one.

Nor would the relatively small amount of building involved in preparing sites be
hindered so long as the West insists that deployment means precisely that.  The
Russians are putting a new SS-20 into place each week - reports that they have
speeded up to one every five days have not been confirmed by intelligence - and
there is no way the West can hurry its program.

Still, there continue to be unsettling apprehensions voiced by Washington lest
the allies go back on their decision.  There is some possibility that the new
Belgian Government may defer endorsement of its predecessor's narrowly-won
agreement.  But even in Belgium should back out, German officials say flatly,
Bonn won't change its mind.

So the Bonn-Washington argument would be a tempest in a teapot if it didn't tend
to create the very doubts to be prevented.  It serves to feed Russian hopes that
enough pressure and perhaps some enticement will reverse Mr. Schmidt's decision,
and to keep alive minority domestic opposition which he had already overcome.

Of course, there is some basis for worry that the climate in Germany might
change, just as Adenauer had some basis for worry that Kennedy might try to
escape the Berlin crisis by making a deal with Moscow over Bonn's head.  The
fearful always have reasons to gnaw their nails.

The Russians could change their standing, deep-rooted policy on Germany's
partition and offer reunification on the sole condition of neutrality, letting
the Communist East German regime go down the drain. More realistic than such a
wild nightmare, the majority of West Germans might come to feel that ties with
the U.S. should be loosened to reduced the risk of attack from the East, even at
the risk of losing important freedoms.

There is a vehement argument going on among West German intellectuals on this
issue, with novelist Gunter Grass leading the coterie which says the U.S. is
both too unreliable and too dangerous an ally to follow closely. All the old
leftist complaints about American capitalism and arrogance are brought out to
support a flirtation with less alignment, if not actual nonalignment.
And Mr. Schmidt's Social Democratic Party has an active, highly v ocal left wing
which pulls in this direction.  He has to deal with i t, and sometimes he does
with harsh display of authority, sometimes w ith pacifying gestures to show he
too is sensitive to the danger of w ar and is being statesmanlike in seeking
negotiation if the Russiansw ill withdraw the hardware of menace.

It is a fallacy to say the Soviets were the great beneficiaries of detente.
True, they gained time to build their mighty arsenal, which they probably would
have managed anyway, given U.S. preoccupation with Vietnam and its consequences.
But it was the West Germans - and the East Europeans - who made the big gains,
in emotional, moral, social cultural and human terms as well as in commerce.
The West Germans have a lot at stake as tensions mount.  Not only the left but
many on the right would like to believe trouble can be reasoned away, or at
least that every effort is being make to persuade the Russians to ease off.

Ironically, Schmidt's main problem incoming elections is the possibility that
his party will win by too wide a margin.  That would wipe out his Free
Democratic coalition partners, leaving him to face his fractious left wing more
directly, a situation that plagues Labor Party leaders in Britain.

Repeated expressions of Washington's doubts about West Germany do nothing to
project the image of a solid, effective alliance in which Schmidt and his
partners can tell their constituents to take confidence.

If it takes daily reassurances from Bonn to Washington on a new special phone,
so be it.  But there is nothing to be gained in airing Washington's recurrent
jitters.  Chancellor Schmidt has asked for a private meeting with President
Carter in Venice, and this is probably what he wants to say.  It would help it
Carter is ready to reply that he knows West Germany has elections too, and that
he has faith in Bonn's intentions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VANCE REJOINS TIMES BOARD

SECTION: Section D; Page 7, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 513 words


Cyrus R. Vance, the former Secretary of State, has returned to practicing law
with Simpson, Thacher & Bartlett, the Wall Street firm he first joined in 1947.
Mr. Vance, back in practice less than a week, says he has yet to take on any
clients, but yesterday he renewed his corporate ties by rejoiningthe board of
The New York Times Company.

Mr. Vance, whose long working days and wearying travels became Washington legend
in his three years as Secretary of State, is one of the few people for whom the
pressured life of a prominent corporate trial lawyer may come as something of a
relief. In an interview, the former Secretary sounded eager about the
opportunities ahead.

"I find it a fascinating practice," he said, referring to the courtroom battles
of a trial lawyer. "I'm also extremely interested in the development of a strong
and effective court system."

Mr. Vance also said he would again take an interest in civil and human rights
causes, but that he planned to delay involvement in politics and the writing of
his memoirs "probablyuntil the end of the year." He did say, however, that he
was planning on "speaking from time to time, as you might expect."

The 63-year-old lawyer said that while he expected to take on several corporate
clients, "I will do work for individuals, as well."

Mr. Vance was made a partner in Simpson Thacher in 1956. He left the firm in
1961 to join the Kennedy, and later the Johnson, Administrations, where he held
various Defense Department posts. He rejoined the law firm in 1967; during the
next decade, while continuing his law practice he undertook a number of
diplomatic and publicservice missions. One of his best known roles was as the
first negotiator at the Paris peace talks on the Vietnam War in 1968-69. In
local affairs, he was a member of the Knapp Commission on police corruption in
New York City form 1970 to 1972 and served as president of the Association of
the Bar of the City of New York from 1974 to 1976.

Mr. Vance said he also intended to accept other directorships, in addition to
that with the Times Company, but he declined to specify which nominations might
be developing. He said the companies would make the announcements when their
boards officially appointed him.

The Times directorship was one of four Mr. Vance gave up when he joined
President Carter's Cabinet in January 1977. The others were at the International
Business Machines Corporation, Pan American World Airways and the One William
Street Fund, a mutual fund owned by Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb Inc., the
investment banking firm.

The Times directors at their May meeting voted to expand their membership to 12
from 11. Yesterday, they elected Mr. Vance to the unfilled position. The post
pays $10,000 a year, plus $400 for each of the 11 yearly board meetings
attended.

A Times spokesman said that Mr. Vance had not yet been assigned to specific
board committees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Cyrus R. Vance

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 21, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese Refugees Rescued at Sea

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 73 words


Early this week the Swan, an Australian destroyer @escort, discovered this
35-foot craft laden with 72 Vietnamese refugees at sea 250 miles southeast of Ho
Chi Minh City. The refugees, almost out of food, water and fuel, were taken
aboard the warship and landed in Hong Kong. The Australians promised the
Vietnamese homes in their country. Most wanted to go to Australia; others hoped
to enter the United States or a European country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of refugees

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 21, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM CARTER'S REMARKS AND COMMUNIQUE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2067 words


Following , as provided by Reuters, are excerpts from President Carter's remarks
at a state dinner in his honor in Rome last night and, as provided by The
Associated Press, excerpts from the communique issued by the United States and
Italy after President Carter's meetings during the day with President Sandro
Pertini and Prime Minister Francesco Cossiga of Italy:

Mr. Carter's Remarks

This morning President Pertini and I discussed some of the central issues that
are troubling world peace. Later I was able to discuss these questions with
Prime Minister Cossiga, whose visit to Washington in January and whose
presidency of the European Community have so deeply impressed us all.

Three basic ideas ran through our discussions today.  The first is that the best
possible policy for our countries as we face a time of danger, change and
testing in the 1980's is a policy that seeks both strong defense of national
security and lasting world peace, for the plain truth is that the one in
necessary to the other.

In decades past, the West successfully resisted Soviet expansionism both
westward and eastward. Today we see the Soviet Union thrusting southward:
directly into Afghanistan and indirectly through Vietnam and Cambodia. This
represents a strategic challenge to the vital interests of the West, and the
industrial democracies must face it together. If we are firm in our resolve, we
will define a position from which we can encourage detente. If we fail, we will
have allowed the strategic, political and economic balance to be gravely altered
in favor of totalitarianism.

Need for Social Justice

A second belief we share is that we cannot defend our common heritage of freedom
by arms alone. The future of our way of life is equally dependent on our ability
to provide economic opportunity and social justice for all our citizens and to
create a decent world environment in which freedom can survive and prosper. We
must be careful thinkers and practical politicians in our approach to energy
dependence, inflation, developing nations, arms control and peace in troubled
regions such as the Middle East.

The third basic idea that ran throughout our discussion today is that national
security and world peace can only be achived by maintaining a strong and united
Atlantic alliance. Just as the best form of government is self-government, so
the strongest cement of any alliance is free will. Ours is an alliance of
independent democracies. We draw strength from both our common traditions and
our individual differences.

We have heard a great deal recently about the differences and disagreements
among the Western democracies. Some voices in my country and Europe talk about
disarray. Some pessimists view debate among democratic nations as a signal of
fatal weakness. They predict a decline of Western civilization, spreading
pessimism, materialism, softness of will and diminishing confidence in ourselves
and in our institutions.

Self-Styled 'Realists' Wrong

Our experience and reality itself show clearly that these selfstyled
''realists'' are wrong. Our open and public grappling with economic or social
problems cannot obscure the extraordinary achievements of our society as a
whole.

It is not from democracy that millions of refugees have fled since 1945. It is
not to escape from democracy that people have risked their lives in small boats
on the high seas during recent weeks. It is not from democracy that nearly 10
percent of the people of an entire Asian nation have left their ancient
homeland. And it is certainly not from democracy but from foreign oppression
that hundreds of thousands of men, women and children have fled from
Afghanistan.

These votes of fleeing millions are being cast - as the voices of millions more
are being raised - for the deeply rooted faith that gives democracy its unique
dynamism: our underlying belief in the unalienable rights and dignity of human
beings.

Liberty Must Be Defended

But while liberty need not be imposed by force, we know all too well that once
won, it must be defended. The search for peace demands strength not weakness,
firmness not vacillation, pride not arrogance. We do not seek to remake the
world on the model of America or the West. We want the peoples of the world to
decide their own destiny and make their own choices. We are confident because
history is on the side of freedom.

Let there be no mistake about this: the West is not motivated by relentless
hostility or by a desire for indiscriminate confrontation or a return to the
cold war. But for the Western alliance simply to accept foreign occupation and
domination of Afghanistan as an accomplished fact would be a cynical signal to
the world that could only encourage further aggression, further tension and
further danger to world peace. It is our responsibility to register in concrete
terms our condemnation of the Soviet invasion for as long as that invasion
continues.

We cannot know with certainty the motivations of this latest Soviet move -
whether Afghanistan is the purpose or the prelude - but there can be no doubt
that this invasion poses an increased threat to the independence of nations in
the region and to the world's access to vital resources and to vital sea lanes.

Touches Lives of All

The fact is that our democracies are vitally dependent on oil supplies from a
volatile region whose own security -from internal divisions and from external
threat - is now in question. Unresolved, that security problem could change the
way we live. Already, it does touch, directly and drastically, the lives of us
all.

But our interest in peace and stability in the region goes far beyond economics.
In this ever more interdependent world, to assume that aggression need be met
only when it occurs at one's own doorstep is to tempt new and very serious
adventures. Detente with the Soviets remains our goal, but detente must be built
on a firm foundation of deterring aggression. The Soviets must understand that
they cannot recklessly threaten world peace or still enjoy the benefits of
cooperation while pursuing a policy of armed intervention.

Above all, everyone must know that efforts cannot succeed to divide our alliance
or to lull us into a false belief that somehow America or Europe can be an
island of detente while aggression is carried out elsewhere.

We recognize, Mr. President, that our policy toward those who might threaten
peace must be clear, it must be consistent, it must be comprehensible. There
must be no room for any miscalculation.

Way Open to Better Ties

But let me be equally clear that the way to improved relations is open, and that
is the path we prefer.  We know that the Salt II agreement can contribute
directly to the security not only of the United States, but of Europe and indeed
of the entire world.

It can help to restrain future arms competition, continue the historically
important direction of nuclear arms limitation and keep our faith that even the
most dangerous differences can be resolved in a framework of cooperation.
Especially now in this time of tension, observing the mutual constraints imposed
by the treaty is in the best interest of every nation on earth.

Therefore, I intend to honor the object and purpose of the treaty as long as the
Soviet Union, as observed by us, does the same. I will remain in close
consultation with our Congress with the goal of seeking the ratification of Salt
II at the earliest opportune time.

We Will Never Surrender

In sum, I do not accept forecasts of weakness or failure for democracy in the
world. Our societies, our values, our freedoms will decline only if we allow
them to do so, only if we surrender to uncertainty about where we stand and in
what we believe, only if we forget that each nation and each individual share a
responsibility to pull together and defend those common beliefs which unite us -
and I am convinced we will never surrender nor forget.

Mr. President, Mr. Prime Minister, ladies and gentlemen, just as within each
democracy we must work to nourish the spirit of community which alone can make
the whole of a nation larger than the sum of its parts, so within the alliance
of free nations it is equally true that unless we work together we shall surely
be vulnerable separately.

I pledge America's own unwavering commitment to our common interests of security
and peace, and we depend on our European friends and allies to join us in that
effort. Together we can and will defend the values and interests of our society.
Historical experience counsels such a course. Present circumstance compels it.

The Communique

The international situation created by the Soviet Union's armed intervention and
continuing occupation of Afghanistan was examined in depth. It was agreed that
this Soviet action, taken in flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter,
constitutes a threat to peace, poses a grave challenge to the West and to its
interests in Southwest Asia and the Persian Gulf, and that it has created a
serious obstacle to the continuation of the process of detente.

As a result of this assessment, both sides view as indispensable a comprehensive
Western political strategy designed to make clear to the Soviet Union by the
application of tangible measures the necessity of a prompt and complete
withdrawal of its troops from Afghanistan.

In line with that view, the two sides welcomed the concerted steps which NATO is
now pursuing in order to strengthen the common defense in response to the
strategic challenge faced by all the Western allies. The two Governments
confirmed their commitment to the earliest possible fulfillment of the goals
embodied in NATO's longterm defense program. Both sides recognized that
increased European attention to security requirements within the NATO treaty
area assumes even greater urgency because of U.S. commitment of resources toward
building a security framework in the region of Southwest Asia and the Persian
Gulf.

Complementary Arms Goals

President Carter and Prime Minister Cossiga expressed their satisfaction with
the NATO decision to pursue the complementary objectives of arms control and the
deployment of theater nuclear forces. President Carter reiterated his admiration
for Prime Minister Cossiga's leadership in this effort. Prime Minister Cossiga
reaffirmed Italy's active support to implement the NATO offer of Dec. 12, 1979,
inviting the Soviet Union to begin negotiations on the limitation of long-range
theater nuclear weapons systems.

President Carter expressed his own appreciation and that of the entire American
people for Italy's support of the international effort to secure the release of
the American hostages held by Iran in violation of international law and
universally accepted standards of decency. It was stressed that the principle of
the rule of law, vital to the health and stability of the world community, is at
stake in this crisis. The conviction was also expressed that the release of the
hostages constitutes a precondition for re-establishing the international
prestige of Iran and for the resumption of mutually beneficial relations with
its Government, including the revocation of economic sanctions.

Middle East Discussed

Turning to other questions of common interest, President Carter reiterated the
U.S. commitment for a comprehensive peace in the Middle East, including the
resolution of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects. He reaffirmed his
belief that the Camp David accords continue to provide the soundest framework
for building on the significant progress which has already been achieved toward
ending the decades of bitterness and conflict in the Middle East.

Prime Minister Cossiga expressed Italy's full agreement with the objective of a
comprehensive and durable peace with justice for all, for Israel and well as for
the Arab countries and for the Palestinian people. This objective is shared by
the United States. It is also endorsed by the countries of the European
Community and was reconfirmed in the June 13 declaration of the European Council
in Venice. In the context of the efforts designed to achieve this objective, he
expressed the hope that significant progress could be made in the implementation
of all aspects of the agreement reached at Camp David, thanks to the personal
and courageous commitment of President Carter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of President Carter and President Sandro Pertini

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 21, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

32,000 VIETNAMESE WAIT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 193 words


To the Editor:

Since the fall of South Vietnam five years ago, American officials concerned
with the refugee program have sought to persuade Hanoi to permit the legal
emigration of Vietnamese with relatives in the United States. Orderly emigration
by air, from Vietnam directly to the United States, would reduce the heavy loss
of life among those who now have no alternative but to take to sea in small
boats, hoping for some place of asylum.

Hanoi recently has agreed to allow 32,000 carefully screened individuals to
leave on regularly scheduled or chartered aircraft.  However, because the United
States has not approved the list, Vietnam now plans to unleash a new exodus of
''boat people.''

When the seaward flow of refugees swelled a year and a half ago, our Government
waited for many months before sending the Seventh Fleet to assist them. In the
meantime, numerous Vietnamese perished.

If many more thousands now die in the South China Sea, it will again be in part
because the Administration failed to act in time.
CARL H. LANDE, Professor of Political Science and East Asian Studies, University
of Kansas, Lawrence, Kan., June 7, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. FIGHTS EXEMPTION OF 2-ACRE MINES

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: WISE, Va., June 21


By using mountainside excavations of less than two acres, 250 to 300 Virginia
strip-mine operators have made themselves immune from either state or Federal
environmental regulation. They have been abetted by local laws in three of the
six coal counties in this area.

The two-acre exemption in the Federal Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act
of 1977, a measure that the coal industry had delayed for 10 years by successful
lobbying, was written in to help small, so-called ''mom and pop'' strip mines
and homeowners who dig ''house coal'' from backyard outcrops.

But on a tour here yesterday, Walter Heine, director of the Federal Office of
Surface Mining, said that the exemption was being abused.  ''It clearly was not
put in the law for this purpose,'' Mr. Heine said after visiting several
two-acre mine sites.

The Office of Surface Mining has a test case under way in Buchanan County,
challenging the two-acre exemption and the county's assistance to the two-acre
miners. ''The law was not written to let large land-holding corporations
sublease to a multiplicity of little operators and then aggregate the tonnage
mined,'' Mr. Heine said.  ''That's what's happening here.''

'Shoot and Shove'

Although the 1977 law made illegal the mining practice that has covered 3,000
miles of slopes on Virginia mountainsides with manmade landslides, miners
operating under the loophole can ''shoot and shove,'' as the method is known
here, with impunity.

In the ''shoot and shove'' procedure, miners blast the high mountain flanks to
loosen the earth and the rock over the coal seams and then bulldoze the spoil
downhill, knocking down the trees below and filling valley-bottom streams with
silt. Many miners do not even bother to get a permit.

Resistance to environmental curbs on strip mining is nearly as endemic here in
Appalachia as are violations of Federal laws against moonshine whisky. To avoid
shoot-outs in neighboring Campbell County, Tenn., Federal strip-mine inspectors
have had to resort to helicopter ''drop ins,'' reminiscent of Vietnam War
maneuvers, on flagrant - and armed -violators of the environmental standards.

Virginia remains one of the most resistant of all the coal states to the strict
environmental curbs that the new law requires to be adopted under a system that
leaves enforcement to the states if their rules meet Federal environmental
standards. One of the most resented requirements is that strip-mined hillsides
be restored to the ''approximate original contour,'' which the operators say is
impossible on many steep slopes.

Governor Involved in Suit

Hostility to the original-contour provision is so pervasive here that Virginia's
Republican Governor, John N. Dalton, has joined in an operators' lawsuit
challenging the constitutionality of the strip-mine act. The suit is pending
before the United States Supreme Court.

Exploiting the two-acre provision is doubly pleasing to strip-mine operators,
who consider that they are using part of a law they detest to ''beat the Feds at
their own game,'' as one coal man here put it.

Before the Federal law was passed three years ago, Virginia officials say, there
were no more than three or four strip mines that would have fit the two-acre
description, because pits that small would ordinarily be uneconomical. The
average strip mine before the law was 10 acres or more in size.

But now, according to Dan Stocker, the chief regional strip-mine inspector of
the Federal Office of Surface Mining, there are 250 to 300 of the tiny mines on
the 25-to 30-degree slopes of Virginia's mountain counties along the
Kentucky-Tennessee border. And the twoacre gambit is not simply the guile of a
small-business operator.

Counties Aiding Miners

The hegemony of the strip-mine operators here is so formidable that in Buchanan,
Dickenson and Russell counties, the local governing bodies are actively aiding
the two-acre operators.

Under the Federal standards for controlling strip mines, roads built for a
strip-mine operation are included in the scope of the ''acreage disturbed.''
Because most strip mines are far up remote zollows, the road acreage would in
most cases make the mine area more than two acres and preclude use of the
exemption.

So Buchanan, Dickenson and Russell counties have been temporarily accepting into
their county road systems the haul roads of the strip miners. By separating the
acreage of the haul road from the actual mine site acreage of, say, 1.9 acres,
the counties are allowing what would otherwise be unprofitably small illegal
pits to become bonanzas, free of reclamation costs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Surface Mining Office Director Walter Heine;
maps of Virginia

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION THE 1980 DEMOCRATIC PLATFORM IS SURE TO BE FULL OF SPLINTERS

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1273 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Four years ago, the Democrats adopted a party platform without a breath of
opposition, an event as rare as a mild winter in Buffalo. This August, at the
Democratic National Convention in Madison Square Garden, the party seems likely
to return to form, squabbling over the text line by line and baring
philosophical differences before a national television audience.

A fight was assured last week when the party's platform drafting subcommittee,
with President Carter's supporters firmly in command, rejected Senator Edward M.
Kennedy's positions on issue after issue.

Issues of Freedom

The subcommittee refused to endorse an immediate tax cut, billions of dollars in
additional spending on jobs programs, wage and price controls, price ceilings on
crude oil and natural gas, a firm statement against draft registration and
dozens of other principles on which the Senator has based his campaign. The
Kennedy forces left no doubt that they would carry their fight to the
convention.

Over the years, platform debates at the Democratic National Convention have
involved the great, divisive issues of the nation's history: slavery, free
silver, prohibition, women's suffrage, civil rights and the war in Vietnam, to
name a few. Sometimes, the internecine struggles have lost the party the
Presidential election.

In 1896, William Jennings Bryan lost to the Republican, William McKinley, by
fewer than 600,000 votes out of more than 14 million cast. The battle at the

Democratic convention that year over the silver standard had led to Bryan's
nomination, but it caused many eastern Democrats to defect to McKinley and is
seen by many historians as the principal cause of Bryan's defeat.

More recently, in 1968, there was an uproar in the International Amphitheater in
Chicago and rioting in the streets when the party considered the Vietnam plank
in the platform. That contributed, no doubt, to Richard M. Nixon's narrow
victory over Hubert H. Humphrey.

On the other hand, there have been times when the party has emerged from
platform fights stronger than it was before. The convention debate over civil
rights in 1948 left the party deeply divided.

It even spawned a third-party candidate, Strom Thurmond, who ran as a Dixiecrat
opposed to the Democrats' stand in favor of full civil rights for blacks. Yet
Harry S. Truman won the election that year, in part because he carried such
northern states as Illinois, Massachusetts and Wisconsin, where there was strong
sentiment for civil rights.

A Tradition of Difference

Not surprisingly, the Kennedy and Carter forces disagree on whether the debate
this year will strengthen or weaken the party's chances in the general election.

''Part of the Democratic tradition is to air our differences,'' Peter Edelman,
Senator Kennedy's issues director and representative to the platform committee,
said last week. ''The process is a healthy one and can only contribute to our
party's being strong in November.''

However, Mayor Coleman A. Young of Detroit, the platform committee chairman and
a Carter supporter, made the opposite argument. ''We are attempting to unite a
party,'' Mr. Young remarked. ''Obviously there are differences. But those
differences are best resolved in private, without grandstanding.''

Many politicians are contemptuous of platforms generally. Senator Barry
Goldwater of Arizona, the Republican Presidential candidate in 1964, once
declared, ''At best, political platforms are a packet of misinformation and
lies.'' Indeed, American political history is replete with examples of
Presidents who, once elected, thumbed their noses at portions of their party's
platform.

The New Deal Departure

To take an extreme example, the 1932 Democratic platform advocated ''an
immediate and drastic reduction in governmental expenditures ... to accomplish a
saving of not less than 25 percent in the cost of the Federal Government.'' It
also pledged ''maintenance of the national credit by a Federal budget annually
balanced.''

When Franklin D. Roosevelt took office, he immediately began to implement the
New Deal, which resulted in the highest level of Government spending and the
largest budget deficits in the history of the country to that time.

The 1976 Democratic platform promised a $5 billion to $7 billion reduction in
military spending and continued price controls on oil and natural gas. President
Carter has increased the Defense Department's budget and supported a phasing out
of price controls on fossil fuels.

Nevertheless, scholars who have studied party platforms have concluded that
Presidents tend to abide by them in general, if not in every detail. According
to Gerald Pomper, whose book ''Nominating the President'' contains one of the
most detailed studies of the subject, a President can ignore individual planks
in his party's platform once he is in office but cannot repudiate the document
entirely without repudiating his party.

Thus, Franklin Roosevelt redeemed many of the pledges of the 1932 platform,
including unemployment relief, a public works program, regulation of the stock
markets, protection of bank deposits and repeal of prohibition.

And Mr. Carter, upon taking office, pressed Congress into enacting jobs programs
for the unemployed and, in foreign policy, negotiated an arms limitation pact
with the Soviet Union and the Panama Canal treaties, all major items in the
platform.

Some of the 1976 platform promises - welfare and tax reform, for example - were
proposed by Mr. Carter but rejected by the Democraticcontrolled Congress.

Furthermore, anyone who reads the Democratic platform, to be put into final
shape by the full platform committee this week, and compares it with the
Republican platform, which will not be drafted until just before the party's
convention in Detroit next month, must conclude that the differences between the
parties are far greater than the differences between President Carter and
Senator Kennedy.

Real Party Distinctions

The Democrats, in one form or another, will endorse a broad range of social
programs such as national health insurance; the Republicans will oppose such
initiatives. The Democrats will support the Equal Rights Amendment; the
Republicans will not. The Democratic platform, on balance, will be pro-labor;
the Republican one will be pro-business.

A platform, Woodrow Wilson once said, ''is meant to show that we know what the
nation is thinking about, what it wishes corrected and what it desires to see
attained.'' This year, the two Democratic candidates disagree in many respects
on what those thoughts, wishes and desires are.

President Carter, as he declared in his statement to the platform committee,
believes that the nation wants to meet its problems with ''realistic, achievable
solutions within our means.''

Senator Kennedy, on the other hand, thinks it wants ''solutions that not only
meet the needs of the many, but reaffirm our commitment to improve the
conditions of the least fortunate.''

The differences are basically ones of degree. They are not so fundamental as
those of earlier times over, say, the abolition of slavery or the war in
Vietnam. But they are differences nonetheless, and the way they are resolved may
ultimately decide the election in November.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Mayor Coleman A. Young

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE ENDLESS COUNTDOWN

BYLINE: By Wayne Biddle; Wayne Biddle, who writes frequently about government
and high technology, is the author of a forthcoming book about the public
language of science and technology.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5826 words


Stretched across the Atlantic coastal flats of Florida is a kind of territory
nobody ever much wanted. The Seminoles stayed away from it because tough podzol
and palmetto scrub were of no use to them. The surf fishing there was probably
wonderful long ago, but only an eccentric would bother to hike across a
shadeless hot plate tormented by Nimrod mosquitoes when every easy waterway in
Florida brimmed with fish. There have never been caverns or significant metal or
mineral deposits. In other words, since Paleozoic times, this land was destined
to host either a bird sanctuary or some sort of military establishment. That it
also happened to become the site of our first total departure from the planet is
perhaps what the Seminoles always knew it deserved.

The years since America's moon walk have not been altogether happy at Cape
Canaveral. Huge rocket casings and launch fixtures of the Apollo years lie
abandoned among Sabal palms and saw grass. Birds live in them. There is a touch
of Flushing Meadow or Angkor Wat here, the sadness of futures passed. And now
there is the worst insult of all at what was supposed to be man's embarcadero to
the stars - a $9 billion spaceship that refuses to fly.

The spring of 1979 was to have marked the resurgence of the American manned
spaceflight program. But when the space shuttle Enterprise (which the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration wanted to call Constitution, before ''Star
Trek'' fans wrote to Gerald Ford) arrived at Kennedy Space Center on April 10,
1979, it was already a lame duck. Analysis of data from two years of glide
landing and vibration tests had revealed that two of the ship's most basic
aspects - its weight and mechanical structure -were unacceptable. Two weeks
earlier, Enterprise's younger sister, the space shuttle Columbia, had also been
ferried in on a 747 piggyback flight. During transport, hundreds of pieces of
its thermal insulation were damaged, or simply fell off. No one quite knew why.
Furthermore, the rocket engines which must boost these craft into orbit were
still back in a Mississippi laboratory; they had logged only one-half of the
total operating time required for certification. NASA officials in Washington
faced the ignominious chore of asking Congress for $185 million to supplement
the $1.4 billion they had already received that fiscal year. Today, the first
launch still could be a year away, and this time NASA needs $300 million more to
complete the shuttle.

The story of how this happened, and of why the project is so beset by
difficulty, is the story of the space program in the twilight of the Apollo
years. It involves disputes over basic design, a chain of budgetary and
technological compromises, governmental infighting and corporate maneuvering. It
is the story of an extraordinary engineering effort that has experienced equally
extraordinary frustration in its attempts to push the state of the art in engine
design and in thermal protection. And although the response of the project
engineers has been to counter adversity with unparalleled technological
resourcefulness - displaying a flexibility capable in no other country - the end
result raises questions about both the ultimate use of the project, and about
why so many billions of dollars will be needed before the space shuttle can
accomplish its mission.  In its present configuration, the space shuttle
consists of an airplane-like orbiter about the size of a DC-9, two large
solidpropellant boosters, and a big aluminum tank that holds 800 tons of liquid
hydrogen and liquid oxygen, which power the orbiter's engines. These components
are mated in the old Vehicle Assembly Building left over from Apollo days at
Cape Canaveral, then hauled out to a rejuvenated Launch Pad 39 on the same
gargantuan tractorcrawler that was used to move the Saturn V moon rockets. At
blastoff, the orbiter's own main engines light up first, then the two
solidpropellant boosters kick in to help lift the whole contraption.
Acceleration is relatively mild, at three times gravity. (By comparison, the
Loch Ness Monster roller coaster at Busch Gardens in Williamsburg, Va., gives
3.5 G's.) It takes about two minutes to reach an altitude of 28 miles, where the
boosters burn out, separate from where they have been bolted to the external
tank, and fall back, on parachutes, into the ocean. The 160,000-pound casings
and motors are intended to be recoverable for multiple reuse - but this
capability remains to be proved. Meanwhile, the orbiter and tank continue to
accelerate toward a velocity of more than 17,000 miles per hour. When the
engines have used all the fuel in the tank, this 127-foot-long, 27-foot-wide,
36-ton, $3 million cylinder drops off and disintegrates in the atmosphere (Or,
more probably, plunges into the Indian Ocean.) The orbiter then coasts alone,
using small selfcontained rockets to place itself in orbit anywhere between
about 175 and 250 miles high.

There, the orbiter's crew opens the shuttle's bay and deploys new satellites and
does experiments. After finishing the hours or days of work they have been sent
up for, the crew (two astronauts, a ''mission specialist'' who operates
experiments or deploys payloads, and sometimes up to four others) strap
themselves in and let the ship's computers fly them back home - to Cape
Canaveral in the case of civilian flights, or to California's Vandenberg Air
Force Base for military missions. It is a completely unpowered plummet through
the atmosphere, except for a few rocket bursts to help the shuttle slow down to
come out of its orbit. The astronaut ''pilots'' can feed updated information
into the computers (this is called ''realtime programming'') or override the
automatic system in the event of a catastrophic failure. But essentially, they
''fly'' the shuttle the same way viewers ''control'' a good color television.
The pilots are, needless to say, a bit sen-sitive about such comparisons.  This
vision of the space shuttle's future seems somewhat dreamlike right now, given
the continuing imbroglio of its development. To trace the origins of the
debacle, one must return to the summer of 1969, during the days surrounding the
first moon landing. Grandiose schemes were in the air. A special Presidential
Space Task Group foresaw earth-orbital space stations, lunar-surface bases,
manned flights to Mars by the mid-80's and reusable carriers to service these
adventures from Earth. But the glory of Apollo 11 could not ob-scure widespread
concern about Vietnam and domestic schism. By the middle of 1970, Richard Nixon
struck a compromise between the lavish space program, which had always been
popular with middle America, and the curtailed spending demanded by legislators
whose foreign-policy support he coveted. ''We must realize that space
expenditures must take their proper place within a rigorous system of national
priorities,'' he said. He modestly identified three ''general purposes which
should guide our space program - exploration, scientific knowledge and practical
applications.'' NASA budgets were then projected well below the $4 billion
supposedly needed for minimal new work. The ''aerospace depression,'' which soon
put 200,000 engineers and technicians out of work coast to coast, had begun.

The only big-budget item to survive through the early 70's was the concept of a
fully reusable launch vehicle. By the end of Apollo, everyone who was involved
agreed that gold-plated stunts were not the way to attain routine access to
space. NASA engineers sketched several designs for an earth-to-low-orbit booster
that would simply ''shuttle'' back and forth between the surface and the lowest
practical parking altitude - taking off like a rocket, landing like an airplane.
By 1974, through the pressures of inflation, the scrutiny of the Office of
Management and Budget (O.M.B.) and the parsimony of a war-weary Congress, these
designs were pared down to the partially reusable system that is now stalled at
the Cape.

The political maneuvering of those first four years is worth close study because
it set the course for most of the problems that would catch up with NASA later
in the decade. The first shuttle authorization votes in 1970 and 1971 were
extremely close. Senators Walter F. Mondale, William Proxmire, Clifford P. Case
and Jacob K.  Javits, among others, spoke for a large constituency of scientists
and at-home social reformers who opposed another manned spaceflight program. To
counter this force, NASA wooed the Air Force and its strong Congressional ties.
Given its sacrosanct budget for expendable launchers like Atlas and Titan, which
put military satellites into space, the Air Force was at first ambivalent, but
soon realized that it might exact quite a handsome concession from NASA in
return for even lukewarm support. The fundamental justification for high initial
investment in the space shuttle was (and still is) the prospect of a lively
market waiting for cheaper launch services in the 1980's. The Air Force could
guarantee a substantial amount of business. They were also interested in some of
the potential uses of the shuttle - manned reconnaissance missions, spaceborn
command posts, laserweapons platforms, the capture and retrieval of spy
satellites and the like.

NASA thus drifted into the proprietary zone of powerful Congressmen who insisted
that Air Force design requirements be accommodated: a 65,000-pound payload
capacity in a 15-foot-by-60-foot bay in place of the smaller, lighter NASA
configuration; a maneuvering capability that would enable the shuttle to orbit
the Earth once in any direction and then land at its takeoff point. These
amendments meant changing the basic shape of the spacecraft and imposing severe
demands on its thermal protection system. The cost implications of these changes
were vague, but estimates added at least 20 percent to both development and
operation costs. The most amazing part of the deal was that the Air Force would
not have to contribute one penny to build the ship: It was to become the most
expensive made-to-order gift to the nation's defense by any civilian agency.

As is usual when billions of dollars are being staked on a project whose
justification lies somewhere in the future, numerous studies were contracted to
either prove or disprove the shuttle's worth. NASA paid $600,000 for one by
Mathematica Inc., a Princeton company that was headed by the econometrician
Oskar Morgenstern. Using data supplied by Lockheed, the Aerospace Corporation,
NASA and the Pentagon, Mathematica first showed that a fully reusable shuttle
would be marginally cost-effective - the savings would be on the order of $100
million from a $12.8 billion investment. The controlling factor would be the
total number of operational flights.Despite this rather shaky forecast, budget
authorization went smoothly through Congress, perhaps because members did not
want to appear too antitechnology after the votes against the supersonic
transport and antiballistic missile. Moreover, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. was by now
taking a dim view of any moves against the space industry.

When the NASA administrator James Fletcher went back to Mathematica for a second
study, however, he knew he had to persuade both the White House and Congress
that the shuttle could be brought in for much less than $12.8 billion. In fact,
O.M.B. told him he might get half that much. So he instructed Mathematica to
develop an analysis based on cheaper designs, and then turned the aerospace
house inside out to produce a ''mission model'' or ''traffic base line'' showing
a maximum number of flights. At one time, the figure finally given to
Mathematica was 714 flights during the proposed 12-year shuttle write-off period
from 1978 to 1990. At 65,000 pounds per launch, this postulated nearly four
million pounds of new satellite payload in orbit every year. (For comparison, in
1969 and 1971 - which were both big years for space - 390,000 and 425,000 pounds
had been launched respectively.) Nonetheless, armed with Mathematica's analysis
(which contradicted other studies by O.M.B., the Rand Corporation and a panel of
the President's Science Advisory Committee), Fletcher persuaded Richard Nixon to
buy the shuttle.

In the fiscal 1973 budget, Congress laid out several ground rules: a first
orbital flight in 1979 at a total develop-ment cost of $5.15 billion (in 1971
dollars); $300 million for NASA support fa-cilities; $1 billion to produce a
fleet of five operational orbiters, and an absolute limit of 20 percent on cost
overruns. NASA had no choice but to accept, despite the extremely high
state-of-art technological risks that were implied by all the design trade-offs.

Dr. Jerry Grey, former professor of aerospace science at Princeton, who has done
a good job of placing the shuttle in NASA history in his book
''Enterprise,''mentions a practice in industrial contracting known as ''buying
in'': a firm will offer to do too much for too little in order to win the
initial project approvals. Given the political environment of the early 70's,
NASA was obviously in a position where it had to present a rosy picture to get
the job. It would then bet on the outcome, hoping that the inevitable losses in
credibility would be offset by accomplishments. Whether NASA was right or wrong
in this ploy is by now irrelevant. The point is that by locking itself into a
minimal development budget on the basis of shallow technical planning, NASA left
itself no margin for error.  This is, of course, the classic engineering
nightmare.  From the very beginning of the space shuttle project, two main
technical obstacles - that would push the state of the art - were apparent. The
orbiter's high-performance rocket engines, unlike anything else ever made, must
be capable of complex throttling and stop-start operation over a working life of
at least 55 missions; and the thermal protection system which - unlike the
ablating heat shields of Mercury, Gemini and Apollo, that are destroyed during
reentry - must be able to withstand the hypersonic maneuvers of reentry and be
reusable without any extensive refurbishment.

Propulsion engineers had warned as far back as 1969 that the engines might be
the element that would pace the shuttle development. They would require a far
greater step forward in technology beyond the Apollo rockets than their Saturn
engines represented over the engines of previous boosters like Atlas. To get a
sense of the magnitude of the challenge, one need only examine the high-pressure
turbopumps that are necessary to get 375,000 pounds of thrust into an engine
small enough to fit alongside two others within the envelope of the orbiter's
body. These pumps are roughly the size of a trash can, yet the amount of energy
being released during combustion is equivalent to five million horsepower.

Preliminary design studies were finished at the end of 1970 by three major
competitors - Aerojet-General's Liquid Rocket Company (in Sacramento, Calif.),
Rockwell International's Rocketdyne Division (in Canoga Park, Calif.) and Pratt
& Whitney Aircraft Group (in East Hartford, Conn.). Pratt & Whitney had already
tested most of the components for a high-pressure engine, the X.L.R.-129, that
met shuttle requirements. It was scaled to deliver 250,000 pounds of thrust, but
Pratt & Whitney had developed and tested turbopumps up to the 350,000-pound
level. As for the competitor Rocketdyne, most of its effort had been on a
different engine design called ''aerospike,'' which was never used. The ''staged
combustion cycle'' favored by NASA, and employed in the X.L.R.-129, had seen
only a few limited component tests at Rocketdyne. Thus, when NASA awarded the
$500,000,000 engine contract to Rocketdyne in July 1971 - six months before NASA
administrator Fletcher got final approval to proceed from President Nixon - many
of those in the rocket industry shook their heads in disbelief. ''It's my
feeling that the contract had to go to California for political reasons,'' said
Representative William R.  Cotter, Democrat of Connecticut, at the time. Cotter
charged that the White House had played politics to sway NASA's choice of
contractors. It was a fact that 1972 was an election year for Richard Nixon, and
that his home state was California. In August, Pratt & Whitney filed a protest
with the General Accounting Office based on the alleged failure of NASA to
observe pertinent statutes and regulations governing procurement conduct - in
other words, the NASA evaluation of the engine proposals. It was the first time
Pratt & Whitney had protested a Federal contract award in 45 years of doing
business with the Government.

Charges of political favoritism and payoffs have swirled around the space effort
just as they have around other Federal programs that spend lots of money and
create thousands of jobs. It is a fact that the nerve center of manned
spaceflight is called the Lyndon B.  Johnson Space Center, and is located a
thousand miles from Cape Canaveral, in Houston - the hometown of Albert Thomas,
who used to head the House subcommittee that approved NASA budgets. Political
and business connections are as much a part of high technology as are chips of
silicon. The engine contract was one of the fattest plums in years to fall to
the financially hard-pressed aerospace industry, which had been lobbying
frantically for shuttle business. The future, if not the existence, of major
companies hinged on their obtaining new work.

After the protest and investigation, Rocketdyne kept the contract.  When NASA
convened an ad hoc committee seven years later to assess delays in engine
development, the members specifically acknowledged in their report the technical
assistance of Richard Mulready of Pratt & Whitney, who had fathered the
X.L.R.-129 concept.  The certification of the space shuttle's main engines is a
complex process that consists of running two engines through a total of four
cycles, which in turn consist of 13 separate firing sequences of 5,000 seconds'
duration. As of early spring 1980, almost 10 years after the preliminary designs
were submitted, the space shuttle's main engines were still about 20,000 test
seconds short of the 80,000-second total that is required before the first
manned orbital flight. Early on, NASA decided that for economic and technical
reasons it was impractical to test engine components separately before they are
assembled into a complete engine. This unorthodox procedure is fine if you are
lucky enough to build perfect prototypes from beginning to end. But if anything
from a whole turbopump to a lowly valve seal happens to malfunction, the entire
engine can be damaged. This is precisely what has happened - not once, but four
times in the last two years alone. Rocketdyne was not just running short on
time, it was running out of spare parts. The first fullduration test of the
total propulsion system, including engine throttling and gimbaling, did not
occur until Dec. 17, 1979.

The second technical obstacle that has worried engineers since the start is the
thermal protection system. When the orbiter re-enters the earth's atmosphere, it
is careening down at over Mach 25 - 25 times the speed of sound. In order to
perform the maneuvers stipulated by the Air Force, the leading edges and
controlling surfaces of the orbiter's body must withstand temperatures as high
as 3,000 degrees Fahrenheit. NASA's Ames Research Center developed a material
called ''reaction cured glass,'' a sort of silica souffle that can be cut into
blocks or ''tiles'' that are glued to a feltlike material that is glued to the
orbiter's skin. Pure river sand from Leseur, Minn., is fired into glass in
Richmond, Ind.; fiberized and strengthened in Chamco, Ky.; then machined and
sawed into blanks at the Lockheed plant in California.

About 31,000 of these tiles - which feel like balsa wood and are about the size
of a slice of Texas toast - cover the ship. Some are white, some black, and they
vary in temperature tolerance, but the basic idea is to keep the aluminum skin
underneath at a temperature of less than 350 degrees at all times. Each tile is
unique; every single one has to be precision-machined to match the contour of
the area it covers. The three-year history of putting together this monstrous
puzzle has been nothing but hellish frustration.

When the Columbia orbiter arrived at the Cape last year, engineers believed that
about two-thirds of its tiles had been satisfactorily installed. Other tiles had
merely been taped on for the ferry flight from California. The job was going so
slowly that fewer than 300 per week were being fixed to its fuselage. Working
three shifts a day, six days a week, the rate was about 1.3 tiles per person per
week.  Each time one is installed, the technician first fits a dummy tile to the
space alongside the real tile that he has just installed on the orbiter's skin.
The dummy then goes back to the factory, where a tracing machine mills out a
real tile, which is returned for fastening. The tiniest scratches, even marks
left by fingerprints, cannot be tolerated. The spaces between tiles can be no
more than 65/ 1,000ths of an inch. Any defect, any gap, can lead to structural
buckling or even burn a hole right through the ship; depending on what is behind
the hole (a hydraulic cable, say), such a breech could jeopardize a mission.

There is no argument at NASA today regarding the fact that the art of thermal
protection engineering was very immature all along.  Originally, the tiles were
thought of more or less as a coat of paint, a glove on an aluminum spaceship,
rather than as a fundamental structural system. This is what led to the
embarrassing problems during the transport from California. Although the
heat-deflection characteristics of the tiles are sensational, they are
mechanically fragile (a property exacerbated by the need to coat them against
water absorption; they soak like sponges, and the added weight would be
detrimental). Whereas the designers first believed that major acreage could be
tested and installed blanket-style, recent tests have revealed that each tile
must be viewed as a unique entity. As a result, separate testing must be done
for almost every one of 31,000 tiles - a process that currently is taking about
12 days per tile from removal to reapplication. At any one time, 200 persons are
working around the orbiter in a hangar at Kennedy Space Center, scrambling up
ladders and across jury-rigged catwalks. A part of the tile work force - which
is expected to peak this summer at close to 1,200 workers - consists of
teen-agers on their first job out of high school. The kids commonly refer to the
shuttle as ''the brick cloud.'' All of these headaches have meant that there has
been managerial realignment and intensified labor. The shuttle project and NASA
have flexed under the strain and sprung back looking quite different from their
configuration in 1969. In this regard, at least, no other country in the world
could show more depth and fortitude. The network of managers, engineers and
technicians that has been brought to bear on the space-shuttle project is
unparalleled and formidable. The question that must be asked now is not ''Will
the shuttle fly?'' The judgment even of the critics is that certainly it will,
sooner or later. Rather, it is most useful to step back slightly from an
examination of the technical innards of the terrible beast and, in the course of
marveling at it, to try to learn something about how it survives, day after day,
year after year, billion dollars after billion dollars.

''In my opinion, the shuttle was funded at one-half of what it would have taken
if it had been done like the Apollo program,'' says John F. Yardley, NASA
associate administrator and head of the project. ''Apollo was done in a
different time - the different environment of a Presidential mandate - no holds
barred. The shuttle was undertaken with Proxmire and Mondale knifing it. In
order to get it started, you had to have a fairly low target.'' By ''low
target'' he means low budget request. Be-sides coming up with a design more
modest than the fully reusable juggernaut originally envisioned, this entailed
the promise of low cost-per-flight operation, which in turn required a large
number of customers, whose payments would amortize operations over 10 or 12
years. As has already been mentioned, NASA tried to make an early projection of
714 flights for the orbiter fleet during 12 years. When basic funding
commitments were made in 1971, this figure dropped to 581. An early economic
analysis of shuttle versus expendable launchers was made in 1973, using the
figure of 725 flights. Today, the official figure is 487 flights, with claims
that the shuttle can be economical even down to the level of several hundred.
These are only planning estimates, based more on potential system capabilities
than on approved commitments.  Nonetheless, the mission model is always used to
justify the shuttle program. So how to explain such yo-yoing?

''The 487-flight model with four orbiters is a ceiling -that's based on seven
days of work, three shifts, no major refurbishment,'' says Chet Lee, NASA
director of space transportation systems operations and chief salesman. ''I
personally don't think we'll get a 160-hour (two-week) turnaround with these
orbiters. We'll go along for many years with a four- or five-week turnaround,
not two. Our capacity will not be 487. Now a lot of people will say, 'That's
going to change your cost per flight,' because we based it on a fictitious model
over a 12-year period to recover total operations cost. Well, there's nothing to
say that you can't extend that investment period.  Maybe we'll make it at the
end of 20 years. The United States Government is in a position to wait a few
more years before it breaks even, I would think.'' Just what the reaction of the
United States Congress would be today - let alone five or 10 years ago - to
Lee's prognosis is easy to guess. When the shuttle begins operations, NASA has
estimated that the mission model can be accomplished with a ''moderately
increasing'' budget. Irrespective of this estimate's accuracy, no Federal agency
can be guaranteed a constant budget in the 80's, much less one that increases.

Down at Cape Canaveral, folks are at once sanguine and realistic about the
shuttle. ''I think it wouldn't be out of line for me to say that down here the
guys out in the field feel that the traffic model being spoken of - when you get
way out to 30 or 40 flights a year -we think that's an ambitious plan,'' says
George A. Page, director of shuttle operations. ''We've been given very
unrealistic schedules.  We're going to slip them just as sure as we're all
sitting here.  That's unfortunate. The public sees that. They say, 'Well, the
dumb bastards, they say we're going to go such and such, and here it is a year
and a half later - they obviously don't know what they're doing.' I guess that's
a natural reaction.'' Above all, the Cape is a place to shoot off rockets, an
engineer's dreamland (there are few scientists around) where splendiferous
one-of-a-kind machines of incredible complexity are hurled into the sky with a
rebel yell. The kind of person who works in this environment needs adrenalin,
needs to have the bird on the pad ready to go. That brick cloud in the hangar
is, quite frankly, a bummer.

Actually, the only top man-ager who does not seem at all fazed by shuttle
difficulties is George W. Jeffs, corporate vice president of Rockwell
International and head of aerospace operations. ''I think the program was going
along well, and I think the program is still going along very well,'' he flatly
declares. Rockwell won the prime development contract in July 1972 by submitting
a cost proposal of $2.6 billion over six years. (''We were screwed,'' an
official of Grumman Aerospace Corporation in Bethpage, N.Y. - Rockwell's chief
competitor - said at the time. Grumman's bid of $4.1 billion now looks awfully
realistic, but the company was outpoliticked by the Southern California giant.)
There have been newspaper charges, all unproved, that Rockwell systematically
hid cost overruns. Today, Rockwell is under investigation by the Justice
Department after NASA's Inspector General's office and the Department of Defense
provided information about allegations that the company had mischarged costs on
the shuttle. Jeffs contends that this was due to ''people getting confused on
their time cards,'' that in any case it involves no more than $100,000, and that
it was definitely not done with malice of management forethought. But there are
other, bigger harpies in the air. Between July and December 1978, Rockwell
received only 68 percent of its cost-award fee (NASA's contract with Rockwell
has an incentive feature that allows work to be rated retroactively). Between
January and June 1979, it slipped to 57 percent. Last year, the House
subcommittee on space science and applications drilled Jeffs on his inability to
foresee more than $100 million in overruns - now known in the trade as
''Rockwell's surprise.'' And John Yardley recently caused a stir when he said
that the people Rockwell had hired in Los Angeles to install tiles on Columbia
before it was moved to Florida were ''a bunch of tomato pickers.'' Jeffs admits
to feeling troubled by the tile morass, but insists that other delays -
including his Rocketdyne engines - were fully expected. Yet Congress was not
aware of them before the necessity of budget supplementals that will exceed half
a billion dollars.

Despite several obvious fumbles, NASA has made impressive leaps forward with
shuttle technology in a budget atmosphere far more rarefied than Apollo. This is
not to say the budget is small in objective terms. The exact figure for total
current investment in the space shuttle is extremely difficult to locate. Budget
lines branch out like a thorn tree. Official information is sometimes
selfcontradictory. One is forced to grab hold of the thickest limbs and say that
the whole project costs at least this much. So far, then, research and
development plus production costs amount to somewhere above $9 billion (in
current dollars). This is roughly the amount that will be spent by the time
Columbia gets off the ground.  The Department of Defense has already spent at
least another $1.1 billion to start its own separate shuttle facilities at
Vandenberg and to develop a kick-rocket called the ''inertial upper stage,''
which would be attached to satellites in the orbiter's bay and used to shoot
them into geosynchronous orbits 22,300 miles high. Neither of these tasks is
near completion. A fleet of four orbiters is currently budgeted (not including
the disqualified Enterprise, which will never go into orbit) at a minimum of
$650 million apiece for the three new ones. Thus, the rough, minimal sum up to
here is $12.05 billion of nonrecoverable investment. No one is yet in a position
to say how much it will cost to operate the whole system once the research and
development phase is over, though estimates start at $15 billion in additional
moneys. The current ''user's fee,'' which is how much a customer must pay NASA
to get on board the shuttle, is based on 1975 cost data.

One is gradually led toward the conclusion that the real driving force of the
project is clearly not the solid promise of cheap, routine access to space. As
for commercial satellite companies, there is growing disillusionment with
shuttle pricing and scheduling policies. The cost advantage of putting new
satellites on board the shuttle over using traditional expendable boosters is
quickly nullified by schedule slippage. Launch delays have already cost the
industry on the order of half a billion dollars. Some companies have seen their
flights displaced by Defense missions. Under the circumstances, Ariane, a new
launch vehicle being developed by the European Space Agency, is beginning to
look very attractive to the American telecommunications business.

The survival of the project since 1969 boils down to two factors: first, the
ineluctable military needs of the Pentagon, which will be its priority user, and
second, the lingering dreams of those in an increasingly retirement-aged NASA
management for whom space exploration was mankind's highest destiny. It is quite
telling that NASA is slated to lose a substantial retinue of top managers as
soon as Columbia flies her first mission. The average age of those in NASA is
45, rather old for a research and development enterprise. The shuttle may in
fact mark the twilight of America's civil spaceflight program rather than its
rebirth. In which case, Cape Canaveral will still be entitled to noble
commemoration among the likes of Flushing Meadow and Angkor Wat.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of space shuttle photo of astronaut Anna Fisher

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PASTOR'S TRANSFER DIVIDES A CHURCH;
STAMFORD

BYLINE: By DIANE HENRY

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 1, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1289 words


LAST Sunday, a month after he had been chosen ''clergyman of the year'' by the
Stamford Council of Churches and Synagogues for ''championing the needs of the
elderly, poor and disadvantaged,'' the Rev. James Davis delivered his last
sermon as senior pastor of the First United Methodist Church of Stamford. The
congregation, which filled the church to capacity, included a number of church
members who described themselves as outraged by the removal of the
sometimes-controversial clergyman.

The decision to replace Mr. Davis, which was initiated by a standing committee
of the church and put into effect by Methodist officials, has resulted in an
often noisy and emotional controversy.  ''The whole thing has the stink of
Vietnam or Watergate,'' said Thomas A. Williams, a 34-year-old banker who has
been active in trying to block Mr. Davis's transfer.

Church officials declined to make public the reasons for the transfer. Members
of the Pastor-Parish Relations Committee, which made the unanimous decision to
ask for a new minister, speak of a ''need for a change,'' but they are not more
specific.

One member of the committee, Rebecca Mitovich, said she would not discuss the
situation ''because everything has been taken out of context. We're not firing
Reverend Davis, we're changing pastors; that's a big difference. I could talk
for hours, but people believe what they want to believe so there's no point.
There was no ill will and none was ever intended.

''This has all been very upsetting to me,'' she continued. ''I've been on the
point of an emotional breakown over this. We were trying to get a different
outlook, new blood, different blood. No big deal.  I cannot understand why
everybody is so upset.'' She said that she would not discuss the matter further.

Bishop W. Ralph Ward, the highest official in the Methodist Church in the
region, refused to answer questions about the dispute. After saying only that
''everything was done in due process and in good order. A new appointment has
been made. That's all; thank you very much,'' he hung up the telephone.

Mr. Davis's supporters, who number 200 to 300 by most estimates, said they
believed he was punished for his active role in local political and community
affairs. The minister, who is a lawyer, worked for prisoners' rights and was a
leader in trying to get a grand jury to investigate allegations of municipal
corruption in Stamford. He was a leader in public efforts to upgrade homes for
the elderly and once called on the ''rich, powerful people'' who owned a nursing
home to ''open the place for public inspection.'' His community involvement
ranged from participation in a citizens' committee to monitor traffic lights to
his weekly radio program.

At First Methodist Mr. Davis, who calls himself a ''radical Christian,'' served
a church with 400 to 500 active members, most of them affluent. The church has
been described by parishioners as one of the most ''prestigious'' in the area.

Mr. Davis calls himself ''feisty'' and acknowledges that he has not always
pleased everyone in his parish with his outspoken manner, but he said he, too,
was unsure of what caused the dissatisfaction with his ministry. ''I've always
been a 24-hour-a-day pastor. I don't play golf or tennis,'' said the clergyman,
who had been pastor at First Methodist in Stamford for seven years after having
served in New Haven, where he was active in the coalition for defense of Black
Panthers, and in Plainfield. ''If there was womanizing or fooling around with
money, malfeasance or misfeasance, you could see it.''

Pained by his departure, he said of his new assigment to a church in Shrub Oak,
N.Y., near Poughkeepsie: ''It's all right. I'll serve the Lord.''

The Rev. William Sexton, pastor of the North Stamford Congregational Church and
president of the Council of Churches and Synagogues, provided the perspective of
an outside, but informed, observer. ''I think the sources of displeasure are
wider than Jim's social activism,'' he said. ''There seem to be differences
regarding style of leadership within the church.''

''Unfortunately, a sizable minority felt unfavorably toward him,'' continued Mr.
Sexton. ''These things happen to the very best of pastors. It's not an atyptical
kind of thing. Pastors sometimes rub some people the wrong way.''

Mr. Williams, a leader in attempts to keep Mr. Davis at the church, said he had
spoken with the nine members of the committee that voted to change pastors.

''The big realization to me,'' he said, ''was how political the church is. I
never really learned why the committee voted to replace him. I don't agree with
a lot of things Jim does, but he's an involved, active guy.

''Some people call him cold and dogmatic and say he humiliated people, but I
kept asking for examples and and I didn't get any. One person talked about one
of Jim's sermons in which he talked about how as a young man he had to fight
alcohol, and the criticism was he gave himself the credit rather than the Lord.
I don't know how anybody got that interpretation.

''I'm really turned off about it,'' he went on. ''Jim made the church seem
relevant to our time. It's frustrating because the vast majority of the
congregation did not want Jim to leave.''

Mr. Williams said he had spoken to a number of people who planned to leave the
church and withdraw their financial support. He said he had gathered about 220
signatures for a petition to keep Mr. Davis, but that it was never presented to
church authorities because of timing. ''They outsmarted me, or lulled me, or
whatever you want to call it,'' he said. He had talked with the district
superintendent, the Rev. Richard A. Thornburg, he explained, and thought he had
more time to present the petition, but had been told unexpectedly that the
decision was final.

Mr. Thornburg, the administrator for the region, noted that the average tenure
for a Methodist minister at any church was about four or five years and that Mr.
Davis had been in Stamford longer than that.

Saying he didn't think it was ''appropriate'' to discuss the reasons behind the
transfer, Mr. Thornburg said it was ''good for a church to have a change in
leaders'' and that the change had been effected ''exactly according to
traditional procedures'' of the Methodist Church.

In the Methodist Church, the Pastor-Parish Relations Committee - members of
which are chosen by the senior pastor, in this case Mr.  Davis - can request a
new minister. At First Methodist, Mr.  Thornburg, and the regional bishop,
Bishop Ward, agreed to the change, and the Rev. Lawrence Snow of Poughkeepsie
was chosen as the new minister.

Donald Childers, a member of the committe that voted to replace Mr. Davis, said,
''We felt we needed a change in the pastorate of the church to grow.''

''We needed some changes to accomplish the Lord's work. As to details further,
they're not important and I would not offer any.'' Ralph Eikenberry, a member of
First Methodist for 17 years who has been actively involved in church affairs,
said, ''The thing that astonished me was there was relatively significant hue
and cry'' when it was announced that Mr. Davis was leaving, and many
parishioners wrote to Mr. Thornburg and Bishop Ward. ''But it seems there is no
line of communication. There doesn't seem to be anybody listening.  There's no
court of appeal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Rev. James Holmes Davis

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TALKING POLITICS: JAMES L. BUCKLEY

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 1, Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2930 words


Buckley

This discussion is excerpted from an interview conducted recently by Richard L.
Madden and Matthew L. Wald.

Q WHAT do you have to offer the voters of Connecticut that the other Senate
candidates do not have? A. First of all, I have a sixyear record in the United
States Senate that I believe has commanded the respect of people on both sides
of the aisle. Although a junior Senator in the minority party, I was able to get
legislation enacted that shows that I did my homework and was able to be
persuasive. In the case of Mr. Bozzuto, he simply doesn't have that experience.
I would start as someone who on day one would be able to be an effective voice
for Connecticut in the Senate of the United States. In the case of Chris Dodd,
it is simply the fact that I am on the right side of the issues.

The things that concerned me during my six years in the Senate are precisely the
things that concern the majority of the people of Connecticut today: The kind of
reckless overspending that generates the inflation that is crucifying retired
people in Connecticut, depriving youngsters of the kind of opportunities and
hope they want to look forward to, and the atmosphere in which we can start
rebuilding our industry in Connecticut - renovating it - creating jobs for
people coming on stream.

Chris Dodd has been on the wrong side of these issues. He has been almost a
compulsive spender. In the area of foreign affairs and the military, I have a
very clear record at a time when it was very unpopular to talk about spending a
nickel on defense because we were bailing ourselves out of the Vietnam War. Yet
I saw the dangers of allowing the Soviet Union to creep ahead of us through
their massive, year-in-and-year-out effort while we, in effect, neglected our
task.

Chris Dodd, on the other hand, has a record of participating in the clipping of
military budgets that now places us in the position where today we cannot look
after our legitimate interests in places like the Persian Gulf; where we can no
longer guarantee the State of Israel, for example, the kind of military presence
in the eastern Mediterranean that would effectively keep the Soviets from
intervening.

Q. The second question, which you've already answered to some extent, is what
specific differences do you have with your rival for the Republican nomination,
Richard Bozzuto, and with Christopher Dodd, who is unopposed for the Democratic
nomination?

A. You're talking on the broad approach to government - the role of the Federal
Government in contrast to the role of government at the state and local level.
You're talking about economic policy, the kind of economic policy that
Christopher Dodd advocates, which has given us our roller coasters over the last
few years - the stagflation, always more inflation, followed by recession and
people thrown out of work.

He and I have totally different perspectives as to how one manages a healthy
economy and to create jobs. With respect to the view of the world out there, I
don't believe he understands the dangers the United States is facing in the next
decade. With respect to Mr.  Bozzuto, on most of the issues involving economic
and foreign policy decisions, I suspect there's very little difference in our
philosophies.

Q. How do you respond to criticism from your detractors who say such things as
that you're a carpetbagger?

A. I think that has really sort of dissipated itself because people now have an
understanding of the facts in my particular situation.  For most of my life I
have spent most of my time in Connecticut.  Year in and in year out I was
basically going in Tuesday mornings and coming back Thursday afternoons.

I'm proud of having the privilege of serving the people of New York. I believe I
served them well. By the same token, my roots have always been in Connecticut,
and when I lost the election and was able to do so again I returned to where I
started out. And by anybody's definition, I have been a resident of Connecticut
11 years longer than Chris Dodd's been alive.

Q. What's the biggest political obstacle that you have to overcome to win?

A. The fact that Christopher Dodd is perceived in the image of his father. I
have the polls on Christopher Dodd. He has 90 percent recognition and at this
stage very favorable favorable-to-unfavorable ratios. The significant majority
of the people of Connecticut view him as either conservative or moderate, yet
his voting record places him among the most liberal ranks of the Congress of the
United States.

Q. In past campaigns in Connecticut most candidates have done everything
possible to avoid primary contests. Are you committed to a primary in September
if you are not the choice of the Republican state convention in July, and will
that split the party?

A. Number one, yes, I am committed if I'm not the nominee. Number two, I don't
believe that it will split the party. I believe that the consensus here is that
a campaign that is conducted the way I would intend to conduct a campaign would
in fact give Republicans a larger opportunity to talk about the Chris Dodd
record, talk about the principles and fundamental insights as to how you run a
healthy economy and how you protect your interests overseas at a time when
there's tremendous competition from a Presidential race.

Q. A three-part question: How much do you plan to spend on your campaign? What
suggestions do you have to reduce the cost of running for statewide office? And,
finally, are you in favor of Federal matching funds for Senate and House races?

A. We are trying to project between $1.5 and $2 million, of which a very
significant sum is spent in raising money. This is what the current Federal
election limitations on individual contributions force on a candidate. Given the
fact that this is a race in a predominantly Democratic state, given the fact
that the Presidential campaign is going on, there has to be heavy emphasis on
media in order to reach the people; and media is expensive.

In terms of money spent on politics, I don't know how you cut the costs. By the
same token, if you compare the costs of promoting political points of view with
promoting a brand-new deodorant like Sure, I think you'll find that probably
Sure spent more money promoting itself than will be spent collectively for all
the Congressional races this year. The figures aren't all that large given what
the stakes are.

I believe that matching funds involve still more Federal bureaucracy in the
electoral process. To the extent that you substitute Federal funding, you
encourage splintering and you encourage blandness. And I don't think this is
what we need in American politics today.

Q. How closely will you hitch your candidacy to the Presidential campaign at the
top of the ticket?

A. I had not thought of hitching it at all. I've got my things to say. However,
I would imagine that the message that I will be projecting will be very very
similar to the message that a Ronald Reagan will be projecting because the major
complaints in America today are the same in Connecticut as they are across the
nation. They come down to inflation, jobs, taxation and defense.

Q. On a few issues, with the economic slump worsening, what would you have
Congress do to stimulate the economy? For example, would you favor a tax cut,
and what kind?

A. What I would hope we could finally do in our country is not to think in terms
of quick fixes for economic trends that sort of run their course in two or three
months' time, but how we go about longterm thinking that will restore steady
growth without inflation and without the sharp roller coasters. So your question
suggests the kind of action that I think has been a large part of the problem.

I would go forward with a program of tax cuts designed to restore incentives to
save money, to invest it, to write off our decaying plants - and this is
particularly important for Connecticut - and to increase American productivity.
This means jobs. I think the long view involves permanent tax cuts instituted
over a period of years with specific incentives for saving, and then you have to
protect those tax cuts by tying the tax rates to the Consumer Price Index.

Q. What would you have Congress do to insure an adequate supply of energy at an
affordable cost?

A. Your question suggests that Congress has control over the ultimate cost of
energy. It doesn't. We have to recognize that the cost of energy is going up and
therefore there has to be an adjustment in the package by which we determine
hardship for socialwelfare purposes.

But we need to expand, in our country, the sources and varieties of energy -
traditional and novel. And the best way to do this, the surest way to achieve
this objective, is to deregulate - decontrol - the whole energy area and take
away any disincentives to individuals and firms to, in effect, take risks to
find more energy.  Unfortunately, the Congress has gone in the opposite
direction in many of these areas.

Q. A dozen years after the urban riots, minority groups say that discrimination
still exists and that they are still left out of the economic mainstream. What
ideas do you have to change that?

A. I believe, in terms of basic social attitudes, that discrimination is
disappearing at a very rapid rate. I think Americans have every reason to be
proud of the fact that we finally came to face a real problem and are changing
our individual attitudes.

But one of the most significant problems in terms of access to the economic
ladder is that we have institutionalized poverty. We have created all kinds of
barriers that did not exist 50 years ago when we had illiterate rural people
coming into our inner cities from abroad. I speak specifically of the way we
have constructed welfare so that there are disincentives to taking a job.

Number two, we have allowed our educational system to deteriorate to the point
where we are graduating from our schools functional illiterates.

Thirdly, and to me this is one of the scandals because it affects that
generation that is at the crossroads. I'm talking about teenagers, people who
are the school dropouts in our inner cities, who are at a fork of life. They can
either turn toward total dependency or learn how to work. And our refusal to
come up with a youth differential in minimum wage deprives these youngsters of
their best possible opportunity to learn how to work and to learn the elementary
skills, because right now, under existing law, they're not productive enough to
be hired.

Q. How committed are you to a balanced Federal budget, and do you favor that
goal even if it means cutting back on social programs?

A. First of all, it is what is to be desired in terms of long-term policy. A
couple of problems with a balanced budget: You can balance the budget the way
President Carter has recently proposed, and that is to add another $28 billion
in taxes on an already excessively taxed economy. You can tax yourself into
strangulation.

Number two, we do have economic cycles. And I believe that there ought to be
enough flexibility in an approach toward fiscal prudence to accommodate the
downside of the cycle and have some modest deficits to be compensated for on the
topside of the cycle. To me, what we ought to be doing is not a rigid
budget-balance approach but a limitation on public spending as a percentage of
our gross national product because we have to restore economic growth. We are
stagnating now.

Q. Connecticut relies heavily on defense contracts. Do you favor, as I gather
you do, increasing defense spending, and by how much?

A. I believe we should be increasing Federal defense spending by 10 to 15
percent. I think that the kind of increases that we are putting into the budget
now don't even keep us even. But if we recognize the fact that the Soviets are
about to reach a position of such predominance in most military areas that they
will be able to coerce cooperation, we must make the decision now to start
restoring our credible military capabilities.

Let me give you just one area. Our Navy now is about half what it was in 1970
when I entered the Senate. We do not have the capacity to guarantee the safe
passage of American ships across more than one ocean at a time. But we have
three-ocean responsibilities.

Q. On foreign affairs, what would you do to improve the relations of the United
States in the Middle East and with allies in other parts of the world?

A. Elect a President who has some understanding of how the world operates and a
determination to look after American interests and rights. That is the critical
factor. And having done so, the Congress must provide that American President
with the military backup to make American policy credible.

To give an illustration of incredible American policy is the socalled Carter
Doctrine that states bravely that we will, if necessary, use military force to
keep the Russians from denying us access to Persian Gulf oil when the Russians
and all the world know we don't have the capability today to live up to that
position.

Q. A couple of specific issues: What's your stand on abortion and the equal
rights amendment?

A. On abortion, my stand is that from conception we are dealing with a separate
unique human being, and I make that assertion on the pure biological medical
evidence. Given that belief that we're dealing with a different personality, I
oppose abortion on demand.

Q. And the equal rights amendment?

A. The fact is that today, as a result of a series of recent Supreme Court
decisions, we have a constitutional doctrine in absolute concrete that declares
that there cannot be discrimination by virtue of sex. So the question now is to
make sure that this right is enforced.

My problem with the E.R.A. - I'm talking about one specific legislative proposal
that has a specific legislative history, and I was there when that history was
being built - is that it lends itself to a totally brutal interpretation that
has nothing to do with discrimination and everything to do with distinctions.

I believe that neither a substantial majority of women nor a substantial
majority of men want a constitutional doctrine that requires committing women to
combat if men are to be committed to combat. I believe this is a choice that
society ought to reserve to itself. Maybe it's the proper thing to do; I'm not
arguing that, for or against, but I don't believe that the American people want
this to be a matter of constitutional mandate.

Q. Do you favor or oppose Federal gun-control legislation?

A. I believe it is aimed at totally the wrong target. First of all, the only
people who pay attention to it are law-abiding citizens; and that's not the
problem, it's the criminal class. That's why I felt from the beginning that the
only effective way to try to limit the use of firearms in situations where
people can get shot is to have a requirement of a mandatory jail sentence, with
absolutely no loopholes, anytime someone is found in possession of a firearm
committing a crime.

Q. Obviously, a question we did not ask your opponents, but how do you respond
to the argument that the voters of New York rejected you twice - once before you
were elected and then once when you went for re-election - and that, therefore,
there is no logical reason for the voters of Connecticut to feel more
sympathetic?

A. Well, the first time around, nobody - least of all me - ever felt there was
any even remote chance of getting elected. Quite seriously, in 1968, if I
thought I could have been elected I would have thought it was irresponsible for
me to try. I was there because the credibility of the leverage party demands the
ability to come up with a sacrificial lamb from time to time.

I was assured that getting into the thing would not take much time, and so on.
But I did twice as well as anyone had done before, and when the traumas of the
1970's came around, that's when I decided to try seriously, and people thought
that was a hopeless venture. I was confident it could be done, and I was proven
right. So I think you throw the first one out of the equation.

On the second time around, let's face it, Daniel Patrick Moynihan is a
formidable guy in a Democratic state and a folk hero because of his strong
stands in the United Nations. And furthermore, Daniel Patrick Moynihan was
viewed and advertised as a neoconservative. I would say that if Christopher Dodd
were in fact a moderate to conservative in his voting records he would be
unbeatable, but the fact is he isn't. And he's not a Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
Even so, if you take out New York City, which we all know is a realm unto
itself, I got 54 percent of the remaining 10 million New Yorkers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of James L.

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 519 words


WORLD NEWS BRIEFS;
Racial Unrest to Be Crushed, South African Leader Says

JOHANNESBURG, June 22 (UPI) - Prime Minister P.W. Botha of South Africa warned
nonwhites today that the Government would use ''all its might'' to crush racial
unrest and end the worst rioting in four years. It was Mr. Botha's first
official statement on the week-long rioting that has left at least 32 people
dead and 171 injured.

The warning came as black residents of Port Elizabeth and Uitenhage, the scene
of violent clashes last week, expressed fears of new riots if the foreign-owned
auto companies in the two cities dismissed striking workers.

''I am not seeking confrontation nor am I seeking violence, but if people choose
this above reasonableness, above sensible discussion and above consultation,
then the state has no choice - then it will have to use all its might,'' Mr.
Botha said on national television.

Peking Says 16 in Hanoi Were Taken From Embassy

PEKING, June 22 (UPI) - China charged today that Vietnamese policemen forcibly
removed 16 Vietnamese who had sought asylum in the Chinese Embassy in Hanoi.

The official New China News Agency said the 16 Vietnamese, including 5 women and
6 children, drove through the gates of the Chinese Embassy in a jeep Friday.

''These Vietnamese told staff members of the embassy that they were no longer
able to bear the ruthless rule of the Vietnamese authorities,'' the press agency
said. ''They asked the Chinese Embassy to help them emigrate abroad.''

It said the Vietnamese accused the Chinese of engineering the episode. The
embassy and the streets around it were cordoned off by Vietnamese security
police, the press agency said. No other details were given.

Venezuelan Government Punishes TV Station

CARACAS, Venezuela, June 22 - The Venezuelan Government announced today that it
had ordered one of the country's two independent television stations off the air
for 34 hours as punishment for violating regulations governing the content of
programs.

This is the first time that the Christian Democratic Government of President
Luis Herrera Campins, now in power for 15 months, has taken punitive action
against a news organization.

The Government action against Radio Caracas Television, a station which reaches
the most heavily populated sections of this nation of 16 million, came following
the showing Friday of a documentary depicting inhumane conditions in a
government center for children and teenagers suffering from psychiatric
disorders.

The Government order also said the program showed minors in a way that could be
embarrassing to them or to their families.

Security Tightened in Spain After Warnings by Basques

MADRID, June 22 (UPI) - The police tightened vigilance around Spain's resort
beaches today after threats by Basque separatists to set off bombs in tourist
resorts within 48 hours unless the Government frees a group of imprisoned
guerrillas.

During a ''tourist war'' last year, the E.T.A. Basque guerrillas killed seven
people and wounded more than 100 others in bombings at Madrid's airport and
major railway stations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ENVIRONMNETALISTS AND COASTAL RESIDENTS SPLIT ON A PLAN FOR U.S.

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 926 words


CONTROLS AT BIG SUR

By ROBERT LINDSEY

BIG SUR, Calif., June 19 - Against a backdrop of some of the world's most
spectacular coastal vistas, a bitter struggle is under way here that is deciding
the future of California's Big Sur coast.

On one side, the Wilderness Society, an environmental group, and Ansel Adams,
the photographer, are advocating a plan to limit development along a 80-mile
stretch of the coast and create a Big Sur National Scenic Area governed by the
United States Forest Service.

On the other side are most of the 1,400 people who live in the area and call the
proposal ''a land grant,'' ''socialism,'' ''environmental elitism'' and worse.

Mr. Adams, who lives in a house north of here that affords a spectacular view of
the rocky coast, contends that without Federal jurisdiction and control, the
coast could become crowded with homes and its beauty spoiled.

''We don't have much time - maybe five years,'' he said in an interview.

Resentment of Government Control

But many other residents say that the plan would lead to ''federalization'' of
the area and even Government control over their lives and homes.

They maintain that there is no need for Federal controls because the Monterey
County government already applies strict restrictions on housing development
along the coast, and at the state level the California Coastal Commission
exercises the most stringent restrictions on coastal development of any agency
in the nation.

Senator Alan Cranston, Democrat of California, at the urging of the Wilderness
Society, has introduced a bill that would designate more than 1,000 square miles
of coastal land as a national scenic area and authorize spending of $100 million
to begin purchasing private property in the area.

Representative Leon Panetta, Democrat of California, has introduced a similar
but more modest proposal in the House of Representatives.

Both measures would grant the Federal Government broad powers, including the
right to condemn and raze private homes that it holds ''incompatible'' with the
area's scenic qualities. This provision is one of the major sources of the
residents' concern.

Lightly Populated Stretch

The proposed Federal scenic area runs from a point below the scenic community of
Carmel-by-the-Sea south into San Luis Obispo County, ending in a point near the
estate that William Randolph Hearst built at San Simeon.

It is one of the loneliest, most lightly populated stretch of the nation's
coastline, where churning white surf pounds against high cliffs that plunge into
the sea from slopes studded with the redwood trees of the Santa Lucia mountain
range.

Big Sur, situated roughly halfway between Los Angeles and San Francisco, has
long been a refuge for such writers as the late Henry Miller and for artists and
vagabonds and eccentrics. In the 1960's it attracted many hippies, some of whom
stayed and still live here.

Although the stunning scenery and the lure of driving a twisting highway that
hugs the cliffs far above the surf draws more than two million tourists a year
through Big Sur, creating summer and weekend traffic jams, most of the time it
is a placid refuge. But these days, the atmosphere in Big Sur is not placid.

Of almost 40 residents who were interviewed this week, none had a good thing to
say about the proposals in Congress. In its current issue, The Big Sur Gazette
has 29 articles and a dozen letters on the controversy, none of which are
complimentary toward the idea of a national scenic area here.

One area resident, Keith Thompson, at a public meeting on the proposals this
week, called them ''cultural genocide.'' Turning the Big Sur coast over to
Federal control, he said, ''is like saying that a Vietnam village had to be
destroyed in order to save it.''

In many ways, the dispute appears to represent a collision between two political
attitudes - the environmental ethic of the 1960's, with its emphasis on
preserving natural beauty, and the more recent antigovernment tide of
conservatism.

Community groups that have organized to resist the Federal proposal have allied
with more than a score of similar groups around the country who are opposing
Federal takeover of private lands for parks or wilderness areas. In
conversations, residents say repeatedly they are concerned about growing Federal
intrusions in their lives.

At a public meeting on the proposals this week in Carmel-by-the-Sea, which is 30
miles north of here, this issue was repeatedly raised. Kirk Schmidt, a supporter
of the national scenic area, warned that if Washington did not take over
jurisdiction of Big Sur, the alternative would be uncontrolled development and
an erosion of the quality of life along the coast.

''Don't wait until the land developers come from southern California,'' he said.
But most of the audience asserted that, given the strict local and state
controls, the region would not be spoiled and that if the Federal Government was
given jurisdiction, as one speaker said, ''a military mentality'' would take
over.

''The history of all the federalized land,'' asserted Howard Sitton, president
of a residents' group called the Friends of the Big Sur Coast, ''is that they
never stay within the original limitations of the project as envisioned by
Congress.

''The people who live in Big Sur are individualists - writers and artists and
other people. They don't want regimentation and once you federalize it, you're
inviting more tourists and they'll ruin it. If this thing goes through, they'll
turn it into Coney Island.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of tip of California

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME:IN THE AFGHAN TUNNEL;
by Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 865 words


Americans who remember the official optimism of Vietnam - the light at the end
of the tunnel - may take a certain bitter satisfaction at Soviet claims of
success in the pacification of Afghanistan. The Tass report that some army units
are being withdrawn because they are ''not necessary'' has a familiar ring.

The available evidence indicates that the Russians are sinking into a military
and political quagmire in Afghanistan. The occupying forces, around 100,000 men,
have not been able to suppress the guerrillas in the countryside. The rebels
control substantial areas, and roads are unsafe everywhere.

Kabul itself has become a dangerous problem for the occupiers. A convincingly
detailed report from Afghanistan in The Economist of London recently said that
thousands of guerrillas had infiltrated the area around the capital, and that
the Soviets were bringing massive reinforcements in by airlift. Soviet attack
planes have made heavy strikes near Kabul.

Politically, too, life is getting more complicated for the Russians. Babrak
Karmal, the president they installed, has lost whatever indigenous support he
had. The local Communist party is divided into factions. The Afghan Army has
been sapped by desertions. Students and the middle class in Kabul have joined in
strikes and protests that go on despite mass arrests and the disappearance of
political suspects.

The Soviets, The Economist concluded, face a choice between two unattractive
policies. One is to go all-out for a military solution, building their occupying
force up to perhaps 500,000 men - a figure with echoes of Vietnam. The other is
to negotiate for a political settlement that would give them enough of a fig
leaf to withdraw their troops.

The first of those alternatives would be a drain on Soviet resources, the second
a major political setback. The object of Western policy, The Economist said,
should be ''to influence Soviet cost-accounting in favor of the second option.''

When Tass suddenly carries a cryptic item about troop withdrawals from
Afghanistan, Western leaders are right to be skeptical. It costs Moscow nothing
to put out a bulletin on its news agency, and the timing of this one suggests
that it was designed to impress the Western summit meeting in Venice. The hope
presumably is that the United States and its allies will let the economic
measures taken against the Soviet Union over Afghanistan slide.

But if Western skepticism is appropriate, it does not follow that there should
be no response to Soviet talk of withdrawal. The right tactics are to go on with
the measures of economic and diplomatic pressure, such as the Olympic boycott
and trade sanctions - trying to make them more effective - and at the same time
to welcome any opening for a negotiated political settlement, however slim it
looks.

That was the course followed by President Kennedy in the Cuban missile crisis of
1963. Nikita Khrushchev sent one message that seemed to offer a formula for
withdrawal of the Soviet missiles, followed by a second that truculently
challenged the American position. Kennedy chose to ignore the second message and
answer the first. It led toward a diplomatic solution of the crisis.

''The Trollope ploy'' is what some called Kennedy's tactic: a stratagem of the
kind described by the novelist of Victorian politics and society. But of course
Kennedy did not use it in isolation. While he took up Khrushchev's ambiguous
diplomacy, he went ahead with plans for a naval blockade of Cuba and for
convincing expressions of American unwillingness to let those missiles remain.

It is in that spirit that the West can respond to talk of Soviet withdrawals
from Afghanistan. The purpose should be to help provide the fig leaf needed for
a political settlement if in fact there are those inside the Soviet leadership
who are ready to consider settling on such terms.

What would the fig leaf be? The details could emerge only with real evidence of
troop withdrawals and real negotiation. But the essential end product would
evidently be an agreement that Afghanistan, after the end of the occupation,
would be a neutralist country, not serving as a base for ''anti-Soviet
activity.''

The West has not had significant influence in Afghanistan, so it should find
such a solution acceptable in principle. Lord Carrington, the British Foreign
Secretary, has already made a proposal of that kind. But finding an Afghan
negotiating partner will not be easy. The rebel factions have little political
common ground except their dislike of the Russians.

No one should expect the Soviet leadership to move with any speed toward genuine
withdrawal and negotiation. After all, an American as smart as Henry Kissinger
insisted that the Vietnam War had to go on for years after he knew it could not
be won, for the sake of American ''credibility.'' But the West must at the same
time keep pushing the Soviets and looking for a chance to negotiate on
Afghanistan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Ellen Wiener, Artist, Married to David Stern, a Designer

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 5; Society Desk


Ellen Claire Wiener, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. John A. Wiener of Scarsdale N.Y.,
and David Stern, son of Mr. and Mrs. William Stern of Cherry Hill, N.J., were
married yesterday at the St. Regis-Sheraton in New York. The Rev. John Garcia
Gensel, associate pastor of St. Peter's Lutheran Church, and Rabbi Roy A.
Rosenberg of the Temple of Universal Judaism, Congregation Daat Elohim,
officiated.

The bride, an artist, held fellowships at the Ossabaw Island Foundation in
Georgia and the Virginia Center for the Creative Arts. She was graduated from
Bennington College and studied painting and printmaking at Pratt Institute, the
Rhode Island School of Design and the University of New Mexico. Her mother,
Sally Dixon Wiener, is a playwright, whose most recent work, ''Show Me a Hero,''
a post-Vietnam play, was produced in New York this year. Mr. Wiener is managing
partner of the New York law firm Greenbaum, Wolff & Ernst.

Mr. Stern, a furniture designer and maker, attended the Boston Museum School,
Philadelphia College of Art and the Leeds Design Workshop in Easthampton, Mass.
He graduated from Emerson College. His father is a supervisor in engineering in
the tool and die department of the Budd Manufacturing Company in Philadelphia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 24, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE ATTACK INSIDE THAILAND

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 933 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Tuesday, June 24


Vietnamese troops, reportedly attacking Cambodian guerrillas near the Thai
border, spilled over into Thai territory early yesterday and stayed for about 10
hours.

This development was announced by Thailand's supreme military command in a
carefully worded statement that spoke only of a foreign military unit, but it
was clear that the intruders were Vietnamese.

The command said that Thai forces had been sent to push back the attackers, who
crossed the border at about 5 A.M. and ''left at 3 P.M.''

A senior Thai military source said this morning that 34 Vietnamese dead had been
counted after the attack and four Vietnamese had been taken prisoner. A
preliminary count of Thai losses showed 16 soldiers dead and three missing. No
count had yet been made of civilian casualties and losses among the Cambodians
in border encampments.

A diplomatic source reported that Thailand's military response had been firm and
had been backed by air strikes and action by armor and artillery.

(In Washington, the State Department said that Vietnam had committed an act of
aggression against Cambodia, but it reported that the fighting had slackened off
and that no United States aid had been requested by Bangkok.)

The Thai officer said that as of this morning no groups of Vietnamese soldiers
remained on Thai soil. He said thousands of Cambodian refugees were fleeing into
Thailand from the border zone.  Thai military intelligence has identified
elements from two Vietnamese regiments that participated in the incursion, which
the officer said was in company strength over a narrow front.

Because the incident began at 5 A.M., none of the foreigners who work among the
tens of thousands of Cambodian refugees along the border were present, and even
usually well-informed senior diplomats here were unable to piece together a
precise picture of the events.

Troops sealed all roads to the border beyond the principal Thai town of
Aranyaprathet, preventing access to the scene. International aid officials
reported that tens of thousands of Cambodian refugees had joined throngs of Thai
villagers being evacuated from the border area.

The Thai supreme command's announcement yesterday spoke of the event as a closed
incident. It warned Vietnam, although not by name, that any repetition would be
repelled by Thai forces to safeguard the nation's sovereignty and territorial
integrity.

Diplomats, speculating on the cause of the incursion after more than a year of
Vietnamese tolerance of the border refugee encampments, recalled the strong
condemnation expressed by Vietnam and the Cambodian Government that it backs in
Phnom Penh of the repatriation to the border zone of Cambodian refugees from two
camps well inside Thailand .

The repatriation program, under the auspices of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and Thai military officials, began last Tuesday and
has led to the return of about 5,000 Cambodians so far from camps at Khao I Dang
and Sa Kaeo.

Most of those returning have been diehard supporters of the ousted Cambodian
regime of Pol Pot returning to join his fight against the Vietnamese occupation
army of about 200,000. Vietnam condemned the repatriation program as a hostile
act and warned of retribution.

The repatriation continued after yesterday's incident, with about 900 Cambodians
re-entering their country south of Aranyaprathet, in an area under the control
of Pol Pot forces. However, resistance forces in the area of incursion,
northeast of Aranyaprathet, are as hostile to Mr. Pol Pot as they are to
Vietnam.

Speculation on Other Causes

Other speculation about the cause of yesterday's incursion suggested that it
might have been either a local act of ''hot pursuit'' or a military provocation
to Vietnamese forces from unknown quarters.

The center of the Vietnamese incursion was the area between the border and the
village of Non Mak Mun. About 20,000 Cambodians were camped just inside Cambodia
across from the village.

An irregular Cambodian military unit close to the resistance movement headed by
former Prime Minister Son Sann handled administration for the civilians and
distributed international relief supplies to them.

Unconfirmed reports yesterday said border villages had been set aflame and heavy
casualties among Cambodian border encampments had occurred during the battle.
The Thai Government dispatched a senior general from Bangkok to report on the
events.

Diplomats who met during the day with high Thai civilian and military officials
described them as playing down the scale of the incursion. Whatever the scale of
the incident, it is certain to have caused panic among the Cambodians who have
flocked to the border to receive the food and medical care that international
relief organization are providing.

----

China Assails Hanoi's Policies

PEKING, June 23 (UPI) - China accused Vietnam today of carrying out a policy of
''aggression and expansion'' in Southeast Asia but said it was still willing to
begin talks with Hanoi to settle differences between the two countries.

China made the charge in a strong protest note to the Vietnamese Embassy here.
The note followed a previous Chinese protest that Vietnamese security policemen
during the weekend arrested 16 Vietnamese nationals who had sought asylum in the
Chinese Embassy in Hanoi.

The new Chinese note said that Vietnam consistently rebuffed ''reasonable
proposals'' to settle differences that ranged from the Vietnamese presence in
Cambodia and Hanoi's close ties with the Soviet Union to continued border
incidents between the two countries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Thailand and Cambodia and sodiers in Thailand
(A3)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 24, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET'S AFGHAN ACTION:PULLOUT OR A TACTICAL SHIFT?;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 900 words


The widely advertised withdrawal of some Soviet units from Afghanistan appears
to be part of a change in the nature of the forces. Heavy-weapons units, tanks,
air-defense missiles and surfaceto-surface missiles are leaving and being
replaced by the infantry essential to Soviet success in a guerrilla campaign.

The composition of the forces being withdrawn, analysts said, is consistent with
the changes in tactics forced upon the Soviet military planners by their
original misconceptions of the military problem. The Russians, analysts agreed,
believed that tactics suitable for the invasion of Central Europe would succeed
against an ill-armed but flexible enemy in a country where roads for tanks are
few and poorly maintained.

United States, British and Chinese analysts agree that the forces withdrawn
include at least one tank regiment, one to three surfaceto-surface missile
batteries, at least two air-defense missile batteries, some armored personnel
carrier units and maintenance units for these and other heavy weapons.

Number Put at 10,000

The number count, they said, is about 10,000 men, or just under the authorized
strength of a Soviet motor rifle division.  Heavy units have been of minor value
in coping with scattered bands of Afghan insurgents. United States intelligence
sources predicted in April that the Soviet high command would realize that light
infantry deployed by helicopter was the answer to guerrilla activity rather than
heavy air strikes and massive armored attacks.

There is some evidence, the analysts said, that the forces withdrawn from
Afghanistan will go no further than the area of Soviet Turkmenia, just north of
Afghanistan. The district's headquarters is at Samarkand.

Meanwhile, infantry units of company and battalion strength are being moved by
transport planes and trucks into northern Afghanistan, where their arrival
cannot be readily observed and reported to Western governments.

''The buildup is gradual and methodical,'' one analyst said.  ''While these
infantry units enter Afghanistan, it is likely that there will be another
well-publicized withdrawal of heavy units. But in terms of winning the campaign,
the infantry is far more important than the heavy stuff.'

Reinforcements Expected

There also is some evidence that the replacement program will in time be
followed by a major reinforcement from the estimated 30,000 troops in reserve
just across the Afghan-Soviet frontier. Most military analysts agree that
decisive victory is beyond the Soviet grasp with the present level of 80,000 men
in the country.

Analysts argue that this total has been altered only marginally by the reported
withdrawal. Last week, there was a sudden increase in the number of Soviet
transport aircraft, Antonov-12's and Antonov-22's, landing by night at Kabul
airport. These aircraft, it is thought, carried some of the infantry intended to
replace the heavy units.

After the first month of the invasion the Soviet tactics of sending massive
armored columns against villages and rebel strongholds proved only marginally
successful.

The fighting in Paktia Province last week apparently taught the Soviet high
command two lessons. One was that armored columns are vulnerable to ambush. One
tank unit was surprised and shot up in the Sultani Valley near Urgun, apparently
because it was not preceded by light infantry patrols. The second lesson was
that fighting close to the Pakistani frontier is likely to attract refugees back
into the battle.

According to a British source, several thousand men from Paktia left a refugee
camp at Miramshah in Pakistan to join the battle against Soviet armored columns
around Urgun and Gardez.

Afghan Regime a Problem

Another serious Soviet problem is the military and political unreliability of
the Afghan Government.  Moscow has been told, according to a British analyst,
that under present circumstances no pro-Soviet Afghan government could control
the country after the departure of Soviet troops.

The virtual collapse of the Afghan Army as a fighting force means, some analysts
said, that the Russians, once the political dividends of the present reported
withdrawal are spent, must think seriously of raising troop levels in
Afghanistan to a figure close to 200,000 men.

On the positive side the Russians know that the insurgents are not receiving any
serious external aid in weapons and supplies. But they cannot understand, a
British source said, why, in this situation, the resistance continues. He also
said that in view of the numerical weakness of the insurgent forces - probably
about 75,000 men - no amount of weapons would suffice to halt an all-out Russian
effort.

Analysts generally warn against the idea that the Russian are involved in a ''
Vietnam situation.'' Moscow's position is more difficult, militarily and
politically, than it anticipated, one said. But as long as the insurgents are
not unified and no outside source of weapons for the rebels, the Russians
eventually will succeed in pacifying the country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Soviet troops conversing with Afghan troops

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 24, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Answering the Soviet 'Withdrawal'

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 614 words


Stipulate that the Soviet Union's recall of ''some'' troops not needed ''at
present'' in Afghanistan is militarily meaningless. An occupation army of 75,000
troops is not more benign than one of 85,000. The Russians have failed to
establish the rule of their Afghan collaborators in Kabul, but they are not
being chased out by the assorted forces of a hit-and-run rebellion. They are
stuck in Afghanistan between success and defeat and, like Americans in the days
of Vietnam, are probably unwilling to pay the full price of either.

Stipulate also that Moscow's propaganda about a small withdrawal is
diplomatically mischievous. It is plainly calculated not to reassure the West
but to divide it further, to undercut President Carter's anti-Soviet posture at
the Venice summit and to encourage the detente politics of France and West
Germany, which have been grating on Washington.

But even deceptive propaganda has political meaning. For what are probably
pressing domestic as well as international reasons, the Kremlin is eager to
advertise progress in Afghanistan, to imply (if not yet to promise) that the
occupation army will be reduced rather than expanded, and to defuse the
hostility of most of the world.  These motives in Moscow are preferable to the
opposite. They should be encouraged.

The allies assembled at Venice were right to respond that any occupation remains
''unacceptable'' and that the Soviet withdrawal must be ''complete.'' But the
signs of a Soviet quagmire in Afghanistan justify negotiation, not blind
confrontation. A genuine Soviet retreat can occur only gradually, as Moscow
weighs the gains and losses of its involvement. A continuing debate in the
Kremlin should now be assumed, and influenced from the West.

Furtive and modest aid to the Afghan rebels can keep them fighting well enough
to discourage a larger Soviet military commitment; but the rebels will not
defeat the Red Army. Western disapproval and boycotts will not force the
Russians to confess error, but they should remain factors in the Soviet
calculation. If the Russians are now willing, no matter how grudgingly, to
report to the West on their Afghan adventure, the response ought to be clear and
uniform.  If they now prefer to move out of Afghanistan instead of in, they
deserve notice of what they can expect in return.
Americans should want to hear three things from Moscow: (1) that spheres of
influence around the world can no longer be built by means of armed invasion;
(2) that the competition in the third world requires some broadly agreed rules
of conduct, and (3) that the frail achievements of detente, notably stability in
central Europe and the process of arms control, should not be lost to lesser
contentions elsewhere.

Accordingly, there are three things the Russians should be hearing from the
West, particularly from the White House: (1) that Americans will help to arrange
for Afghanistan's neutrality if Moscow will join in renouncing the use of force
there; (2) that the United States is ready to negotiate terms of mutual
restraint to govern the Soviet-American competition everywhere, and (3) that
negotiations on nuclear arms control and European security can resume
simultaneously with the other talks.

Such talks are now unlikely until after the American election. But expectations,
like propaganda, can influence policy. A setback in Afghanistan will look more
tolerable in the Kremlin if it can be packaged with a promise of progress
somewhere else.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 24, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE REAL ISSUES;
by Richard J. Tofel

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 870 words


The only sensible way to choose our next President is on the basis of the
issues. Right?  Wrong. The issues haven't provided a very good basis for picking
Presidents in the past. This shouldn't surprise us: We use today's issues to
pick tomorrrow's leader.

In 1964, Lyndon B. Johnson and Barry Goldwater sparred over Social Security and
the use of tactical nuclear weapons, but Vietnam and urban decay dominated
events in the next four years. In 1968, Richard M. Nixon, Hubert H. Humphrey and
George Wallace debated Vietnam, the future of the Great Society and the need for
''law and order,'' but the undiscussed issues of detente and inflation came to
the fore from 1969 to 1972. In 1972, Mr. Nixon and George McGovern presented a
clear choice, but they never really discussed energy, unemployment or Watergate.
In 1976, Jimmy Carter and Gerald R. Ford said very little about unemployment or
future relations with the Russians, and Iran was not mentioned.

So what's a voter to do? We could hope that if we agree with our candidate on
today's issues, we would be happy with our President tomorrow. Or we could try
to guess which issues will be important, and ask the candidates about their
hypothetical positions. Redefining the ''issues'' is more promising. If we can
move beyond the daily headlines, we will encounter real issues, enabling us to
choose a President in November who can govern by popular consent after January.
The issues I see are the following:

1. American exceptionalism. This is the most important, most spiritually
troubling question before us: Is America different from other nations? Are we
one among many (while stronger perhaps, or wealthier perhaps), or do we have a
unique national purpose, ideal or mission? In the past, our leaders have
unhesitatingly accepted an exceptional role; recently, others have derided this
view as naive, imperialistic, or worse. As our unquestioned supremacy recedes,
we need to decide what ''America'' means to us, and what it will mean to the
world.

2. Soviet intentions. The Soviet Union is our most important immediate rival.
But what goals do the Russians seek? Are they expansionistic imperialists, or
paranoids using force for defensive purposes, or merely power-maximizers? Will
the Soviet Union after Leonid I. Brezhnev be motivated by ideology, or has
''Communism'' been reduced to mere camouflage? Before we can predict what the
Russians will do, we must ask ourselves what they want.

3. Distribution of wealth. Much of what passes for political dialogue in this
country is really a veiled discussion of whether the distribution of wealth in
our society is equitable. If it is not, we must consider how much and how
quickly we wish to change the situation. If the issue were phrased thus,
complicated questions of economic policy, which are now beyond the attention
span of most voters, could be addressed. We also need to consider the
distribution of wealth in a global context: Can we continue to overeat in a
world where people are starving, to consume even more than the staggering amount
we produce? Even if we do not confront this issue now, the billions with whom we
share the planet will press it on us soon enough.

4. The future of governmental power. Americans have always feared the
accumulation of political power while at the same time abhoring powerlessness.
Today, we need to ask the candidates what type of leadership they envision for
our country. Are they still reacting to fears of an imperial Presidency, or has
a reaction to the reaction set in? The issue is not confined to the Presidency.
We have increased the powers of government, and centralized those powers in
Washington. If we seek even-greater centralization, our basic notions of
Federalism will be called into question. On the other hand, if we want to
decentralize governmental authority, we need to consider which responsibilities
might be transferred or eliminated.

5. Social justice. Even after economic and political questions have been
addressed, America must still face a number of social problems.  We seek
equality, but do we mean equality of opportunity, equality of result, or the
middle ground of ''affirmative action''? Whichever course we choose, we must
surely deal with the effects of centuries of racial, sexual and ethnic
discrimination in some way.

An important caveat remains. As we all know, there is many a slip betwixt the
policy and the execution. The issues are not enough. Most voters will also want
to consider a candidate's experience, knowledge, sincerity and colleagues. But
if the issues are not sufficient as a basis for decision, they do remain
necessary.  Properly defined, they can provide the bridge between tomorrow's
politics and today's.
Richard J. Tofel, who worked in the White House in the Office of the Special
Trade Representative last summer, recently completed his first year at Harvard
Law School.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 24, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN MORALITY INTERFERES WITH EXPORTS AS USUAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 607 words


To the Editor:

Your June 9 ''Washington Watch'' column, describing current efforts to ''clarify
and define'' the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act because it is having ''a
'chilling' effect on American international trade,'' concludes with the
observation that ''Congress now has something new: an export lobby.'' Whether it
is new is doubtful, but the appearance of Alexander Perry's Op-Ed article ''On
'Exporting Morality' '' on the same day is proof indeed that it is actively
preaching its standard message: business-as-usual.§tripped of its rhetorical
flourishes (one wonders why Mr. Perry needs inveigh against ''post-Vietnam''
morality three times in one essay), the author's principal argument is that the
U.S. is losing foreign exports and domestic jobs because of ''crippling'' trade
restrictions designed, among other things, ''to enforce the observance of human
rights.'' While he may be right in the Argentine case he cites, he greatly
exaggerates the effect human-rights concerns have had on U.S. trade. Moreover,
despite the standard disclaimer that he rejects and resents ''any implication
that (businessmen) don't share common-sense concerns about human rights,'' he
ignores the moral dimension of the problem.

His one example is a perfect case in point. Argentina, as he must know, has been
run since 1976 by a brutal and repressive military junta. Many thousands of
persons have been arrested, tortured and killed. The State Department's Country
Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1979 mentions up to 20,000 ''disappeared''
persons and states that ''there is substantial evidence that most of these
persons were abducted by the security forces and interrogated under torture; as
most have not reappeared, many observers believe that they were summarily
executed.''

If Mr. Perry regards these continuing violations of international human rights
law (which he demeaningly labels ''ethnocentric political fashions'') as
unproved assertions, he should consult the recent report of the Inter-American
Commission of Human Rights, a distinguished seven-man body headed by an American
law professor, which after a visit to Argentina last fall reached similar
conclusions. They are confirmed by numerous nongovernmental organizations, such
as the Washington Office on Latin America, and by such prestigious bar groups as
the Association of the Bar of the City of New York.

Mr. Perry, applying the businessman's version of ''situation ethics,'' ignores
all such evidence. Exports and jobs are all he sees. If they are hurt by a U.S.
trade policy sensitive to humanrights concerns - and there is little hard
evidence to show that they are in a substantial way - then he is correct in
asserting that a price is being paid for the U.S. adherence to international
humanrights law. That, however, just raises the question, avoided by Mr. Perry
but the title of Sandra Vogelgesang's perceptive article in the July 1978 issue
of Foreign Affairs: ''What Price Principle?'' In a democratic society, answers
to this question may vary, but ultimately it must be addressed.  RICHARD B.
LILLICH Charlottesville, Va., June 9, 1980 The writer, Howard W. Smith Professor
of Law at the University of Virginia, is rapporteur of the International Law
Association's Committee on Human Rights.

*

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 24, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STATE LAW GIVES JOB AGENCY AID TO GRANT LOANS

BYLINE: By ROBIN HERMAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 16, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 497 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, June 23


The New York State Job Development Authority, which had been running out of
money to lend businesses and industries, received stopgap aid today. Governor
Carey signed a bill authorizing the authority to issue $60 million in bonds that
would not be guaranteed by the state.

Subject to approval by the Internal Revenue Service, the bonds will be sold to a
unit investment trust and the proceeds used, through a trustee, to buy $60
million of existing state-guaranteed Job Development Authority mortgages.

''We hope the additional loans would be targeted to areas that need it most, the
inner cities,'' said James R. Boyle, vice president of finance for the
authority, ''places like Buffalo, Rochester, Yonkers and Syracuse.''

The low-interest loans are made to business concerns expanding their operations
and employment in New York State.

$134 Million Loans Outstanding

The authority has outstanding $134 million in loans, according to Mr. Boyle.
Through last March it had approved 1,045 loans in its 18-year history.

More long-range aid for the authority rests on a resolution for a constitutional
amendment, approved recently by the Legislature. It would increase the agency's
bonding authority to $300 million from $150 million. The resolution requires a
second approval by the Legislature in the 1981 session before it can be placed
before the voters. Increased bonding for the authority was rejected by the
voters last year.

That rejection left the agency with only $20 million to stretch over the next
two years, until a constitutional amendment could be voted again. Immediately
loans to a single applicant were limited to at most $250,000 in financing or 30
percent of the project cost, compared with former limitys $1 million or 40
percent, according to Mr. Boyle.

Governor Carey signed the bonding authorization today at P. A.  Plastics Inc. in
Rochester. The company is to receive financing of up to $88,000, according to
Frank McElrath, its owner, who said he would be putting up a new building and
adding 10 people to his staff of 32 by the end of the year.

Among other bills Mr. Carey signed today were the following:

Agent Orange

A nine-member Temporary State Commission on Dioxin Herbicides was created. In
particular the commission will compile health data on individuals who have been
exposed to Agent Orange, the herbicide widely used in Vietnam during the war
there.

Historic Preservation

A State Register of Historic Places was established. The law requires that
historic preservation be taken into consideration by planners of state projects.


School Aid

Twenty-three upstate school districts will receive an additional $23 million in
state aid. However, Governor Carey said such direct state aid on a nonformula
basis was ''unprecedented'' and ''gives cause for considerable concern.'' He
said a special Regents task force would develop a more ''comprehensive and
fiscally responsible reform of our school finance system.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 25, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LAWLESSNESS RAMPANT IN THAILAND'S SOUTH

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words

DATELINE: PATTANI, Thailand, June 19


A sense of lawlessness and fear weighs heavily on the people of Thailand's deep
south.  The unrest stems from two sources: widespread banditry and a series of
Moslem and Communist insurrections, each involving a variety of factions.

None of the movements are strong enough or sufficiently popular to threaten the
Government's hold over the rubber-and tin-producing region. But by frequent
attacks on Government installations, kidnappings for ransom, ambushes and
widespread extortion, they have begun to worry officials in Bangkok.

The Moslem movements - four of the southern provinces are estimated to be up to
80 percent Islamic in population - aspire to a separate Moslem state in a region
that did not come under Bangkok's full control until early this century and
holds dear its ethnic and religious ties to the Malays farther south. Their
principal strength is in the provinces of Yala, Pattani and Narathiwat.

Yala and Narathiwat, as well as the neighboring province of Songkhla, also serve
as longstanding sanctuaries for three factions of the outlawed Communist Party
of Malaya, which continue from jungle bases their armed struggle against the
Government in Kuala Lumpur.  Their principal base areas are in the Betong
salient, Thailand's southernmost tip jutting into the Malaysian jungle.

Malayan Guerrillas Put at 2,000

The Malaysian Communists' main strength belongs to the traditional, pro-Chinese
party that staged a long civil war that did not end until 1960. Its guerrillas
are thought to total around 2,000. The two others are breakaway factions of a
few hundred armed men of uncertain ideological persuasion.

Far more worrisome to Thailand is the indigenous Communist movement, also loyal
to Peking and most active in the provinces north of the border area,
particularly Nakhon Si Thammarat, Trang, Phattalung and Surat Thani. They are a
branch of the main-line Communist Party, which for many years has waged
guerrilla warfare in provinces along the Laotian and Cambodian borders.

Peking, in support of its present foreign policy of calming the spirits of
non-Communist Southeast Asia and laying its emphasis on appearing as the
principal force restraining the aggressiveness of pro-Soviet Vietnam, has
minimized its overt backing of the parties it sponsored, and last year it even
silenced the radio station from which the Thai party broadcast its views.

But the Thai Communists are sufficiently well entrenched in their mountain bases
to continue their campaign of raiding outlying civil government and military
outposts and schools, collecting ''tolls'' on roads that they block at night and
''contributions'' from villagers whom they indoctrinate.

Government Denounced as Corrupt

Their principal argument to the rural population is that the Government and its
servants are uncaring and corrupt. On occasion, they have ''executed,'' in front
of villagers, policemen and minor officials known for having abused their
powers.

In view of the general failure of the Thai Communists to draw popular support,
the Government has not, except reactively, mounted major military suppression
campaigns. It is thought to be acting on the consideration that to raise the
level of warfare would lead to greater popular disaffection.

But the Moslem insurrection in the extreme south has produced a rising number of
incidents this year and is raising the level of insecurity and causing alarm
among the population. Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda, a native of @Songkhla,
visited the region recently and called for strong repressive actions.

The principal separatist group is the Pattani United Liberation Organization,
which Thai officials allege receives support from an unnamed Arab country,
thought to be Libya. Its armed strength is estimated at about 1,000 in the
Moslem provinces.

Buddhist Monk Slain by Rebels

Smaller, sometimes more extremist, rebel groups add to the Government's concern.
Last Saturday, according to the deputy governor of Pattani, Vichen
@Sukhonthapirom, insurgents for the first time killed a Buddhist monk and a
novice, as well as two villagers, in an attack against a pagoda. ''They are
trying to make a religious war,'' Mr. Vichen said.

On June 7, the deputy governor reported in an interview, rebels at a nighttime
roadblock separated Moslem and Buddhist passengers on a bus and killed five whom
they thought to be Buddhists. One was a Moslem.

Westerners living in this region believe that among young Moslems militancy is
on the rise. But Moslem community leaders in this provincial capital, where the
government built a luxurious mosque in the 1960's as a symbol of its commitment
to religious freedom, believe that a faster pace of economic development would
pull the sting from separatist sentiment.

Usman Soidei, a member of the provincial Islamic committee, said that
development projects tended to remain uncompleted. He said he did not know
whether not enough money was being allocated by Bangkok or whether officials
were misspending the funds.

In the deputy governor's view, however, the Government favors Thailand's
approximately 1.75 million Moslems over the majority of the 45 million Thais.
''The Moslems get more care from the Government than the Buddhists,'' he said.
But Mr.Vichen, a Buddhist from Songkhla, said the people of the region were less
industrious and slower to accept new technology in agriculture than others.

Whether the causes are political or economic, it is generally conceded that the
state of security in the southern provinces is lower than in the rest of the
nation. Many side roads are dangerous day and night, and even the main highways
are risky to travel after dark.

Government officials, assigned from Bangkok in a highly centralized bureaucracy,
tend to regard assignment to the south as a hardship. In this province and in
others of the region, they are targets for assassination or kidnapping. They
take strong measures for their personal security, but other people avoid
traveling in their cars.

In a region in which banditry has traditionally flourished on land and sea,
officials and observers find it difficult to separate the terrorist actions of
political groups from other crimes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 25, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THAI OFFICIALS SAY ATTACK ACROSS FRONTIER HAS NOT ENDED

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, Wednesday, June 25


The Thai Foreign Minister, Siddhi Savetsila, said here today that the Vietnamese
incursion across the Cambodian-Thai border was continuing and that two Thai
aircraft were shot down by groundfire yesterday afternoon.

The aircraft - a spotter plane and a helicopter gunship - were said to have been
brought down within 10 minutes of each other by antiaircraft guns that were
thought to be emplaced inside Thailand.

The latest military information reaching the Thai delegation suggested that
local skirmishing continued through yesterday. Late in the afternoon, in a clash
between Thai and Vietnamese patrols just across the border near the village Non
Mak Moon, Thai forces reported killing three Vietnamese soldiers and capturing
three others.

A senior Thai official said that the Thai armed forces were making no major
shift of units to the border but remained on full alert.  Air Chief Marshal
Siddhi the confirmed reports of continuing fighting as he arrived here for the
annual conference of foreign ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations. The border incident dominated the session and was strongly condemned in
the opening speech by Prime Minister Hussein Onn of Malaysia.

Yesterday, Thailand formally protested to Vietnam over the incursion, which
began before dawn Monday. Casualty figures are incomplete, but a well-placed
Thai military source said 16 soldiers had been killed Monday, many more had been
wounded and that no count had been made of Thai and Cambodian civilian
casualties.

In addition to the protest to Vietnam, the Thai Foreign Minister instructed the
Thai mission to the United Nations to deliver a protest to Secretary General
Kurt Waldheim. In the protest, Thailand reserved the right to bring its case
before the Security Council.

Interviewed on the plane bringing him here last night, Air Chief Marshal Siddhi
said that Thailand did not intend to press for a Security Council comdemnation
of Vietnam now but would certainly do so if Hanoi's troops in Cambodia made any
further crossings of the Thai border.

Speaking angrily about Vietnam's repeated pledges not to violate Thai territory,
Air Chief Marshal Siddhi said that the incursion had been met by Thai military
force and that Thailand was ready to repulse vigorously any further border
violations. ''Just let them try!'' he said.

The minister said that the incident ruled out his going to Hanoi on an official
visit. Last month, during a visit to Bangkok by the Vietnamese Foreign Minister,
Nguyen Co Thach, Air Chief Marshal Siddhi accepted in principle an invitation to
return the visit. Air Chief Marshal Siddhi also said that he no longer
considered himself bound by an understanding reached last year under which
Thailand and Vietnam would refrain from publicly criticizing each other.

Mr. Thach, now on an official visit to Indonesia, was scheduled to stop in
Bangkok today for an overnight stay before returning to Hanoi. On the plane, Air
Chief Marshal Siddhi ordered his assistant to instruct Bangkok to refrain from
sending even a protocol official to greet Mr. Thach, as diplomatic custom
requires. He said police protection was all that Thailand would provide for the
Vietnamese minister .

Air Chief Marshal Siddhi expressed pleasure at Washington's condemnation of the
border attack. Asked whether Thailand had requested specific American measures
or assistance, he replied, ''Not now.''

Hanoi Irked at Repatriation

The minister said that interrogation of the handful of Vietnamese soldiers
captured during the fighting had disclosed that the incursion was a riposte to
Thailand's repatriation of several thousand Cambodian refugees across the
border. About 4,000 of the 5,000 Cambodians repatriated over the last week were
followers of former Prime Minister Pol Pot, who returned to join in the armed
struggle against the Vietnamese occupation army.

The Foreign Minister said the repatriation was continuing despite the Vietnamese
attack. But he rejected the Vietnamese contention that Thailand was helping the
Pol Pot troops or arming the refugees who were going back. Air Chief Marshal
Siddhi said he would inform his Southeast Asian colleagues - Malaysia,
Indonesia, Singapore and the Philippines are the other members of the
association - of what he termed the Vietnamese ''unseemly act verging on
gangsterism.''

----

U.S. Voices 'Deep Concern'

By RICHARD BURT

WASHINGTON, June 24 - The State Department expressed ''deep concern'' today over
recent Vietnamese incursions into Thailand and announced that Washington had
begun talks with the Government in Bangkok on increasing American military
assistance.

In a briefing for reporters, Hodding Carter 3d, the department spokesman, said
that the Carter Administration had already provided Thailand with ''substantial
amounts'' of military aid and that Washington would ''stand by its commitments''
to the country.

Other officials said that the Administration was in close touch with the Thai
Government and that Pentagon aides were examining several options for increased
military support. Mr. Carter said that no decision had yet been made on
increasing the $50 million in military assistance that is scheduled to go to
Thailand this year.

The officials said that the Administration, under law, could accelerate the
delivery of arms such as 35 improved United States M-48 tanks already contracted
for by Thailand. However, they said that additional steps to strengthen the Thai
military would not be taken without consulting Congress.

State Department aides said that although talks with Bangkok were under way, the
Thai Government had not requested formal security consultations as outlined in a
1962 security agreement between the two countries. The agreement, based on the
1954 Manila Pact, calls for the United States to come to the aid of Thailand in
the event of ''armed attack'' and to consult with Bangkok in the event of other
threats.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: soldiers interrogating Vietnamese raider

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 25, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
News Summary;
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1980

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 896 words


International
President Carter assured Yugoslavia of continued American support for its policy
of nonalignment and renewed a call for a similar status for Afghanistan.
Speaking at a state dinner in Belgrade, Mr. Carter again proposed creation of a
transitional Afghan regime and a speedy withdrawal of all Soviet troops. (Page
A1, Column 1.)
The visits to Spain and Portugal by President Carter are viewed in both
countries as symbolic demonstrations of American support for the two new
democracies. (A8:3-4.)
Thailand protested to Vietnam over an armed incursion Monday into a Thai border
village. The assault resulted in the death of 16 Thai soldiers and an
unspecified number of Thai and Cambodian civilians, the wounding of many others
and the burning of the village. Bangkok may take the issue to the U.N. Security
Council. (A3:3-6.)
A U.S. military presence in Somalia is a prospect that the Carter Administration
may decide not to pursue. Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie indicated that
Washington was now undecided on whether to proceed with such a plan because it
was making arrangements for other bases in the region, in Oman and Kenya.
(A4:1-3.)
National
Relatively moderate inflation was reflected in consumer prices reported for May.
The Government said that they rose nine-tenths of 1 percent, the same as in
April. The increase brought the annual inflation rate calculated on the basis of
the last two months to about 11 percent, in contrast to an annual rate of 18.1
percent rate in the previous three months. (A1:6.)
Aid for Chrysler was secured as the troubled auto maker won an immediate loan
permitting it to issue $500 million in notes after nearly a year of financial
brinkmanship. The note issue represents the capstone of the complex program
under which Chrysler can obtain Federal guarantees for repayment of loans of up
to $1.5 billion.  (A1:5.)
The President's standing has dropped to the level it held before the American
hostages were seized in Iran last Nov. 4, according to the latest New York
Times/CBS News Poll. Only 20 percent of those surveyed, the smallest group in
Mr. Carter's Presidency, said they approved of his conduct of foreign policy and
only 30 percent approved his general performance. (A1:3-4.)
President Carter's views were upheld on all major issues adopted by the
Democratic Party's Platform Committee except for a statement opposing nuclear
power. In more than a week of debate, the committee's majority rejected many
items that form the basis of Senator Edward M. Kennedy's challenge to the
President. (A1:2.)
John B. Anderson would reject a bid by Republican leaders that he endorse the
party's Senate candidates in states in which his political influence may be
significant this fall. The Republicans were said to be ready to ask the
independent Presidential candidate to support the party's nominee in Illinois,
the Republican Representative's home state, and other key states. (A21:1.)
Decreased aid for college students was approved by the Senate in a major policy
shift. The chamber voted a sharp curtailment in Federal interest subsidies for
student loans, which could save the Government up to $3 billion over the next
five years. (A1:1-2.)
A new energy transmission technology, which has been rejected twice in Congress,
appears likely to prompt another bitter confrontation in this session. The
proposal, involving the pipeline pumping of slurried coal, a syrupy substance,
has been pressed by powerful pipeline owners and opposed by the nation's
railroads. Pipelined coal would take from the railroads much of their most
lucrative haulage, and both sides have lobbied intensively over the legislation
for six years. (A12:1-2.)
Plans to protest draft registration this summer were announced by a coalition.
The leaders said that the protests would be held at post offices, where the
expected registration is to be held, and also at the national political
conventions. (A21:1-2.)
Metropolitan
School decentralization has failed to upgrade achievement in the decade since it
took effect in New York City. Test scores have only kept pace with the small
gains of urban districts around the country and school programs have gained only
slightly in diversity. (A1:3-5.)
An improved clean-air plan is expected to be demanded of New York State by the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency, according to a draft of the agency's
findings. The agency is expected to rule today that Albany's plan for complying
with the Clean Air Act should be rejected on the ground that adequate funds to
implement the masstransit provisions of the plan are not available. (B1:4-6.)
A fiscal reprieve for New York City of about seven weeks is expected to be
granted today by the Financial Control Board. The state monitoring agency cannot
approve the city's current spending plan for the next four years because of
uncertainties over new wage contracts with municipal employees. The executive
director of the board said it was likely to require the city to submit an
interim plan based on the approved new budget. (B3:6.)
A hostage-ransom plot was thwarted in Brooklyn. A postal worker and his wife
were held captive in their apartment for 11 hours, but were freed unharmed by
the police after a bank employee questioned the withdrawal of $10,000 by the
husband for ransom. (B3:3-5.)

Business Digest, Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 25, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
General Knowlton to Retire After 42 Years in the Army

BYLINE: ALBIN KREBS AND JUDITH CUMMINGS

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 696 words


Gen. William A. Knowlton, who became the 49th superintendent of the United
States Military Academy in 1970, will retire from the Army June 30 after 42
years in uniform. He held the post at West Point until 1976, longer than any
other commandant since World War II.

The 59-year-old general, since 1977 the United States representative on the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization's military committee in Brussels, will retire
as the Army's second-ranking fourstar general. He and his wife will live in West
Springfield, N.H.

General Knowlton was in the top 2 percent of his class at West Point in 1943,
and holds a Master of Arts degree in political science from Columbia University.
In World War II he won his first Silver Star for a daring reconnaissance mission
behind German lines north of Berlin to make contact with Soviet forces across
the Elbe.

In his two years in Vietnam, General Knowlton won two more Silver Stars, one for
gallantry at a fire-support base that came under sudden attack, the other in a
battle on the Plain of Reeds.

A Break for Bloodhounds

Down in Baton Rouge, La., State Senator Armand Brinkhas proved he was dog's best
friend when he successfully shepherded through the Senate's finance committee a
bill that promises to raise the living standard of sheriffs' bloodhounds.

Those mournful-miened dogs that the state's sheriffs use to hunt runaway
prisoners are entitled to a substantial ''cost of living'' allowance for their
upkeep, Mr. Brinkhas told his colleagues.

''Is it a 9.7 percent increase like all other state employees?'' asked one
senator, referring to a pending $130 million raise for those holding state jobs.

Actually, Mr. Brinkhas explained, the bloodhounds are entitled to a monthly
increase in state aid from $4 to $20, but that's because the law on bloodhounds
hasn't been changed since the 1930's.

His bloodhound measure was unanimously approved by the finance committee.

Brenda Starr Won't Get Any Older Despite Her Age

Brenda Starr, unlike the comic strip in which she appears, will never be 40.
That's one thing of which her creator, Dale Messick, is certain. The 74-year-old
cartoonist, who published the first ''Brenda Starr'' strip in 1940, does admit,
however, that she sometimes gets her adventure-loving 23-year-old heroine into
scrapes she can't get out of. Then it's time, she said yesterday, to ''just wake
her up - but I can't do that too often.''

The 40th anniversary strip will be run on Sunday by subscribers of the Chicago
Tribune-New York News Syndicate, and the future for the ultrafashionable
reporter shows no letup of excitement. She will, Miss Messick predicted,
''really lose her love, the Mystery Man, and her daughter, Starr Twinkle, is
going to become something of a brat who passes on her boyfriends.''

There'll still be, she added after a pause, ''a bit of a chance the Mystery Man
will come back.'' ''I can't kill him off altogether,'' she said. ''My fans
wouldn't allow that.'' Brenda, said Miss Messick, is meant to be a cross between
a fairytale princess and a soap-opera character. The fact that, as a star
reporter, she hardly ever writes a story, has long been a sore point with some
newpaper editors handling the strip. But that persnickety complaint is finessed
by the cartoonist.

''I don't know too much about the newspaper business,'' she said.  ''If I knew
too much, it would spoil it.''

Wanted: Limo for Boston Mayor. Used Model O.K.

Four years ago, when Mayor Kevin H. White of Boston tried to buy a $24,000
official limousine, the City Council, then newly aware of the energy crisis,
refused to appropriate money for the 1976 Cadillac.

The Mayor wound up getting the car anyway, from a dealer who sold it to the city
for $1. Now the Mayor is looking for a replacement for the car, but this time
he's lowered his sights and advertised for a used 1979 Cadillac or Lincoln
limousine in mint or near-mint condition.

Even so, he may be in for another dispute with the City Council.  One member,
Lawrence DiCara, has already criticized Mr. White's new quest for a car, saying
it's ''absolutely ludicrous that he would foist such extravagance on the
taxpayers.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: DRAWING OF BRENDA STARR,REPORTER,THEN AND NOW

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 25, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

News of the The Theater
Ionesco Play Coming

BYLINE: JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1030 words


EUGENE IONESCO has written a new play, and it will open at the Guggenheim
Museum. In fact, it was written especially for the Guggenheim Museum. It is
called ''Variations on the Same Theme,'' subtitled ''Journeys Among the Dead,''
and is about the hereafter, specifically, Mr. Ionesco's own hereafter. He
imagines himself as a shade, meeting people from his past. In other words, the
play seems to be more comprehensible than most Ionesco.

''Variations on the Same Theme'' will open at the Guggenheim the week of Sept.
22 and run until Nov. 2. Then, presumably, it will move on to other places. It
is being produced by Jean Dalrymple, Sidney Frank, who is an art collector, and
Paul Berman. Mr. Berman, who directed Mr. Ionesco's ''Man With Bags'' in 1977,
will also direct ''Variations on the Same Theme.'' In the play, he says,
''Ionesco explains the past, present and future in dream encounters with his
dead.'' Anyway, it will have a cast of eight - four men, four women - who will
play 24 roles.

Concurrent with the play will be a showing of the works of Mr.  Ionesco's
friend, Yaacov Agam, the Israeli kinetic artist, who now lives in Paris. The
showing, and the friendship, is why Mr. Ionesco wrote the play in the first
place. While ''Variations on the Same Theme'' is being performed in the museum's
rotunda and on its ramps, Mr. Agam's large works - which assume different
shapes, depending on your viewpoint - will be prominently featured. For the
play, Mr. Agam also has designed three-dimensional pieces for the audience to
sit on. They are for sale. You place your order, and at the end of the play's
run you take one home.

''This is an absolutely unique event in theater history,'' Miss Dalrymple says.
Miss Dalrymple is one of the few people in theater who can say ''absolutely
unique'' and be sure of what she is saying.  She has been press agent, play
doctor and producer, and her theatrical memories go back to the '20's.

Pocohantas Set to Music

Pocohantas was a staple of the American stage in the last century, and although
she has not been heard from much since then, there are now plans for a musical
version of her life. The book is by Marty Martin, who wrote ''Gertrude Stein
Gertrude Stein,'' and the music and lyrics are by Blaine Butler. Mr. Butler is
new to Broadway, and his name is not Blaine Butler, anyway. It is Robert Blaine
Butler Brown. Under that name, he studied at Yale and with Nadia Boulanger and
wrote for Off and Off Off Broadway. The producer of ''Pocohantas'' is Jesse
Reese. Mr. Reese once ran Town Hall.

Mr. Reese, who says he will get the musical on next spring or the following
fall, was inspired by the book ''Pocohantas, The Life and the Legend,'' by
Frances Mossiker, published in 1976 by Alfred Knopf. Arnold Weissberger, the
theatrical lawyer, suggested to him that Mr.  Martin write the musical. As
everyone sees it now, it moves from Virginia to London, and is something of a
pageant.

''It's moving toward opera,'' Mr. Reese says. ''Dancing girls and can-can it's
not.'' Meanwhile, Mr. Reese is already talking with at least one Broadway
director, although a better question is, who would play Pocohantas. Mr. Reese
has a candidate: Cher.

Mark Medoff's New Play

Mark Medoff, whose ''Children of a Lesser God'' won a Tony as the best play of
the season, is writing a new play. And in a way, he says, it is not new at all.
He has been thinking about it for years.

''It's called 'Rado in Retreat,' '' Mr. Medoff said, speaking from Las Cruces,
N.M., where he is chairman of the drama department and dramatist in residence at
New Mexico State University. ''It's about the principal of a vocational high
school and his wife, childhood sweethearts who've been married 20 years, whose
only child commits suicide. I know it sounds grim, but I'd like to think that
whatever I write has some humor in it.''

Mr. Medoff said that on his return from the Tony ceremonies, he was met by the
citizens of Las Cruces, whose Mayor had proclaimed a ''Mark Medoff Day.'' Since
then, Mr. Medoff says, ''I've had tears in my eyes at least once a day.''

'Honey, I'm Home'

Julie Goldsmith Gilbert has written, and Tony Tanner will direct, ''Honey, I'm
Home,'' which will go into previews at the A.T.A Theater on July 7. It features
Betty Aberlin, Victor Vezine and Giannine Taylor.

''It's a three-character play about a Vietnam veteran who returns to his home in
the Midwest, and it's very much about flexibility and the need to change,'' Mr.
Tanner says. ''It's what interests me most - change not for the sake of change,
but to meet our real needs. This play and 'Class Enemy' are the two most
important things I've been offered since I've come to America.''

The producers of ''Honey, I'm Home'' are Robert I. Goldberg, who, among other
things, manages the Broadway Theater, and Jane Lewis, a former actress, who
appeared in, among other things, ''Private Lives'' and ''No Sex Please, We're
British'' with Mr. Tanner. She also managed the team that won the Broadway Show
League softball championship last year: God's Little Actors.

Rip Torn in Shaw Play

Rip Torn and Amy Wright will do George Bernard Shaw's one-act play ''Village
Wooing,'' starting July 8 at the Sanctuary Theater Workshop in Greenwich House.
It will be done with two one-act plays by Michael McClure, ''The Button'' and
''The Spider Rabbit.'' Taylor Mead and Madeline Le-Roux will appear in the
''Spider Rabbit.'' ''The Button'' has not yet been cast. ... ''Bent,'' which
opened at the New Apollo on Dec. 2, will close on Saturday night after 240
performances. ''The Music Man,'' which opened at the City Center on June 5,
closed last Sunday after 29 performances. ... Jordan Charney and Debra Mooney
replaced Judd Hirsch and Trish Hawkins last night in ''Talley's Folly.'' Mr.
Charney and Miss Mooney played the roles in Chicago.  ... The producers of
''Fearless Frank,'' the musical at the Princess Theater that is based on the
life of Frank Harris, have taken to television advertising. Meanwhile, they have
been giving away tickets, or, it is called, papering the house. The producers'
colleagues now call the musical ''The Paper Chase.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF EUGENE IONESCO PHOTO OF EUGENE IONESCO

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA BACKS THAIS AGAINST HANOI

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 342 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Thursday, June 26


China warned Vietnam today that it faced ''grave danger'' if it continued its
military raids into Thailand from Cambodia.

A statement issued by the Chinese Foreign Ministry said China would ''resolutely
support'' Thailand in the confrontation.

'Struggle Against Aggression'

''The Thai Government has solemnly declared its determination to defend
Thailand's sovereignty and territorial integrity,'' the Chinese Foreign Ministry
statement said. ''The Chinese Government and people firmly support this just
stand of the Thai Government, and will resolutely support the people of Thailand
in their struggle against aggression.''

It continued, ''The Chinese Government forcefully calls on the Vietnamese
authorities to stop their aggression in Thailand at once, and to withdraw all
their aggressor troops from Cambodia. We hereby call the attention of the
Vietnamese authorities to the grave danger involved if they persist in military
adventures in disregard of the just demands of the international community.''

The Chinese statement did not threaten immediate military action against
Vietnam.

Undeclared War in 1979

China and Vietnam fought a one-month undeclared war in February and March of
1979 after Vietnamese troops moved into Cambodia and installed a friendly regime
there. Chinese forces occupied four provincial capitals in northern Vietnam
before withdrawing to Chinese soil. Since then, China has furnished weapons and
diplomatic support for Cambodian guerrillas resisting the Vietnamese.

The Foreign Ministry statement called the Vietnamese incursion, which started
Monday, ''A gross violation of Thailand's sovereignty'' that ''poses a serious
threat to the peace and security of Thailand and the region as a whole.''

Shortly before the Foreign Ministry statement was issued, the New China News
Agency carried a special ''commentary on Vietnam's lying diplomacy.'' It charged
that the Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, told reporters in
Indonesia June 21 that Vietnamese troops would not cross the Thai border.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI TROOPS SAID TO DIG IN A THAI BORDER

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words


More than 8,000 Vietnamese infantry soldiers are reported to be digging in along
the frontier between Thailand and Cambodia to seal it from further movement into
Cambodia by guerrilla followers of the former Pol Pot regime and by food supply
caravans.

Except for sporadic artillery and mortar fire on both sides, the flurry of
fighting along the frontier died down yesterday although the 75th Vietnamese
infantry division was identified in the area.

Late reports were that Vietnamese units were moving into new positions, possibly
in preparation for a renewal of the attack Hanoi's forces made across the Thai
border Monday and Tuesday.

A regiment, estimated at 2,000 men, was reported moving on an encampment of Pol
Pot forces at Phnom Malai, in Cambodia south of the Thai border town of
Aranyaprathat. The camp has been attacked unsuccessfully twice in the past.

Other Troops Reported on Move

Other Vietnamese units were reporting moving from Samrong in Cambodia toward
Thailand's northeast frontier and against minor bases of the Pol Pot guerrillas
in that area. Analysts said the Vietnamese operations might be in answer to a
higher level of operations by the Pol Pot forces since the start of the monsoon
last month.

There are reports, which Western analysts cannot verify, that other units of the
Vietnamese army in Cambodia, whose strength is estimated at 100,000 to 120,000
men, are moving to bases around Battambang in northwest Cambodia. One informed
estimate is that the Vietnamese are now in position to send an additional four
divisions, about 32,000 men, into any renewal of the fighting.

The two days of fighting this week left no clear indications of Vietnamese
intentions, analysts said. The clash may have been no more than a reflex
reaction by the Vietnamese to an increasingly irritating frontier problem in
which hordes of refugees offer cover for Pol Pot guerrillas who cross the
frontier from Thailand to harass the Vietnamese and their Cambodian clients.

Washington sources reported that the State Department was concerned about the
possibility of a large-scale offensive in the near future.  While the recent
operations have been confined to the border areas, officials said the Vietnamese
were now strong enough to launch larger attacks. There is a possibility, they
said, of a replay of the experience in 1978 when the Vietnamese began by
attacking camps along their frontier with Cambodia and then poured 200,000
troops into the neighboring country.

Condemnation Issued by Muskie

As a possible deterrent to a major operation, Secretary of State Edmund S.
Muskie declared that ''the United States strongly condemns Vietnam's military
attack on Thai territory beginning June 23.'' The statement was approved by Mr.
Muskie, who was in Ankara, Turkey, but was issued in Washington. It said the
attacks had ''produced a significant number of civilian casualties.''

The Thais have admitted suffering about 60 army casualties and assert that their
forces inflicted more than 100 on the Vietnamese.  Casualties among the refugees
are reported to be over 400.

The attacks, Mr. Muskie said, ''threaten the peace, security and stability of
the entire region.'' ''We call upon Vietnam,'' he said, ''to refrain from any
further aggressive actions threatening Thailand's security and integrity or
endangering the well-being and safety of noncombatants in the refugee
concentrations along the border.'

The Secretary of State also called on the Soviet Government to use its influence
to check the Vietnamese.

No Vietnamese Air Reconnaissance

Lieut. Gen. Pin Thmmasri, who commands one Thai division of about 10,000 men,
reportedly expects another Vietnamese attack. However, there was no Vietnamese
air reconnaissance or bombing of the Thai positions yesterday. Such actions
normally are the preliminary to ground operations. The Thai forces in the
forward and support positions are on full alert.

Analysts said there were several reasons why another Vietnamese attack might
prove counterproductive.  The Vietnamese army and air force are the most
experienced in Southeast Asia and nn offensive against relatively untried Thai
forces might be successful initially, but it would increase the Hanoi regime's
widespread military responsibilities. These already include forces in Laos and
Cambodia and a concentration facing the northern frontier with China. Any
operations in Thailand would be at the end of a long line of communications
running through territory where the guerrilla resistance is active.

Finally, there is the question of Chinese reaction. Peking has sent some
military assistance to the Pol Pot forces although analysts report that this has
not been on a significant scale. But a Vietnamese lunge into Thailand could
spread the army too thin and invite, at the least, Chinese military activity
along the country's northern frontier.

An alternative assessment is that the Vietnamese attack, which penetrated at
least a mile into Thai territory, may have heralded the opening of a major and
methodical operation to clear out the opposing guerrillas and eliminate the
refugee camps that serve as their sanctuaries. But any further operations to
this end, analysts predicted, will evoke a strong response from the Thai army
and air force.

Assault Seemed Well Planned

The Thai forces concentrated in the Aranyaprathat-Poipet area at present are not
regarded as strong enough to withstand a major Vietnamese attack.

Although detailed information is scanty, assessments of the fighting indicate
that the Vietnamese assault was launched after careful planning with the forces
involved moving forward from Battambang to deploy for the attack. The initial
move was at battalion strength but other units were fed into the battle as it
developed.

Although the Vietnamese air force is the strongest in southeast Asia both
quantitatively and qualitatively, no fighter planes were used to support the
attack. The Vietnamese were equally wary about the employment of air power in
their clash with the Chinese early in 1979.

The fact that the Vietnamese penetration was limited to about a mile could mean,
analysts said, either that the attackers had accomplished their immediate
objectives or that the advance was intended to probe Thai strength so that a
reasonable estimate could be reached on the extent of Thai reaction to a larger
operation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Thai soldiers with Vietnamese prisoners map of
border area

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

5 SOUTHEAST NATIONS ASSAIL HANOI

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 657 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, June 25


Thailand was joined today by four other pro-Western nations of Southeast Asia in
a declaration strongly condemning Vietnam for its armed incursion into Thai
territory.

The special statement, issued after the first day of the annual ministerial
meeting of the five-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations, denounced
Vietnam's breach of the Cambodian-Thai border this week as an ''irresponsible
and dangerous act'' that ''will have far-reaching and serious consequences.''
The declaration said that the incursion ''constitutes a grave and direct threat
to the security of Thailand and the Southeast Asian region.''

Despite varying national views on whether Vietnam or China represents the more
serious threat to non-Communist Southeast Asia, the foreign ministers of
Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and the Philippines rallied to their Thai partner
to express the group's ''firm support and solidarity'' in the face of the border
violation, which began Monday.

But in presenting the declaration at a news conference tonight, the Malaysian
minister, Ahmad Rithauddeen, indicated strongly that no military support for
Thailand was envisaged.

Most of Attackers Withdrawn

Reports from Bangkok today indicated that the bulk of the estimated total of
2,000 Vietnamese troops who attacked a border encampment of about 20,000
Cambodian refugees and carried the fight into Non Mak Mun and two other Thai
border villages had withdrawn into Cambodia.

The statement by the foreign ministers, who are due to end their meeting
tomorrow, asserted that Cambodian civilians and Thai villagers ''suffered heavy
casualties.'' The ministers charged that the attack was ''premeditated and
coordinated.''

In the Thai view, the raid was Vietnam's reaction to the repatriation of about
5,000 Cambodian refugees from camps well inside Thailand to the border. About
four-fifths of the Cambodians were followers of former Prime Minister Pol Pot
and members of their families. The supporters of Mr. Pol Pot, who was ousted by
the Vietnamese, reportedly returned to continue armed resistance against the
occupation of their country by the Vietnamese army.

The five ministers declared that Thailand had the right to continue the
repatriations, which are being supervised by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, to protect those in the camps who are unwilling to
return against coercion by elements that support Mr. Pol Pot.

Repatriation Denounced by Hanoi

Vietnam and the Cambodian Government of President Heng Samrin that it sponsors
have strongly denounced the repatriation as designed to bolster the opposing
forces.

The foreign ministers affirmed what they described as the ''legitimate right''
of the Cambodians in Thai camps ''to return to their homeland to resume their
livelihood.'' However, in Cambodia's current state of desperate depletion, those
returning now are apparently either rejoining the Pol Pot army or hoping to
squat in the border zone, where international relief organizations distribute
regular rations and provide medical care.

The joint statement reflected a consensus of the views presented by the
ministers in their opening public speeches at the conference.  Within their
organization, Thailand and Singapore represent the strongest anti-Vietnamese
view. Malaysia and Indonesia, while opposing all Communist governments, have
taken a more conciliatory line. The Philippines is evenhanded in its opposition
to Vietnam and China.

In addition to the host, Foreign Minister Rithauddeen, the other participating
ministers are Air Chief Marshal Siddhi Savetsila of Thailand, Mochtar
Kusumaatmadja of Indonesia, Arturo M. Tolentino of the Philippines, who is
filling in for Carlos P. Romulo, who is ill, and S. Dhanabalan of Singapore. Mr.
Dhanabalan, recently named Foreign Minister, was accompanied by his predecessor,
Sinathamby Rajaratnam, who is now Second Deputy Prime Minister for foreign
affairs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TO CATCH A DRAFT-REGISTRATION EVADER

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 516 words


To the Editor:

Now that the Senate has approved legislation requiring draft registration, it is
crucial to ask how the Selective Service organization intends to monitor
compliance. ask the question for a number of reasons. First, your column on
''Draft Queries and Answers'' (June 13) did not include the question (it should
have). Second, my research as a consultant to the National Advisory Commission
on Selective Service (headed by Burke Marshall) convinced me that in former
times the Selective Service had no satisfactory means of monitoring compliance.

The result was that simply not registering and remaining anonymous was a fairly
safe way of avoiding both the draft and trouble with the law. (Make no mistake;
not registering was illegal, it just wasn't easily detectable.) On the other
hand, registering for the draft but not reporting for induction was a sure way
of getting caught.

It is worth repeating the question: How does the Selective Service system intend
to monitor compliance? Indeed, does it intend to? Will it have the budget and
staff (as well as the intention) to monitor compliance effectively?

It is worth observing that the Internal Revenue Service gets millions of
duplicate 1099 forms reporting dividends and interest paid - but it does not
systematically compare these with tax forms submitted by taxpayers. Compliance
is not monitored. Another tax analogy is provocative. Mostly we pay taxes
because we have no choice - our taxes are withheld. The collection of taxes that
depends on individual motivation (on self-employed income, tips, capital gains
and dividends and interest) is more problematic; there is more underreporting.

Registering for the draft is going to depend on individual initiative and
motivation. There won't be any withholding. What level of noncompliance does the
Selective Service expect? What level is the Justice Department prepared to cope
with? How will noncompliance be measured and detected?

To be sure, there are criminal penalties, but to be meaningful there must be
some confidence that violators can (and will) be identified, prosecuted and
convicted. Frankly, I am not sanguine. And once young men come to understand
that not registering is likely not to bring penalties, then I would expect
failure to register to be quite common.

One final point. During World War II, draft avoidance was difficult. The young,
healthy male civilian stood out like the proverbial sore thumb. Why wasn't he in
the service? During the Vietnam War, we assumed that civilian draft-age males
simply had a deferment - though in fact some may not have registered at all.

Tomorrow, how will we tell the registrant from the non-registrant?  If we can't,
or if we don't, why should anyone register?  JAMES W. DAVIS St. Louis, June 17,
1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 636 words


Bolivians find that cocaine profits are habit-forming A2
Korea is quiet on 30th anniversary of war's start A2
Five Southeast Asian nations de- nounce Vietnam for attack A3
U.S. queries Israeli leader on of- fice shift A3
Cuba making its neighbors edgy A6
World News Briefs A7
Syria hints it plans closer rela- tions with Moscow A8
The roses of Bulgaria are sweet both in fragrance and money A10
French bill to toughen crime pen- alties brings outcries A11
Farm crop woes add to Moscow Olympic boycott blues A12
Basque separatists explode 2 bombs in Spain A12
Tass dismisses Carter offer on Af- ghanistan A13
Excerpts from Yugoslav-Ameri- can statement A13

General
Around the Nation A14
Goal of author with 100 million readers: More A14
Michigan passes test of nuclear emergency preparedness A16
New season and new life for out- door concert band in New York B1
Neighbor held in slaying of Glas- tonbury woman B2
Police officer indicted in wound- ing of burglary suspect B3
Sprinkler system considered by owners of Park Ave. tower B3
Lincoln Savings Bank branch being sued over rules B4
Arizona men facing Federal trial in torture of Mexicans B10

Industry/Labor
Koch visits labor talks with uni- formed services unions B3

Religion
Brandeis to open center for study of Jewish life in U.S.  A16

The Home Section
Home It's linen, linen over all C1

Where linen is sold C6

Energy-saving renovations C8
America's craftsmen gather at Rhinebeck C1
A crusader for all living green things C1
Hers C2
Helpful Hardware C2
Home Beat C3
Summer programs for city chil- dren C3
Home Improvement C4
Back-home touches in capital's of- fices C7
Design Notebook C10
Calendar of events C11
Repairing stained glass C13

Government/Politics
Key White House aide for liaison with women is quitting A14
Judge orders U.S. to release 31 boats seized in sealift A14
Governor Grasso's radiation ther- apy stepped up B2
Caesars World fails in bid for speedy hearing on license B7
Campaign Report B9

Arts/Entertainment
Hollywood reports summer busi- ness is off nationally C14
Crowsnest performs at dance fes- tival in Durham C14
''Dialog/Curious George'' opens at the Newhouse Theater C15
What were all those stars doing at Fifth and 59th C15
Mathews-Masters Dance Com- pany performs at N.Y.U.  C17
Illinois Jacquet leads jazz quintet at Village Vanguard C17
Rufus Thomas sings Memphis blues at Tramps C17
Anna Paidoussi, soprano, is heard in recital C17
Book about Gloria Vanderbilt cus- tody case is reviewed C18
Brooklyn Philharmonia an- nounces plans for 1980-81 C18
Britons can buy things through home Prestel TV system C19

Obituaries
Katharine Strauss Mali headed Concern for Dying B11

Sports
Weld sets record in singlehanded trans-Atlantic sailing D15
Mets lose second game after Zachry stops Cubs in opener D15
Rudy May joins Gossage as stop- per in Yankee bull pen D15
Andrea Jaeger, 15, makes winning debut at Wimbledon D15
Former pros are allowed to com- pete in Olympic track trials D15
Dave Anderson on Billy Joe Pat- ton D17
40-1 shot pointed for upset in split Cane Pace D17
Courageous beats Clipper 3 times in America's Cup trials D19

Features/Notes
Issue and Debate: Should India get more U.S. nuclear fuel?  A4
Notes on People B2
Going Out Guide C18

News Analysis
Paul Goldberger takes up the issue of the Rice mansion B2
David E. Rosenbaum discusses Democratic platform battle B8

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A18

Handling West Valley's waste To live for Ireland A bus pass worth trying Topics:
letter of the law Letters A18
Anthony Lewis: an archive to look into A19
William Safire: swift Justice and slow A19
James Traub: after the death of Sanjay Gandhi A19
Frank Logue: combating arson A19

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATIC PLATFORM BATTLE 'CONTEXT' IS KEY AS SUPPORTERS OF KENNEDY

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1176 words


FIGHT CARTER'S BACKERS OVER DEFINITION OF PARTY'S GOALS

By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

News Analysis

WASHINGTON, June 25 - Four years ago, the Democrats adopted as the motto of
their platform a quotation from Harry Truman: ''The platform is the party's
contract with the people.'' In the meetings of the Platform Committee this week,
supporters of Senator Edward M. Kennedy wore large buttons bearing that slogan.

The message was unmistakeable. Senator Kennedy is trying to portray himself as a
true Democrat and President Carter as an imposter, an elephant in donkey's
clothing. The Senator labeled his submission of proposals to the committee ''A
Rededication to Democratic Principles.''

The Truman quotation notwithstanding, platforms are not contracts.  There has
never been a President who did not conveniently ignore the platform on which he
was elected when it suited him. Rather, platforms serve one overriding purpose:
to win votes for the party's Presidential candidate in November.

The President and the Senator from Massachusetts have different views on how
best to accomplish that goal, and that is what the platform fight this week was
all about. Mr. Carter, according to his aides, believes that the way to defeat
Ronald Reagan in November is for the Democrats to stake out a position in the
middle of the political spectrum. Mr. Kennedy, according to his staff, believes
that a Democratic candidate cannot be elected without the enthusiastic support
of the liberal wing of the party.

Quest for Middle Ground

Mr. Carter had a majority of nearly 2 to 1 on the Platform Committee, roughly
reflecting the proportion of delegates he won in the primaries and caucuses. The
document the committee adopted yesterday illustrates his quest for the middle
ground, at the expense of the traditional liberal positions he himself endorsed
four years ago.

At the 1976 Democratic convention, when the unemployment rate was 7.8 percent
and falling, the platform that Mr. Carter's supporters wrote and adopted called
for an all-out effort to provide jobs for every American willing and able to
work. Now, the unemployment rate is 7.8 percent and rising, but the Carter
platform offers no new jobs programs and emphasizes ''spending restraint'' and
''fiscal prudence.''

The 1976 platform promised a $5 billion to $7 billion reduction in military
spending and declared that ''a principal goal must be the continued reduction of
tension with the U.S.S.R.'' This year's platform boasts of the ''real increase
in our defense spending in every year 1976,'' and asserts, ''At the heart of our
policy toward the Soviet Union must be a clear recognition of the reality of
Soviet power.''

Four years ago, the preamble offered a commitment ''to a fairer distribution of
wealth, income and power.'' The preamble this year emphasizes combining
''compassion with self-discipline.''

Stuart E. Eizenstat, director of the President's domestic policy staff, was the
chief of Mr. Carter's platform-drafting team four years ago and again this year.
The difference is not so much that Mr. Carter has changed his views, Mr.
Eizenstat said, as that an incumbent President is faced with constraints that do
not apply to a challenger.

''We have to operate in the real world,'' Mr. Eizenstat said. ''In 1976, we
could just give a wish-list without worrying where the money would come from.
When you're the incumbent, you have to consider everything in a governmental
context, in a budget context, in a legislative context, in a diplomatic context.
A commitment by us here would be considered a commitment by the government.''

Mr. Eizenstat cited as an example Senator Kennedy's proposal for ''an American
Reindustrialization Corporation, empowered to borrow and to lend, to aid
innovation and to sell shares in the economic future of the nation.''

The Administration has been studying that concept for several months, Mr.
Eizenstat said, but has not made a decision whether to adopt it. ''If we weren't
the incumbent, we would just say, 'It looks good, and we'll take it in the
platform,' but as it is, we can't react like that to new initiatives,'' he
added.

The Kennedy loyalists were clearly aware of that dilemma, and at times they put
forth planks that seemed designed primarily to embarrass the President with one
or another group of voters.

On the other hand, many of the platform battles were over fundamental issues -
heavy spending to create more jobs, wage and price controls, development of the
MX missile, the timetable for national health insurance, energy prices and draft
registration, to cite just a few.

Kennedy Outlook

According to an aide to the Senator, those issues were raised at length before
the Platform Committee, even though Kennedy supporters knew in advance that they
would lose, because, ''we wanted to make clear that there's a contest going
on.''

In a speech in New York today, Senator Kennedy said he would take the issues to
the floor of the Democratic convention at Madison Square Garden in August
because ''I am determined that the Democratic convention must offer a truly
Democratic nominee and a truly Democratic platform.''

It is impossible to predict what the effect of such a floor fight would be on
the vote in November. The bitter platform battle over the Vietnam War plank at
the Chicago convention in 1968 undoubtedly hurt Hubert H. Humphrey in his race
against Richard M. Nixon. Similarly, an 11-hour platform debate in Miami Beach
in 1972 on such emotional issues as busing, homosexual rights, capital
punishment and abortion certainly did not help George McGovern.

On the other hand, the most bitter platform fight ever held at a Democratic
convention was over civil rights in 1948. It caused a segment of the party to
walk out of the convention and form their own party, the Dixiecrats, which
carried four Southern states with 39 electoral votes in the general election.
However, Harry Truman's election that year was due in large part to the fact
that he carried such Northern states as Illinois, Massachusetts and Wisconsin, a
result, according to many historians, of the Democrats' strong commitment to
civil rights.

Some of President Carter's advisers believe that Senator Kennedy may abandon his
plans for a platform battle if, by the time of the convention, it is apparent
that he cannot take enough delegates away from the President to win the
nomination.

But Mr. Kennedy gave no evidence of that in his speech today.  Democrats, he
declared, ''will not prevail if we gather in false unity in front of a party
label, while behind it we retreat from the spirit and the substance of
Democratic principles.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET SAYS CARTER FACES 'REBUFF' FOR 'LIES' ABOUT AFGHAN CONFLICT

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 499 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 26


The official Soviet press agency, Tass, accused President Carter today of lying
about Afghanistan and warned him of a ''fitting rebuff'' if he persisted in his
''undeclared war'' against that country.

Tass took exception to what it called Mr. Carter's allegations that Moscow's
announcement of partial pullout of its troops in Afghanistan was the result of
''some 'success' in the American policy of pressure on the U.S.S.R.''

The agency said that in fact the Soviet Union had found it possible to withdraw
''some units'' because ''large gangs of counterrevolutionaries have been routed
'' and ''life in Afghanistan is gradually returning to normal.''

''As for the 'versions' spread by the United States President,'' Tass said,
''they represent either a profound and dangerous mistake or, more likely than
not, a deliberate lie.''

The truth, according to Tass, is that the United States is waging an
''undeclared war against the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan,'' organized
with Peking's help from Pakistani territory - all this as part of its plan for
strengthening the American presence in the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean.''

Soviet Warns of 'Fitting Rebuff'

Tass then warned that ''if Washington and the accomplices of American
imperialism persist in implementing their plans for making Afghanistan a
springboard for aggression on the southern frontiers of the U.S.S.R., they would
do well to bear in mind that the Soviet Union, its friends and allies and all
peace-loving forces have the means and the possibilities to give a fitting
rebuff.''

The predominant view among Western and Asian non-Communist diplomats here is
that the Soviet pullout announcement, Mr. Carter's offer to make transitional
arrangements in Afghanistan if the Russians withdraw and the Soviet response are
part of a propaganda contest.

Both governments, the diplomats say, feel they must demonstrate to third
parties, including their allies, that they are forthcoming and interested in a
reasonable settlement of the Afghanistan crisis.

Soviet Acceptance Doubted

The reality behind the gestures, in the view of diplomats here, is that the
Soviet Union is nowhere near ready to accept the kind of political defeat that
would be implicit in an acceptance of Mr.  Carter's proposal.

The ''arrangements'' offered by the President, they said, could leave
Afghanistan a truly nonaligned nation representing no security threat to the
Soviet Union and, in fact, committed to friendship with Moscow.

But that would compel the Soviet leaders to accept far less than they set out to
obtain when they took the plunge into Afghanistan.  The consequent loss in
prestige is not one the Soviet Union seems ready to contemplate.

''It took the United States five years to accept the inevitability of defeat in
Vietnam,'' an Asian diplomat said. ''It may take the Soviets that long to
realize, if things go really badly for them militarily, that withdrawal is the
best option they have in Afghanistan.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM SAID TO SEIZE PHOTOGRAPHERS AND RELIEF WORKERS AT THAI BORDER

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 645 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 26


Vietnamese troops seized two relief officials of the International Red Cross and
two American photographers at a point along the Thai-Cambodian border today, the
Red Cross said.

Witnesses told the Red Cross that the Vietnamese soldiers approached the group
while they were inspecting the abandoned refugee encampment at Nong Chan and led
them away.

The captured Red Cross officials were identified as Robert Ashe of Britain and
Pierre Perrin of France. The photographers were identified as George Lienamann
and Richard Franken, co-owners of the Bangkok-based Lensman Advertising Company.

Earlier today, Vietnam's Foreign Minister said here today that Vietnamese troops
would strike next against Cambodian guerrillas south of the Cambodian-Thai
frontier area where they attacked early this week. Denying that Vietnamese
troops had crossed into Thailand, he said Thai ''territorial integrity'' would
continue to be respected.

U.S. Envoy Asks Halt

The minister, Nguyen Co Thach, who is on an unofficial visit here, spoke in an
interview after hearing an appeal from the United States Ambassador, Morton I.
Abramowitz, that Vietnam refrain from any further attacks into Thailand.

Mr. Thach denied official Thai and American statements that Vietnamese troops
had violated Thailand's frontier in fighting on Monday and Tuesday. Charging
that Thailand was actually helping to repatriate armed guerrillas to Cambodia in
the guise of refugees, he said Vietnamese troops had attacked only after Thai
soldiers had ''escorted'' insurgents four miles inside Cambodian territory on
Sunday and Monday.

The American Ambassador's appeal was part of a diplomatic effort begun yesterday
to bring the border clashes to a halt. Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie
appealed to Vietnam in a statement yesterday ''to refrain from any further
aggressive actions threatening Thailand's security and integrity,'' and he asked
also that the Soviet Union use its influence with its Vietnamese ally to halt
the fighting.

In Washington today, the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly F. Dobrynin, was called to
the State Department and formally given Mr. Muskie's appeal.

Thai military commanders said that the bulk of the Vietnamese troops that
crossed into Thailand on Monday northeast of the Thai town of Aranyaprathet had
been withdrawn. But, Thai military sources said, some fighting continued in the
border region for the fourth day.

Border Is Reported Crossed

The sources said that Vietnamese troops were exchanging fire with anti-Communist
Cambodian insurgents in the Ban Sangae area and that the fighting there spilled
over into Thai territory. They said that other Vietnamese clashed with pro-Pol
Pot guerrillas near Poipet and also in the Malai hills to the south.

The Vietnamese attacks on Monday came in an area that serves as a temporary home
for some 200,000 Cambodian refugees loosely controlled by anti-Communist
Cambodian guerrillas. The Vietnamese Foreign Minister said that the new action
would be against guerrilla concentrations to the south of Aranyaprathet to stop
the repatriation from a refugee camp in that area of followers of the former
Cambodian Prime Minister, Pol Pot.

Vietnam invaded Cambodia 18 months ago, replaced Mr. Pol Pot's pro-Chinese
Communist Government with a pro-Hanoi Communist Government headed by Heng
Samrin, then began trying to eliminate the Pol Pot guerrillas who took refuge
along the Cambodian-Thai border.

Repatriation Is Denounced

The fighting this week followed strong denunciations by Vietnam and the Heng
Samrin Government of a program of refugee repatriation begun by Thai military
officials under United Nations supervision.  Officials here said that more than
8,700 were returned to Cambodia under the week-old program, 7,200 of them from
the camp at Sa Kaeo, which has been under the control of Pol Pot supporters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Vietnamese soldiers and a map of Thailand

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THAIS SAY ATTACK DROVE OUT 100,00 CAMBODIANS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 531 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, June 26


The Thai Foreign Minister said here today at the close of the annual foreign
ministers' conference of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations that the
Vietnamese armed incursion into Thailand last Monday and Tuesday drove more than
100,000 Cambodian refugees into Thailand.

The Foreign Minister, Air Chief Marshal Siddhi Savetsila, said at a news
conference that the Vietnamese forces had withdrawn from Thai territory and only
sporadic firing had occurred since. He said that 75 invaders were killed in the
fighting and 4 taken prisoner; Thai military losses amounted to 22 killed and 7
wounded.

The minister also said that many Thai civilians and Cambodians were killed or
wounded but gave no figures.  ''If this is not an act of aggression, what is
it?'' he asked.  The new influx of Cambodian refugees suggests that Thailand's
move this month to lighten its load through voluntary repatriation had achieved
the opposite result. Air Chief Marshal Siddhi termed the Vietnamese attack a
direct response to the repatriation. A highly placed Southeast Asian
intelligence source with access to intercepted field communications from the
Vietnamese headquarters for western Cambodia confirmed the assertion.

Accusation by Vietnamese

Vietnam objected to the return of the refugees on the ground that it was
intended to bolster the anti-Vietnamese resistance in Cambodia. Thailand and the
office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees presented the
project as a humanitarian move. Whatever the motivation, most of those who chose
to return were described as militant followers of the deposed Prime Minister,
Pol Pot, and their families.

With the more than 100,000 new refugees in Thailand, the number of Cambodians
who have crossed the border since the Vietnamese invaded their country in
January 1979 to oust the Pol Pot Government is put at 300,000. In addition,
130,000 Laotian and Vietnamese refugees are in Thai camps under the protection
of the United Nations agency.

The Thai Foreign Minister received the full support of his colleagues from
Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia and Singapore for his condemnation of
Vietnam as an aggressor.

In a final communique today the meeting denounced Vietnam in strong terms,
echoing a special declaration yesterday. The five ministers held Vietnam
responsible for the continuation of the armed conflict in Cambodia and repeated
the organization's call for a political solution based on a withdrawal of
Vietnamese troops, said to number 200,000, from that country.

----

Arms for Thais to Be Speeded

WASHINGTON, June 26 - President Carter has ordered deliveries of military
supplies on order for Thailand to be speeded up, the State Department said
tonight.

A department spokesman, Mark Sawoski, would not go beyond a 13-word announcement
that the President had asked for the speed-up of ''military supplies in the
pipeline.'' The department had been asked for comment on a report on ABC News
that the President was expected to approve an emergency airlift of weapons
requested by Thailand.

The report said that the emergency shipment would include artillery, mortars,
machine guns and radar equipment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

2 NEW STUDIES FIND HERBICIDE INGREDIENT GIVES LAB ANIMALS CANCER

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 852 words


Two new studies conducted for the National Cancer Institute have concluded that
dioxin, a highly toxic impurity found in the herbicide 2,4,5-T, causes cancer in
laboratory animals.

The findings of the studies appear to be in sharp contrast to the results of
studies conducted in the past by industry. However, they tend to corroborate
some of the findings announced over the last 20 years by Dr. James Allen, a
pathologist at the University of Wisconsin, who has also found dioxin to cause
cancer in laboratory animals.

The results of the latest studies, the final draft of which has not yet been
officially issued, are scheduled to be reviewed today in Washington by the
Technical Report Review Subcommittee of the Board of Scientific Counselors, part
of the National Cancer Institute-National Toxicology Program.

The results of the studies and how they are eventually interpreted are of
considerable interest on two fronts. The herbicide 2,4,5-T has aroused much
controversy in recent years and is under a partial ban imposed by the
Environmental Protection Agency. Officials of the Federal agency believe it is
so dangerous that it ought to be totally and permanently banned. But the ban is
opposed by the Dow Chemical Company and other makers of 2,4,5-T, who say that
the herbicide is safe to use.

Veterans Express Concern

Interest in 2,4,5-T and dioxin research has also been expressed by veterans'
organizations. The herbicide made up half of the defoliant Agent Orange, used by
the United States Army in the Vietnam War to deprive the enemy of food and
places to hide. The Army stopped using Agent Orange after the Vietnamese
complained of stillbirths and a disproportionate number of birth defects among
the offspring of people exposed to the chemical.

In the last two years, Vietnam veterans have complained of some of the same
symptoms that the Vietnamese reported and also say that their exposure to the
substance has caused them to suffer cancerr, loss of sex drive, personality
changes and inexplicable weaknesses in the limbs.

The Veterans Administration has not honored the mass of Agent Orange claims as
such, contending that research on the subject was inconclusive. No one is sure
at present what role, if any, the dioxin contaminant played in creating the
problems alleged by those exposed to Agent Orange or 2,4,5-T, or both. However,
there was widespread agreement among scientists that more basic research had to
be done on dioxin, especially on the nature of its suspected carcinogenicity.

The dioxin studies just completed were done under direct contract to the
National Cancer Institute by the Illinois Institute of Technology Research
Institute in Chicago.

Findings of Test

In one test, 50 rats and mice of each sex were given dioxin in a food mixture of
corn oil and acetone, two days a week for 104 weeks.  The dioxin doses were
extremely low - .01, .05 and .5 micrograms per kilogram of body weight for rats
and male mice and .04, .2 or 2 micrograms per kilogram of body weight for female
mice. A dose of .01 micrograms is only 100 millionths of a gram. A gram is a
28th of an ounce. It remains unclear whether this is analogous to the human
exposures. There were also two untreated control groups.

Among the 50 male rats treated with the dioxin-contaminated food, weight gain
was slowed and 22 of them developed tumors in the thyroid. Cancerous growths in
the thyroid occurred in three male rats in the mid- or high-dose groups. No such
growths were seen in the low-dose group, but there was one in a control group.

Female rats also reflected a similar pattern of retarded weight gain. Nine of
them got thyroid tumors, with seven cases among the midand high-dose groups. The
females seemed prone to liver cancer and neoplastic nodules of the liver. The
nodules are frequently regarded as precursors to liver cancer. Sixteen of the
females got the nodules, as against only three males. The three males were on
highdose dioxin, as were 12 of the females who got the nodules.

Forty-eight of the rats got toxic hepatitis, all but two of them on the
high-dose dioxin diet. Cancers occurred in mice in much the same way, with the
risk of it increasing in relation to the level of dioxin ingested.

In the second test, dioxin was applied to the skins of 30 male and 30 female
mice, three days a week for 104 weeks. The experiment proved carcinogenic for 21
of the females, who developed malignant tumors, or fibrosarcomas, in their
ligaments and muscles. Male mice also got fibrosarcomas, but test results were
regarded as not statistically significant.

These results are in contrast with the research results thus far produced by
industry. For example, the Toxicology Research Laboratory of the Dow Chemical
Company did a reproductive study on rats that were studied over three
generations to evaluate the effects of chronic, low-level ingestion of dioxin.
The study said that ''no significant toxicity'' was found in rats of either sex
during the 90 days of dioxin prior to mating, although some dioxin ingestion
levels did affect their reproductive capacity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

'THEY'RE C.I.A.,' PEOPLE MUTTER;
EARL S. MARTIN AND PAT HOSETETTER MARTIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 833 words

DATELINE: MALAYBALAY, Philippines


One might have thought we would be immune to it by now. We got it regularly
during our years of refugeeassistance work in Vietnam - before and after the
Communist takeover. Now here in the Philippines it is common fare. Yet when our
nextdoor neighborhood confided to our student helper that she had decided we
must be Central Intelligence Agency agents, the suspicion left us unsettled
again. Such charges no longer sting; they've come too often for that. Now they
just trouble.

The cause of the suspicion is understood easily enough. We are Americans, and,
rightly or wrongly, many third-world people ascribe a certain omnipotence to the
United States Government.

Furthermore, seeking identification with the people here, we are serious about
learning the local language well. We spend much time listening to the concerns
of peasant farmers and the urban poor - those most inclined to complain against
their Government.

Once the label of covert agent is applied, there is virtually no way to shake
it. Everything you do or don't do can deepen the suspicion. Anything
unexplainable, like living a sacrificial life, or anything contradictory, can be
attributed to ''part of the cover.''

In this light, it was especially disturbing to read recently that the Director
of Central Intelligence, Admiral Stanfield Turner, was seeking authorization to
use missionary and journalistic ''covers'' for C.I.A. agents around the world.
If that was granted, the trustbuilding so essential to our service would become
even more difficult.

So why all the concern? When the ''C.I.A.'' tag gets pinned on us, why don't we
just shrug if off?  Well, we're training ourselves to do just that. But we're
still disturbed because, frankly, we perceive our goals and our methods to be
markedly differed from those of the C.I.A.

Does that make us anti-American?  Not necessarily. It's just that the ultimate
loyalty of the C.I.A.  is to serve the United States Government. Ours is to
serve God and ''to bring sight to the blind ... to release the oppressed,'' as
the Book of Luke enjoins. Sometimes these two sets of goals may seem compatible.
Other times our priorities are clearly different, perhaps even in conflict.

As are our methods. While the C.I.A. sponsors much open, helpful research that
is accessible in the public domain, a significant aspect of the C.I.A. involves
covert operations, secret intelligence gathering, using paid undercover agents,
deception, false pretense, falsehoods.

We are not arguing that governments should abolish such covert agencies,
although we believe the world would be a kinder place without them.

We are saying that these covert methods of the C.I.A. stand in direct conflict
with those of the church-service worker. The latter seeks to live in a spirit of
openness and honesty. Genuine human and spiritual development must be predicated
upon trust. Employing covert means is the surest way to destroy that spirit of
trust.

So what should be our response? We hope that United States citizens and
legislators will register concern about the Central Intelligence Agency's
proposed crippling of missionaries and journalists by further entangling them in
webs of suspicion.

The overall good will of other nations toward the United States, and even the
ability to discern what is happening in other countries, may be increased if
church workers and journalists are free to work without suspicion. Further,
using them may encourage some to take subtle or overt anti-American postures to
''prove'' they are not Government agents.

But these are not, in our opinion, the primary reasons to oppose the Central
Intelligence Agency's use of such ''covers.'' It is rather that the ability of
church workers and news reporters to serve the cause of truth and human
development can be severely jeopardized if they are wrongly suspected of covert
operations. In the meantime, those of us in the field take solace where we can,
knowing we'll never fully shake the sticky suspicion.

There is some comfort. Here in the Philippines, for example, history records
numerous occasions when foreign powers took unfair advantage of the uncunning
openness of the Filipino people. So it is perhaps encouraging to see some signs
of wariness and caution.

It is tricky business for a small country to survive amid the competing
interests of the superpowers. Thus, while suspicions of us as United States
intelligence agents are troubling on a personal level, we are also heartened
that people here are being careful as they make their way in a world that still
has too many covert agents.

Earl S. Martin and Pat Hostetter Martin are community-development
representatives of the Mennonite Central Committee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. WILL SPEED DELIVERY OF ARMS TO THAIS FORCES

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 456 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, June 27


Secretary of State Edmund S.  Muskie told the Thai Foreign Minister here today
that the United States would speed delivery of 35 tanks and other battlefield
equipment as a tangible American response to the Vietnamese incursion into
Thailand this week.

Relaying the message to the Foreign Minister, Air Chief Marshal Siddhi
Savetsila, Mr. Muskie also held out the possibility of more aid.

The Secretary flew here from a North Atlantic Treaty Organization meeting in
Ankara to consult with the foreign ministers of the five members of the
pro-Western Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Concern Over Vietnamese Drive

The meeting has been dominated by concern over Vietnam's incursion into Thailand
from Cambodia on Monday and Tuesday during operations against Cambodian
guerrillas. The concern was reflected in Mr.  Muskie's arrival statement, in
which he said, ''We meet in Kuala Lumpur over the next two days in the shadow of
ongoing aggression - by the Soviet Union in Afghanistan and by the Vietnamese in
Kampuchea.''

The attack this week, he said, ''not only violates Thai territorial integrity
and threatens its security, but it may represent an expansion of the conflict
and exacerbates the suffering of the Thai and Khmer peoples.''

After the meeting Air Chief Marshal Siddhi said, ''Very soon we can expect to
see many American arms-supply planes coming into Bangkok.'' Thailand received 15
modernized tanks of Korean War vintage late last year; the additional 35 will be
delivered this summer. In addition, shipments of artillery, recoilless rifles
and ammunition are to be expedited. Thailand receives $50 million in military
credits a year on regular Pentagon terms, and repayment is to be eased to allow
Thailand to buy more with its money.

A Two-Day Stay in Thailand

As pieced together from intelligence reports, American officials believe that
two companies from the Vietnamese 75th Division overran two border refugee
encampments and oocupied two Thai villages Monday. They withdrew Tuesday
although artillery exchanges continued that day and a Thai spotter plane and
helicopter gunship were shot down, probably by hand-held Soviet-made
ground-to-air missiles.

After the raid the American Ambassador to Thailand, Morton I.  Abramowitz,
delivered a message from Mr. Muskie to Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of
Vietnam, who coincidentally stopped over in Bangkok on his return from an
official visit to Indonesia. In the 25-minute meeting Mr. Thach was told of the
American concern and unhappiness over the incursion.

Mr. Muskie also conferred with Malaysian leaders and the foreign ministers of
Indonesia and Singapore today as well as with ministers from Japan, Australia,
New Zealand and Canada.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF EDMUND MUSKIE

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 510 words


WORLD NEWS BRIEFS;
Kenya Agrees to Expand U.S. Use of Military Bases

WASHINGTON, June 27 (Reuters) - Kenya has agreed to expand American access to
its military facilities in exchange for increased military and economic aid, the
State Department announced today. Details of the agreement are still to be
worked out.

Oman has also agreed to such an arrangement, but Secretary of State Edmund S.
Muskie indicated this week that there were problems in talks with Somalia.

American officials said the United States wanted to use Kenya's air and port
facilities more often and it was logical to expect that depots for fuel and
spare parts and possibly even a hangar would be established. United States naval
vessels have called at Mombasa for many years.

Dutch Government Survives Censure Vote

THE HAGUE, June 27 (Reuters) -The future of the Dutch Government was in doubt
after it narrowly survived a parliamentary censure motion today.

Prime Minister Andreas A.M. van Agt's center-right Cabinet, under fire for its
refusal to forbid the sale of oil to South Africa, survived on a vote of 74 to
72 at dawn after an all-night debate.

The embargo would be largely symbolic because South Africa imports little oil
from the Netherlands. The Government has said that it favors an embargo but that
unilateral action would have little impact. Parliament adjourned today for the
summer.

26 Jamaicans Charged In Alleged Coup Plot

KINGSTON, Jamaica, June 27 (UPI) - Twenty-six soldiers were charged today in an
alleged plot to overthrow the Government of Prime Minister Michael N. Manley.
Seven others still face charges.

As officials investigated the alleged plot, the police reported that four people
were shot and killed overnight in separate incidents in Kingston. The police
linked some of the shootings to political gang warfare in Kingston's slums.

Bodies of 400 Americans Reported in Hanoi in 1977

WASHINGTON, June 27 (AP) - A former North Vietnamese undertaker, contradicting
the Vietnamese Government, said today that he saw the bodies of 400 American
servicemen stored at a former prisoner-of-war camp in Hanoi as late as 1977.

Wearing a helmet and a black visor to prevent his identification because of
reported threats to his life, the undertaker told a House Foreign Affairs
subcommittee that as late as mid-1977 he worked on American remains at 17 Ly Nam
De Street in Hanoi, which once housed American prisoners, who called it the
Citadel or the Plantation. He said that from 1969 to 1975 he and his
subordinates processed many of the 400 American remains there. He said the
remains were stored in wooden boxes with their personal effects and
identification.

He said he had worked for the Vietnamese Government since 1958 but was expelled
last year because he is an ethnic Chinese.  Lieut. Gen. Eugene F. Tighe Jr.,
director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, said that the information had been
corroborated but that Vietnam had refused to acknowledge that any more
unidentified American servicemen, dead or alive, were in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT POLITICS MEMORIALIZING THE VIETNAM WAR DEAD

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 27


For quite a while, Representative Thomas A.  Daschle, a Vietnam veteran,
resisted joining the long list of sponsors of a plan, moving fast through
Congress, to build a memorial inscribed with the names of all 57,661 Americans
killed in Vietnam.

''It's like sending a condolence card,'' the South Dakota Democrat feels. ''It
lets people wash their hands of it all too easily.'' But recently, with all 100
Senators on board and a growing sponsorship behind it in the House, Mr. Daschle
joined the sponsors.  He did so even as he emphasized that a better memorial
would be to provide badly needed Government services for the survivors of the
war.

''It wasn't worth all the explanation,'' the Congressman said of his shift from
passive tolerance to sponsorship of the plan. He recognizes a sure thing in
politics when he sees one, and the nation seems ready for such a memorial, he
conceded. But like so many other Americans who knew that era, he cannot imagine
what the memorial should look like or how it could possibly summarize such a
twisted history of emotion and death.

A twinge of the national ambivalence and controversy that marked that war can be
experienced still in a glance at the memorial's fundraising letterhead that is
already being sent out. There, in the name of reconciliation, Bob Hope, the
entertainer, is prominently listed along with Senator George McGovern. Senator
Barry Goldwater is there along with the Rev. Theodore M. Hesburgh.

The politics of that war era still seems raw even in diplomatic analysts' talk
of the emergence of the United States from a postwar period of hesitancy in the
arena of world power. The originators of the memorial plan, a group of Vietnam
veterans who talk of building an oasis of national healing in the shadow of the
Lincoln Memorial, are the first to concede that the topic leaves some Americans
still shouting at each other.

''A lot of the guys who died there were my best friends,'' said Jan C. Scruggs,
a former Vietnam infantryman who heads the memorial fund and drive. The dead
deserve better than to be forgotten ''in the national amnesia that surrounds the
Vietnam war,'' Mr. Scruggs added.

While Mr. Daschle stresses the rehabilitation proposals that have been
languishing in Congress for a decade, Robert W. Doubek, another Vietnam veteran
working on the drive, argues that a memorial to the dead is needed to help the
living, too, by distinguishing between the warrior and the war.

''There's been no one with whom to discuss the experience of the war,'' Mr.
Doubek observed. ''It was treated as something in my life to be written off as a
loss.''

Mr. Scruggs noted that one poll had measured a steady increase in the last
decade in the number of Americans who view the servicemen of that war as
''suckers,'' to use the wording of the poll.

There must be a more honorable tribute than ''suckers'' for the war dead, Mr.
Scruggs argued. ''I remember writing to McGovern from Vietnam back in 1969,'' he
added, ''and I was impressed, because he sent a personal note emphasing how he
criticized the war but respected the guys.''

The memorial is expected to cost $2.5 million. The first fundraising appeals by
letter have drawn more success with the ''hawks'' rather than the ''doves,'' to
use that era's shorthand. But the drive continues to canvass both sorts, and the
true chance for reconciliation, Mr. Scruggs hopes, will be in the quiet moment
of actually visiting and seeing the names in the simple landscaping and
sculpture scene to be built on a two-acre site.

Americans already are fascinated by the singular design that will be sought in a
competition. One sculptor sent in a miniature work, depicting exhausted
soldiers, bare-chested, with no national uniform showing, reaching up to the sky
as if for a helicopter for deliverance.

One veteran, now an architect, wrote of the project as ''the most difficult
memorial in our nation's history to design.'' ''It must convey that we
experienced remoteness, confusion, horror, uncertainty, bitterness, closeness,
love, anxiety, boredom and otherworldiness in Vietnam,'' he wrote, ''and also
that we encountered many of these same emotions when we returned home.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BY COREY RUZICKA;
EUREKA!

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 925 words

DATELINE: NEW BUFFALO, Mich.


How do we really elect our Presidents? Setting aside the apparent realities,
there are many theories, hypotheses and ideas about the forces of nature that
really govern who becomes chief executive and who does not. But, perhaps as a
consequence of two courses in statistics that I have taken, I may have invented
the best theorem yet. It is ''Corey's Last-Letter Presidental-Election Theory.''
Its premise is simple: Presidential candidates with an ''N'' as the last letter
in their last name have the highest probability of becoming their party's
nominee.

Ronald Reagan and John Anderson have been successful so far in this election
year while Howard Baker George Bush, Philip Crane, Robert Dole, Larry Pressler,
John Connally and Edward Kennedy have had their problems. (In my view, Edmund G.
Brown Jr. was no candidate.)

Who can forget Eugene McCarthy, Morris Udall, Nelson Rockefeller, Frank Church,
Hubert Humphrey, George Wallace, Birch Bayh, Edmund Muskie and George Romney -
they all tried to run for President and failed. But Lyndon B. Johnson and
Richard M. Nixon made it to the White House.

Twenty of the 48 Presidental elections in our history have been won by ''N''
candidates - some won second terms. George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, James
Madison, Andrew Jackson, Martin Van Buren, William Henry Harrison, James
Buchanan, Abraham Lincoln, Benjamin Harrison, Woodrow Wilson, Harry S. Truman,
Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon have been elected by the people. Andrew Johnson
succeeded Lincoln although he was never elected.

At least one ''N'' candidate has been fielded by one of the parties in 31 of the
48 elections. If Ronald Reagan wins the G.O.P.  nomination in Detroit this
summer as expected, then of course 32 of 49 elections will have had at least one
''N'' candidate.

There are, needless to say, other axioms associated with ''Corey's Last-Letter
Presidental-Election Theory.'' Our three ''S'' Presidents - John Adams, John
Quincy Adams and Rutherford B. Hayes - won close elections. One of the
elections, John Quincy Adams's, was settled in the House. The disputed 1876
election was awarded to Hayes by a special electoral commission.

After we elected three ''Y'' Vice Presidents, America went to war: Elbridge
Gerry, the War of 1812; Alben W. Barkley, the Korean War; and Hubert H.
Humphrey, the Vietnam War.

Curiously, we've neglected the names Smith and Jones for Presidents and Vice
Presidents even though this country is abundant with such names.

The two ''Y'' Presidents we have elected - William McKinley and John F. Kennedy
- were assassinated.  An alarming last-letter feature is the ''E'' Vice
President.  Before Walter F. Mondale's election victory four years ago, the
United States elected four ''E'' Vice Presidents, and in all four instances a
President has died in office within five years of the ''E'' Vice President's
last day in office.

The first ''E'' Vice President was Millard Fillmore, in 1848. His President was
Zachary Taylor, a Southern farmer with extensive military experience and little
political background. Taylor was under intense pressure in 1850, his second year
in office: The controversy over whether California would be admitted as a free
or slave state caused sectional quarrels. Under the Compromise of 1850, preceded
by a bitter Congressional debate, California was admitted as a free state, which
Taylor wanted. But the pressure of the Compromise and threat of possible civil
war damaged Taylor's health. He died in July 1850, and Fillmore became
President.

In 1856, we elected our second ''E'' Vice President, John C.  Breckinridge. The
next elected President, Abraham Lincoln, died in office, in 1865.

Our third elected ''E'' Vice President was Calvin Coolidge, in 1920. His
President was Warren G. Harding. Harding's third year in office was turbulent.
He and his Administration were losing the nation's confidence. He was in the
middle of the Teapot Dome Scandal. To rebuild his credibility, Harding traveled
throughout the country trying to restore its faith in him. Unfortunately, he
never made it back to Washington. He died in August 1923, his third year in
office. The pressure had gotten to him, as it did to Taylor.

Our fourth elected ''E'' Vice President was Henry A. Wallace, in 1940. Wallace,
like Breckinridge, was a one-term Vice President, and the President in office in
the next term -Franklin D. Roosevelt - died.

Will history repeat itself? Let's hope not.  Certainly Jimmy Carter has his
problems, as Taylor and Harding did. He has Iran, the economy, the Russians, and
he has Reagan, Kennedy and Anderson chasing him.

Call all this a coincidence? Think about the following: Our nation has had four
''E'' Vice-Presidental candidates who lost.  Joseph Lane, who ran with John
Breckenridge against Abraham Lincoln in 1860, was the first.  Henry Cabot Lodge,
who was Richard Nixon's running mate in 1960, was the second.  The third was
Edmund Muskie, now the Secretary of State, who ran with Humphrey in 1968, when
Nixon won the election.The fourth was Robert Dole, who ran in 1976 with Gerald
R. Ford.  Despite the apparent imminence of his renomination, we must wonder:
Will Jimmy Carter be denied it, at the Democratic National Convention in August,
or will he lose the Presidency at the polls in November?

Our historians, who clearly have not gotten to the bottom of things, could
profit from the novelty, not to speak of the depth, of these observations.
Corey Ruzicka is a senior majoring in business administration at Indiana
University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 528 words


Humor is main export of Bulgarian town 2
American physicist lives as Buddhist monk in Thailand 3
Israeli radio tells of West Bank-Gaza troop deployments 3
Muskie tells Thai of faster delivery of tanks 3
Somoza becomes involved in scandal in Paraguay 4
Iranian report said not to call Clark an ''agent'' 4
World News Briefs 5
Moscow cleans, paints and polishes for Olympics visitors 12
Pravda commentator denounces Carter's Afghanistan proposal 18

Government/Politics
Campaign Report 7
Right to Life committee endorses Reagan's candidacy 7
Reagan urges allies in Congress to push his tax-cut plan 7
Anderson making few inroads among blacks 8
Kennedy lists 18 proposals as possible minority planks 8
Supreme Court Roundup 18
Mayor Koch announces new drive to redevelop Times Square 23

General
Around the Nation 6
Two firemen killed fighting blaze on Upper West Side 23
Water's cleaner at the city's beaches 23
Jersey State Troopers graduate all-female class 24
The City 25

Religion
Papal delegate to U.S. given high Vatican post 2

Education/Welfare
U.S. finds pattern of segregation in Yonkers school system 24

Health/Science
Harvard doctor resigned after faking cancer research data 22

Arts/Entertainment
Jaki Byard gives solo piano jazz concert 9
Newport Jazz Festival opens with two tributes to Charlie Parker 9
Gracie Mansion ceremony opens Newport Jazz Festival 9
Christiane Edinger, German violinist, gives recital 10
Balanchine reveals ideas of ''Davidsbundlertanze'' 19
''Selected Works of Djuna Barnes'' is reviewed 19

Style
Amid a changing scene, bargains are a constant 17
Getting the jump on a the summer suit styles 17
Tampons are linked to a rare disease 17

Obituaries
Barney Bigard, jazz clarinetist 18
Carey McWilliams, former editor of The Nation 18
Moses L. Kove, former taxi commissioner 18

Sports
Minter, facing Antuofermo, aims to prove title is legitimate 12
McEnroe pressed to limit by Aussie before winning in 5 sets 13
Reuss of Dodgers hurls first no-hitter of season, beating Giants 13
Mets beat Phillies and Carlton by 3-2 13
Indians' Waits thwarts Yankees in 2-0 victory 13
Tommy Bolt sheds terrible-tempered label 15
Joseph Durso on Joe Torre's future 15
Hintnaus and Green are victorious at Olympic trials 15
Freedom beats Courageous twice in Cup trials 16
Older sister helps Andrea Jaeger handle Wimbledon pressure 16

Features/Notes
About Politics: memorializing the Vietnam War dead 7
Saturday News Quiz 19
Notes on People 26

News Analysis
Henry Scott Stokes views Japan's top party 3
Steven Rattner assesses political effects of Republican tax plan 7
Ronald Smothers on the pressure on the city's resourses 25

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 20

An interest in savings banks Overdue process for the press The odor outside
locker rooms Letters 20
Russell Baker: yes, Elizabeth, there is a free lunch 21
Eric Goldstein: understanding New York 21
John Buell: letter to a rich friend 21
Corey Ruzicka: alphabetological theory of Presidential choice 21
Gilmer Totten: the heart of New York 21

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
SUNDAY, JUNE 29, 1980

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 709 words


International
The disruption of food supplies to Cambodians across Thailand's border following
the Vietnam's attack on Thailand last week was ''potentially explosive,''
Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie said following a meeting with five Southeast
Asian foreign ministers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. He saw ''the possibility that
in the next few days the problems of feeding people may escalate, even in
dangerous ways.'' (Page 1, Columns 1-2.)
The Shah of Iran had a relapse and was taken to an Egyptian military hospital,
where he is in ''very serious condition,'' President Anwar-el-Sadat announced.
The Shah, who has cancer, was recently further weakened by pneumonia. (1:1.)
Clandestine broadcasts to Iran by the United States Government aimed at
undermining the clerical rule of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini are originating in
Egypt, Administration officials said. The broadcasts, in Persian, apparently
were begun in May with the help of the C.I.A.  (3:4-6.)
National
Supplemental funds for a waterway in the South that has aroused much
controversy, were voted by the Senate despite warnings from Northern opponents
that the expenditure would increase public skepticism about Congress's
commitment to curtail spending. Approval of the $58 million for the
Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway, a Corps of Engineers project, came during
consideration of a $16.6 billion supplemental appropriations bill for the
current fiscal year. (1:6.)
The release of krypton was suspended at the Three Mile Island nuclear reactor in
Pennsylvania four minutes after the venting of the radioactive gas had begun
when radiation monitors signaled - apparently falsely - an unexpectedly
excessive level of the gas.  Despite the insistence of Government officials that
the gas's release over a 30-day period would be harmless, many families have
left the Three Mile Island area.(1:5.)
Miami is straining its resources to care for the 60,000 Cuban refugees who have
arrived since last April. Few officials doubt that eventually the newcomers will
be absorbed, but it is agreed that Miami and surrounding Dade County need all
kinds of help. The major needs are jobs, housing and aid to a school district
that faces a crisis of ''almost indescribable proportions,'' an official said.
(1:3-4.)
Many blacks say they are leaderless despite the efforts of the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People and other similar
organizations. They believe that the leaders of these organizations are
unwilling to raise their voices against social and economic discrimination for
fear of alienating the white business community that provides them with
financial support, and they accuse the leaders of failing to deal with problems
such as unemployment, inflation and attacks on affirmative action programs.
(1:2-4.)
Helen Gahagan Douglas died at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in
Manhattan. She was 79 years old. She had been an actress before she entered
California politics and became a United States Representative. Her defeat by
Richard M. Nixon in a bitter fight for a Senate seat launched him into national
prominence. (20:1-4.)
Metropolitan
Cleveland McKinley Davis was acquitted in his third trial on charges that he had
killed two police officers and a former inmate at the Attica prison on a
Brooklyn street two years ago. The first two trials ended in mistrials when the
juries were unable to agree on a verdict. He had been a leader in the Attica
prison rebellion in 1971. (1:1.)
The city's uniformed unions refused a wage offer that municipal negotiators had
described as their final one. The union coalition, whose contracts expire
tomorrow at midnight, said the city's offer failed to recognize the special
sacrifices and essential services they were called upon to provide. (18:1-2)
Undermanned token booths were besieged by subway passengers seeking the new,
smaller tokens being sold on the first day of the 60-cent fare on New York City
subways and buses. Officials hoped that it was not prelude to a chaotic Monday
morning. (21:1-4.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUNFIN P. 13 LETTERS;
LETTERS ;
Job Interviews

SECTION: Section 3; Page 13, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 802 words


To the Business Editor: Although there are certainly more desirable responses to
be elicited from a prospective employee than the one Robert Swain chose (''Job
Interviews: Questions of Style,'' June 22), it is unfortunate that, in scripting
the vice president of human resources's thought processes, he paints the
individual as a simple trickster, uninterested in determining the qualifications
and capabilities of a candidate.

My experience as chairman of Robert Heller Associates, a firm active in
executive recruiting since 1921, indicates that interviews are conducted by
concerned, real people and not by papier-mache, onedimensional fictions. It is
worth noting that quite often the prospective employee (if qualified) is made or
becomes cognizant of the employer's concerns and criteria and thus might be
prepared for questions designed to draw out latent sexism.  RICHARD SHEMTOB New
York, June 22, 1980

Regulation
To the Business Editor: It is all to the good that a strong case for certain
types of public regulation (environment, health, safety) has now appeared in
your pages (''In Many Cases, Regulation Pays,'' June 15). I wish only to add a
footnote about a type of regulation Nicholas A. Ashford chose to overlook.

While many insist that safety and economic (price) regulation are not, and
should not be, related to each other, the history of transportation regulation
(airlines and trucking companies) indicates they cannot be separated. A large
part of the trucking industry has been unregulated for years, and its safety
record is much worse than that of the regulated companies.

Historically, the less regulated the airline industry, the greater the safety
problems. All-out competition on prices requires companies to cut corners and
costs; in transportation systems, training and maintenance are the only ways to
do this.  FREDERICK C. THAYER Associate Professor, Graduate School of Public and
International Affairs University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, Pa., June 16, 1980

Hazardous Wastes
To the Business Editor: A recently identified crisis resulting from years of
improper disposal of toxic wastes, ''Who Pays? Cleaning Up the Love Canals''
(June 8), underscores the simple fact that the economy and environment are not
issues of conflicting values.

Laying waste to the land and depleting limited resources are merely forms of
deficit spending in a macroeconomic sense. Proper waste disposal should be
figured in as an above-the-line cost of chemical manufacture.

Having failed to cover all initial costs, the chemical industry has brought
about a great number of unforeseen costs, many of which are still unknown.
Unless an unwritten code of ethics prevails, the industry could undoubtedly
escape a large part of the burden.  JON HINCK Greenpeace Seattle, Wash., June
11, 1980
To the Business Editor: The article reminds us that just a few years ago we were
actually paying our sons to spray chemicals harmful to human bodies over the
women and children of Vietnam. It would have been better if we had employed our
chemists then to seek out the chemical dumps we were creating in our own land
and stop what we were doing to ourselves instead of spraying Vietnamese
civilians with Agent Orange. As usual, it is the innocent who suffer.  GRAHAM R.
HODGES Liverpool, N.Y., June 9, 1980
---------------------------------------------------------------------
The Times welcomes letters from readers. Letters for publication should include
the writer's name, address and telephone number.  Letters should be addressed to
The Editor, Sunday Financial Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street,
New York, N.Y. 10036.  Because of the large volume of mail received, we regret
that we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAJOR NEWS IN SUMMARY;
Inflation Slows, But at a Cost to Carter's Standing

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1354 words


Before this election year is over, Jimmy Carter may come to remember the
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini as the best political ally he ever had. Throughout
the primaries, citizens apparently mesmerized by the hostage crisis helped the
President rack up victory after victory over Senator Edward M. Kennedy, who
insisted that the economy was the central issue.

Last week, too late for Mr. Kennedy but in plenty of time for Ronald Reagan and
the Republicans, the economy was at center stage.  And while the Consumer Price
Index gave the Administration a rare opportunity for self-satisfaction, the
balance of the week's figures showed how serious the political implications are.

A moderate .09 increase in the C.P.I. for May, the same as April's, put
inflation for the last two months at a projected annual rate of (only) 11
percent - down sharply from the 18.1 percent recorded in the first quarter of
the year. And while Alfred E. Kahn, Mr. Carter's anti-inflation adviser, said
declining mortgage interest rates would soon carry inflation below 10 percent,
expectations of an increase in short-term rates were reinforced when the Federal
Reserve reported an unexpectedly large increase in the money supply.

Another Government report showed a rising casualty count in the Administration's
high-interest battle against inflation - 599,000 new unemployment claims in the
week ending June 14. Meanwhile, the International Monetary Fund forecast a
longer recession than the Administration envisions, with a drop in growth of 3.5
percent this year and unemployment as high as 9 percent. (The economy alters
voting patterns, page 2.)

Accusing Mr. Carter of ''fighting inflation with higher taxes, mounting
unemployment and deepening recession,'' Ronald Reagan moved to pre-empt him by
calling for immediate enactment of $36 billion of individual and business tax
cuts, to take effect Jan. 1. The Democratic majority in the Senate promptly
voted down an amendment to the budget embodying the Reagan proposals, thus
giving Mr. Reagan and his Republican allies in Congress a charge to hurl in
their fall campaigns. Senate Democrats rushed protectively to promise their own
tax bill in September, House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill said that would be not
only unwise, but impossible and suddenly, the heat was on Mr. Carter. (Tax as
social policy, page 2.)

The latest figures on his public standing can't have made the President more
comfortable. The economy and his handling of the Iran standoff were the main
factors in a drop to an anemic 30 percent in the latest New York Times/ CBS News
Poll - the same level at which he stood before the hostages were seized Nov. 4.
And now, Mr. Reagan is favored over Mr. Carter, 47 percent to 37 percent. In a
three-man race with Representative John B. Anderson, the independent candidate,
Mr. Reagan was still ahead, at 41 percent, with Mr. Carter at 30 and Mr.
Anderson at 18 percent.

While the President was in Europe most of the week, his economic and political
advisers were at home thinking on how to repair the damage. Members of the White
House Economic Policy Group told Senate Democrats that the the Administration,
which has been stuanchly hedging on a tax cut, is willing to start talking. And
some highlevel election strategists say the Mr. Carter is planning to raise the
hostage issue again. The reason: Playing down the subject since mid-May was not
only an effort at quiet diplomacy, but an attempt to defuse the potential
domestic political damage, and that last, one adviser explained, doesn't seem to
be working.

A Show of Unity In Venice, Perforce

With an unexpected - and certainly unintended - assist from Leonid I. Brezhnev,
Jimmy Carter guided Western diplomacy across the Venice lagoon last week.

The agenda for the leaders of the leading Western industrial countries and Japan
at such meetings has traditionally focused on energy policy, and at Venice they
pledged to double coal production by 1990 to ''break the existing link between
economic growth and consumption of oil.'' But Moscow's announcement that some
Russian troops - fewer than 8,500 by Western estimates - were leaving
Afghanistan shifted the leaders' attention to harmonizing their East-West
policies.

Although domestic politics strained their unity, with elections approaching in
West Germany, France and the United States, the President and the other leaders
closed ranks, at least temporarily, on Afghanistan, issuing a call for
''complete withdrawal of Soviet troops.'' Alliance solidarity was less clear in
private, however. Mr. Carter met West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt and
received a ''very rough'' 40-minute lecture on Bonn's judgment - questioned by
Washington - on the touchy subject of negotiating with Moscow over medium-range
nuclear missiles in Europe. Mr. Schmidt will pursue his controversial proposal
for a missile freeze with Mr. Brezhnev tomorrow in Moscow.

Valery Giscard d'Estaing, the French President, annoyed United States officials
last month when he met Mr. Brezhnev in Warsaw. After separate talks with the
German and French leaders in Venice, Mr.  Carter withdrew his criticism,
approving the opportunities ''for the Soviet leaders to hear in an unvarnished
fashion directly from European leaders.'' Besides, he added, ''we could not
prevent them even if we wanted to, which I don't.''

After returning to Paris, Mr. Giscard d'Estaing added to the complexities of
arms control negotiations by announcing that France had tested a neutron
bomb.(See summary, page 4.) He also suggested that the Afghanistan withdrawal
showed Moscow was ready for a political solution there.

If so, it would not conform to a United States proposal for talks with the
Russians about a ''transitional'' regime intended to help them leave Kabul
gracefully. Revived by Mr. Carter last week, the suggestion was rebuffed by
Tass, which accused the President of ''deliberately slanderous provocations.''
In a followup message to Italy as current head of the European Community, the
Soviet Union said no more troops would be withdrawn until Afghanistan's
neighbors accept the Russian-installed regime.

Carter Goes Calling

Before flying home from Venice, the President made three European stops - first
in Belgrade, to reaffirm United States support for Yugoslavia's independence and
to offer belated respects at the tomb of President Tito, whose funeral last
month was attended by most other world leaders. Going on to Madrid, he supported
Spain for membership in the European Common Market, ignoring the recent call for
delay by France. He also backed Spanish entry into the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, calling Spainish democracy a ''tonic for the entire Western
world.''

In Lisbon, Mr. Carter praised Portugal's strong condemnation of the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan and of the seizure of United States hostages in Iran.
Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie, meanwhile, flew east. In Ankara, Turkey he
staved off a move by Europeans in NATO to endorse Palestinian
self-determination. Later, in a low-key separate statement, the alliance foreign
ministers called on ''the Iranian authorities to release immediately and
unharmed the American hostages.''

Mr. Muskie continued to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, to meet with the foreign
ministers of Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and the Philippines, and
support their condemnation of Vietnam's incursion last week into Thailand.
(Asians disagree on the greater danger, page 4)

The Vietnamese attack, Mr. Muskie added, has halted international food relief,
and thus may set off a ''potentially explosive'' rush into Thailand by more
thousands of hungry Cambodians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IT'S HARD TO RELAX IN A DRAGON'S BACK YARD

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1136 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia


The Association of Southeast Asian Nations, founded 13 years ago to further
political, economic and social cooperation, held its annual foreign ministers
conference last week. As at last year's meeting and the year before, however,
only one subject occupied the ministers in their public speeches, remarks to the
press and conversations in the corridors - Indochina. How to live with Vietnam
on the warpath has become an obsession.

The subject imposed itself on the ministers with exceptional force because of an
ugly clash whose echoes resounded in the conference hall and caused delegates to
slip away from sessions to ask journalists for the latest news. Earlier this
month, Thailand, the ''frontline state'' with long borders with Vietnam's
clients, Cambodia and Laos, had repatriated 8,600 Cambodian refugees; 80 percent
of them were women and children. Vietnam responded to this perceived provocation
last week in its customary way, with armed force.

Before the repatriation, Vietnam had made known its opposition to the move,
which it considered an open reinforcement of anti-Vietnamese armed elements in
Cambodia. The view is not unfounded - 7,000 of the 8,600 Cambodians repatriated
went from the Sakaeo camp, severely administered by followers of the deposed
Prime Minister, Pol Pot, into a border area that is a Pol Pot redoubt.

Before dawn on Monday, Vietnam retaliated with a strike across the Thai border -
not across the Pol Pot stronghold, which Hanoi's forces have found inaccessible
and keenly defended, but through encampments of tens of thousands of unarmed
refugees astride the frontier. In the two-day attack on three Thai villages, 97
soldiers on both sides were reported killed. Civilians caught in the crossfire
paid the heaviest price.

Thailand's Foreign Minister, Air Chief Marshal Siddhi Savetsila, said the attack
drove more than 100,000 Cambodian refugees into Thailand, adding to 300,000
Indochinese refugees already there. In Washington, the United States ordered a
speed-up of military deliveries to Thailand and appealed to Vietnam ''to refrain
from any further aggressive actions.'' A copy of the appeal was handed to the
Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly F. Dobrynin. Visiting Bangkok, the Vietnamese Foreign
Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, denied that the border was violated. Two American
photographers and two International Red Cross officials were seized there by
Vietnamese troops.

At the ASEAN meeting, speeches were hastily rewritten to condemn Vietnam in the
strongest terms and assure Thailand of maximum verbal support. The most
articulate and openly anti-Vietnamese Minister, Sinathamby Rajaratnam of
Singapore, dominated the public proceedings with the harshest denunciations of
Hanoi and its principal supporter and source of weaponry, the Soviet Union.

China Design Worries Allies

Beneath the surface unity, different conceptions continued. Not that ASEAN is
divided; a more singlemindedly anti-Communist grouping would be hard to find.
Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines are as opposed to all Communist powers,
particularly in Asia, as are Thailand and Singapore. But the nations differ on
how to protect their remarkable independence and growing prosperity against the
separate threats from Vietnam and China.

Thailand, which geography has placed on the Indochinese peninsula but which, by
astute politics, has been spared both colonialism and Communism, has had the
Vietnamese Army as its neighbor in Laos since 1975, in Cambodia since last year.
It sees Vietnam as the overriding menace and, by extension, China, Vietnam's
most direct enemy, as a friend. With China, Thailand believes that the Pol Pot
forces, the most efficient force fighting against Vietnam, must be fully
supported and, that although its ''government'' controls neither significant
territory nor population, it must be recognized as Cambodia's only legitimate
regime. Because Thailand is in Vietnam's direct line of fire, its allies readily
rally to support its diplomatic position.

Some do so more from a sense of duty than conviction that Thailand has chosen
the most imaginative or constructive course. Malaysia and Indonesia have no
hesitation in supporting a strongly anti-Vietnamese line but are deeply worried
about an ally that attaches its policy to a Chinese design. They fear China more
than any other power. Malaysia's population is nearly 40 percent ethnic Chinese;
they are deeply anti-Communist and among the world's most adept practitioners of
free enterprise, but the Malay-dominated Government remains traumatized by the
long Chinese-inspired Communist insurrection in the 1940's and 1950's and deeply
suspicous of Peking's possible use of the ethnic Chinese as a fifth column.

Indonesia has not forgotten its late President Sukarno's alignment with China
and its conviction that China fomented a coup in 1965.  Neither Malaysia nor
Indonesia has fully integrated its ethnic Chinese, which in Indonesia constitute
only about 5 million in the population of 135 million. Both consider Vietnam's
dominance over Laos and Cambodia and its hostility to China as elements of
policy to be exploited for their own security interests. They recognize
Thailand's predicament but are privately critical of Bangkok's reliance on China
to restrain Vietnam's ambitions. They find Thailand's commitment to maintaining
the Pol Pot resistance - in whose future they have no faith - understandable but
politically sterile and shortsighted. Reluctantly, Kuala Lumpur and Jakarta have
concluded that it might be better to assent to Vietnam's hold over Cambodia as
inevitable and to strive for an accommodation to keep Vietnam at bay without
relying on a Chinese role whose long-term dangers they consider greater than its
short-term benefits.

But they took no comfort from conversations with Vietnamese officials. ''They
know only one tool of policy,'' said a Malaysian minister, ''the hammer.''

Bedeviled with the intransigence of the two Communist powers and painfully
conscious of the narrowness of their options, the five foreign ministers who met
here on Friday with Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie impressed him with their
hope that a more palpable United States role in Southeast Asia might widen their
range of responses. But how the United States should implement a higher interest
in the region, from which only recently it extricated itself with such travail,
remained undefined.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo map

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN OLYMPIA, AN IDEAL?;
CHICAGO Admittedly, anything you buy on a trip to Greece is a souvenir. In
Olympia, there are contemporary Greek art souvenir shops and popular Greek art
souvenir shops. The first type offers contemporary poetry books and modern
expressionist sculpture. The popular souvenir shop stocks worry beads, bazouki
records and Olympia T-shirts.

BYLINE: By Gary S. Ruderman

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 619 words


Along the same line, there are differences about the way the 600 citizens of
Olympia feel about bringing the Olympic Games back to their mountain village, in
the Peloponnesus. When I visited last month, the mayor was away in Athens seeing
his son, who was ill, but the tourist policeman beamed behind mirror sunglasses
and said that Olympics in Olympia would be great: He would love to meet all the
new female tourists later in the disco.

Apostolos Kosmopoulos owns the Galerie Orphee. The 33-year-old Olympia native
fled Athens after law school to open his contemporaryart shop. ''I'm against the
Games,'' he said. ''I don't believe in them. I don't like professional athletes
like the Communists. They use the Olympics. Most people think it'll bring money.
That's not true. If the facilities come here, the Americans will make them and
who will control them? The people of Olympia? One hundred thousand people coming
to Olympia for the Games? They will ruin Olympia. This village will have to be a
parking place.''

Next door, Panagiotis Papaioanox, 28, owns the popular Greek souvenir shop. He
has Olympic tradition in his blood: He carried the Olympic flame from the nearby
stadium on its first leg to Montreal in 1976. He wants the Olympics in Olympia.
He wants the tourists to come into his shop. (The last time the Olympics were
held in the tiny village was A.D. 393; the first modern Games were held in
Athens in 1896.)

While he would like more tourists to stay in his Hotel Pelops, Theodore
Spiliopoulos objected to the proposal on political grounds: ''In four years, the
Olympics will be in Los Angeles. How are you Americans going to react when the
Russians boycott the Games? And, for sure, they should expect something like
that. When one country says 'I'm not sending my team because of Afghanistan or
Vietnam', the Olympic ideal will become a political game. We're fine without the
Olympics. If they build something here, then sometime we'll have an earthquake
and everything will go down.''

Even without the Olympic horde, the decades of summer tourists have altered the
village, according to two state archeologists, who asked to remain anonymous.

''The landscape is a unique spot of natural beauty that can't hold 100,000
people. For the last 30 years, the residents haven't taken care of the
village,'' one said.

''I'm concerned about too many visitors walking on the ruins. Our No. 1 problem
now is keeping their feet off the ruins. If there are 100,000 tourists here for
Olympics, we'll close ancient Olympia,'' another said.

The group of boosters and dissenters, sitting in a taverna, agreed that moving
the Games to Greece would rob them of their international flavor. ''No matter
where they are held, the Greek team still leads the opening parade,'' said Mr.
Spiliopoulos.

Olympians grumble about the international sports complex built nearby and used
each summer for two months. But it's off-limits to the villagers. ''They took
our land and we can't use it,'' said Mr.  Kosmopoulos.

The plan by the Greek Government and Olympic committee calls for a permanent and
neutral site at the Lake of Agoulinitsa, 12 miles from Olympia. It could be
ready in 20 to 25 years, with International Olympic Committee approval. ''Just
in time for the games between Coca-Cola and Adidas,'' said an archeologist.

Rekindling the Olympic ideal, where wars stop for the period of the Games, may
be the hardest part.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Gary S. Ruderman was a staff writer for The Associated Press.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT THE RECORD SAYS ABOUT REAGAN

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6144 words


Herbert Lindsey is The Times's Los Angeles bureau chief.
By Robert Lindsey
ack in 1971, Bob Moretti was the second most powerful man in Sacramento, the
Speaker of the California Assembly, and one morning he picked up the phone and
placed a call to the man who was supposed to be the most powerful man in town.
As Governor, Ronald Reagan had the top job, all right, but for four years he had
been frustrated by unfriendly and unyielding legislators -like liberal Democrat
Bob Moretti.

Mr. Reagan doesn't think much of politicians (he'd much rather spend time with
successful businessmen or old friends from Hollywood) and he had expressed his
disdain for the California legislators in just about every public statement he
made. But on that morning in 1971, Mr. Moretti called the Governor and set up a
meeting. ''There were just the two of us,'' Mr. Moretti says of that event. ''We
had never been alone; there were always staff people around when we met.  I
walked into his office and said, 'Look, I don't like you. And I know you don't
like me. But if this state is going to function, we had better try to work
together, and I suggest we start.' ''

Later, Mr. Reagan would say that Mr. Moretti had been forced to sue for peace,
that the Governor's television appeals to the public over the heads of the
lawmakers had forced his hand. Still, he accepted the truce offer, and during 17
days and nights of negotiations, the Reagan conservatives and the Moretti
liberals worked out a classic political compromise. The conservatives were able
to significantly narrow the eligibility rules for welfare recipients; the
liberals won higher benefits and automatic cost-of-living increases for those
Californians who could meet the new standards.

For Ronald Reagan, the meeting with Bob Moretti was a kind of turning point in
his eight years in Sacramento, leading to other compromises with the Legislature
on matters ranging from tax reform to school financing. Today, that
all-but-forgotten lesson in the give-
and-take of politics takes on a new significance as Mr. Reagan, at the age of
69, moves within striking distance of the White House.

He has been ahead in the polls since before the race for the Republican
Presidential nomination began more than a year ago, and he is assured of a
first-ballot victory at the party convention next month in Detroit. But all
along the way, Mr. Reagan has been accused of being vague and elusive on
specific issues as part of a play-itsafe strategy designed to keep him out of
trouble. His critics charge that the public has been given no real insight into
the policies and approaches Mr. Reagan would be likely to adopt if he were
elected to the Presidency. They dismiss him as a movie star who lacks the
intelligence and sophistication and experience for the task.

His supporters insist that their man can be judged by his record in the ''second
toughest job in America.'' It may be, they admit, that Sacramento is not
Washington, that no Governor has to cope with an Arab oil embargo or cajole a
labor leader intent upon calling a nationwide strike or live with the
responsibility of the hydrogen bomb. Yet eight years as Governor of California
do represent a level of political command far beyond what most of our recent
Presidents have been able to claim.

Mr. Reagan's performance as Governor may be the best clue to his performance as
President. But there are other parts of the record to consider, as well - his
public statements, the people who surround him and the way he has run his
campaign.

Ronald Wilson Reagan, 55 years of age, was sworn in as Governor of California at
16 minutes after midnight on Jan. 2, 1967. He had defeated the Democratic
incumbent, Edmund G. (Pat) Brown, father of the present Governor,
by almost a million votes. With 32 television cameras focused on him, Mr. Reagan
looked over at his old sidekick from the Hollywood days, Senator George Murphy,
and said: ''Well, here we are on the late show again.''

For cynics around the country, the scene must have confirmed their worst
suspicions about California. Where else could a movie actor and a song-and-dance
man hold down two of the most important political offices in the state?

In fact, as Mr. Reagan took office, California was beginning to show a few signs
of middle age. Immigration to the state, a torrent during the 50's and early
60's, had started to slow. There was getting to be less talk about California's
benign sun and swinging life styles and more about its smog, urban congestion
and crime. It was becoming less of a Lotusland, more of an Iowa.
eanwhile, large segments of the public had become suspicious and resentful of
established authority. The Berkeley campus of the University of California had
erupted with the Free Speech Movement in 1964, and the Watts ghetto in Los
Angeles blew the following year.  College campuses were still aflame with
dissent over the Vietnam War. Many middle-class Californians who had fought hard
to survive the Depression, couldn't understand why the angry students didn't
appreciate their affluence and their chance for a college education.  It was a
time of growing public skepticism of established institutions that, in a curious
way, Mr. Reagan shared with the very students he deplored. His target was
Government, which he said was too big, too costly and too inefficient. Mr.  Rea-

gan came to Sacramento to do battle.  He went right to it. Shortly after his
inauguration, Mr. Reagan announced to Californians that he had discovered that
the Brown administration - and, indirectly, the legislature - had ''looted and
drained'' the state and left a deficit of almost $200 million. In fact, the
outgoing administration had done some tinkering with bookkeeping methods that
enabled it to avoid an election-year tax increase.  Mr. Reagan told Californians
that the state had no choice but to raise taxes. The legislature passed the
largest tax increase in the state's history, which brought in about billion a
year. There were three major increases during his years in Sacramento, plus
several smaller ones, and they consistently brought in more money than the
Republican administration had predicted. These faulty estimates, resulting in
part from an inflation that forced income-tax payers into higher brackets,
poured a cascade of money into state coffers. Governor Reagan fought for
legislation that returned some of the excess to taxpayers, but the surplus
continued to grow and, in 1978, it provided much of the impetus for passage of
Proposition 13, California's controversial property-tax limitation initiative.

Mr. Reagan said he hadn't forgotten his pledge to ''cut, squeeze and trim.'' He
sought a freeze on hiring of new state employees and a 10 percent cut in state
employment, unveiled a plan to impose tuition at state universities and colleges
and announced a drastic reduction in the staffing of state mental hospitals. But
before long he had to backtrack on virtually all of his reforms, mostly because
he hadn't consulted in advance with legislators who simply refused to approve
the legislation.

''He was terribly naive when he first came in,'' says A. Alan Post, who headed
the nonpartisan California Legislative Analyst's Office from 1946 until his
retirement in 1977. ''I remember sitting with him at one meeting in which we
were trying to explain something rather technical about financing. He was
uptight about something and just wouldn't back down from his position, even
though it was clear he was wrong. If he saw things a certain way, it had to be
that way.''
Despite Governor Reagan's frustra-
tions in his dealings with the Legislature in his early years in office, public
opinion polls perennially gave him high ratings, largely, it appears, because of
his ability to communicate his position to the public, a talent that he learned
in almost 20 years on the screen and in hundreds of speeches on what he still
calls the ''mashed-potato circuit.'' Says Mr. Post: ''He's very good at going to
the people. He's extraordinarily good at formulating a political issue to the
public and getting them on his side.'' It is an ability that would be a potent
force for a President trying to deal with a difficult Congress.

Balloons rise into the air. A high school band plays ''California, Here I Come''
or the theme from ''Rocky,'' and the audience rises to its feet. Then Ronald
Reagan walks onto the stage with the confidence of a man who's been doing it for
the better part of 45 years.  Smiling, waving, looking perhaps even modestly
boyish, he is the consummate performer, and he plainly loves it.

With timing honed during countless thousands of speeches, he unreels a litany of
statistics, one-liners, jibes at the Democrats.  He offers hope, assuring
Americans that they do not have to face a future with less, that they are ''a
nation of destiny.'' He rails at the fact that General Motors employs more than
20,000 workers merely to fill out Government forms, and says one agency of
Government alone handles enough paper to cover the District of Columbia three
times.  He pauses, then adds, ''and that's not a bad idea.''

A favorite Reagan sequence: ''Jimmy Carter says we should sign the SALT II
treaty because nobody will like us if we don't. Well, isn't it about time we
stopped worrying about whether people like us or not and say we want to be
respected again?''

From New Hampshire to California, the crowds hear this line and erupt. In truth,
the President never said America should sign SALT II because nobody would like
us if we didn't; he has said that the survival of the world is dependent on
ending the cycle of nuclear arms development. Mr. Reagan is also quite selective
in describing his years in Sacramento, boasting how he cut back big government
and high taxes but ignoring three huge tax increases and the growth of state
expenditures by more than 120 percent.

For all of the critics' barbs, on a personal level almost everybody likes Ronald
Reagan. They speak of him as decent, sincere, a nice guy. And they use some of
the same adjectives to describe his second wife, the former Nancy Davis. (If
elected, he would be the first President who has ever been divorced.) Mr.
Reagan's first wife, Jane Wyman, used to complain publicly that he was devoting
too much of his time to his role as president of the Screen Actors Guild and not
enough to her.

Mr. Reagan's only experience as a manager until he reached Sacramento was as
president of the Screen Actors Guild, which he headed from 1947 through 1952,
and again in 1959-60. As a
chief executive of a union, according to people who knew him then, he was
effective and was so consumed by the job that, some friends said, it might have
hurt not only his marriage but his film career as well. These days, he is
remembered less in Hollywood, however, for his management style than for his
rabid anti-Communism which developed during these years.  ''There really wasn't
much for him to do that helped him prepare for Governor or President,'' said an
actress who served with him in the union leadership, ''but he became a lot more
organized as he stayed on the job.''

Nancy Reagan has made her husband's career her own, participating in his bid for
the Presidency both as campaigner and adviser. If there ever is a Reagan
administration in Washington, people who know him say, she will probably be the
second most important person in it. She is, in his words, ''my best friend,''
and many trace Mr.  Reagan's own deep conservatism to the influence of Nancy and
her father, Dr. Loyal Davis, a retired Chicago surgeon.

Ronald Reagan is a proud man, perhaps even vain. ''He loves those cheers,
thrives on them,'' says a former aide. Mr. Reagan wears contact lenses for his
nearsightedness, but he insists that he does not dye his hair. He stands
slightly more than 6 feet tall, weighs 185 pounds and has only the vaguest
suggestion of a thickening waist. At dinner, Mr. Reagan leans to charcoal
broiled steaks - ''without any sauce,'' he wants you to know - but he does yield
to chocolate desserts.

His vigor on the campaign has impressed many of the newsmen who have tried to
keep up with him. He says he learned to pace himself during his travels in the
1950's for the General Electric Company, when he toured 12 weeks a year visiting
139 G.E. plants in 38 states.

Mr. Reagan stays trim by cutting firewood at his ranch in Santa Barbara. On the
road, he uses a wheel-like exercise device that helps keep his stomach and arm
muscles in tone. Three or four times a week, he has a cocktail or glass of wine,
but says he isn't much of an imbiber, largely because his father was an
alcoholic. He doesn't use tobacco, though when he was growing up, he says, he
experimented with cigarettes. ''That's what I thought all good American boys
were supposed to do,'' he says.

Veterans of Ronald Reagan's Sacramento years might be expected to be experts in
providing some perspective on his record. For one thing, they've been getting a
lot of practice: newsmen from as far away as France and Thailand have been
badgering them to learn what kind of President he would be. Yet these old-timers
claim that such perspective is hard to find. Some say that when the former actor
was elected, their expectations were so low that the mere avoidance of state
bankruptcy made his administration look good. Others say the current state
administration, led by Edmund G. Brown Jr., has been so unpredictable that it
makes
the Reagan tenure look good by comparison. Still, the consensus is that Mr.
Reagan became an increasingly effective chief executive of California during the
latter part of his first term and especially after his re-election in 1971 and
his horse-trading truce with Bob Moretti.

William Bagley. a Republican who was chairman of the Assembly Revenue and
Taxation Committee, says: ''The first two years were miserable, but either by
design or experience or luck, it changed; after the first two years, I think he
mellowed and became more pragmatic. I call him a closet moderate.'' Mr. Moretti
adds: ''The way he acted as Governor didn't resemble his rhetoric.''

Wilson Riles, California's highest-ranking black official, defeated a strident
conservative incumbent Max Rafferty, to become State Superintendent of Public
Instruction in 1970. When he took office, Mr. Riles says, he expected problems
from a Governor who seemed to sport the same philosophical stripes as Mr.
Rafferty.

''I called Ronald Reagan,'' Mr. Riles recalls, ''and asked for an appointment
and he invited me in. I told him that I was in a nonpartisan office and did not
want it to be politicized. He agreed to that, and I told him I'd like to have
access to him personally if I saw a problem developing.'' According to Mr.
Riles, the Governor responded: ''I fully understand what you mean. You'll have
access. When I was in my former business, we used to say that stand-ins and
extras created so much hate that the stars couldn't get the scenes done.''

Several times over the next four years, Mr. Riles said, he took positions
contrary to those of the Governor, and found him receptive to hearing an
opposing view and, sometimes, even willing to accept it. ''The bottom line on
Ronald Reagan,'' says Mr. Riles, ''is that he is a conservative and articulates
a very conservative position, but at least in the field of education, which I
know about, he did not try to manipulate it in a partisan way. He did his
homework, and he was well-organized. He was an administrator in the sense that
he set the policies and directions and chose good people to carry them out.''

As a day-to-day manager and decision maker in Sacramento, Mr.  Reagan patterned
his style largely on that of a corporate chairman.  He delegated considerable
authority to subordinates, tended to avoid getting involved in the details of
problem solving, listened to the recommendations of his subordinates and then
made his decision based on this advice.

Most days, Mr. Reagan would be at his desk a little before 9 A.M.  and out by 6
P.M. Often working in shirtsleeves, he met at least once a week with a
half-dozen or so of his senior administrators. The meetings, according to people
who were there, tended to be free-form discussions, in which the conversation
drifted from topic to topic.

Mr. Reagan made maximum use of a management device his staff called a
''mini-memo,'' a one-page, four-paragraph treatment of a situation or problem
facing the Governor, setting forth the facts and staff recommendations -most of
which he accepted.

Occasionally the mini-memo approach might have contributed to getting him into
trouble, as when he was unable to respond in any depth to news-conference
questions about current issues. (His 1980 Presidential campaign has sometimes
been marred by similar embarrassments. One example: a statement that Vietnam War
veterans were not entitled to veterans' benefits.) But the mini-memos have their
defenders, including Caspar Weinberger, an executive of San Francisco's Bechtel
Inc., who served as Mr. Reagan's director of finance, later served under Richard
Nixon as Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare and would probably play a
role in a Reagan White House. ''Some people joked about them,'' Mr. Weinberger
says, ''but they were backed up by more information; the Governor sought out
more information when he needed it. The memos were a very effective way to take
a large problem and present a kind of distillation of it that focused the
discussion.''

As a boss, Mr. Reagan is said to be thoughtful and approachable.  Staff members
from the Sacramento days say he generated a good deal of loyalty, often
remembering birthdays or other special events with a card or telephone call.
Some associates feel he has occasionally carried his own loyalty to subordinates
too far by not acting soon enough to get rid of those who were not doing an
effective job.

Last winter, Mr. Reagan found himself under growing pressure to shake up his
campaign structure following his loss to George Bush in the Iowa caucuses.
Conservative backers in the South and elsewhere called, urging him to fire John
Sears, chief architect of his primary campaign strategy, who was under attack
for keeping Mr. Reagan out of the candidates' forum in Iowa and for trying to
lessen public perception of him as being extremely conservative.

Squeezed between his natural predilection to stand behind his aide and the
growing pressure to dismiss him, Mr. Reagan is said to have agonized over the
decision for nearly a month. He dis-
cussed it on several occasions with his wife and with a few close friends.
Eventually, he called Mr. Sears and two other senior staffers close to him and
told them they were dismissed.

One former aide speaks of two concerns he has about Mr. Reagan as President - an
inclination to make a decision based on advice offered by the last person he
sees and a personal disinterest in oldfashioned politics, which could make for
trouble in his dealings with Congress. ''Ronald Reagan is not a political man,''
he says.  ''He cares about issues, but he really doesn't care about politics,
and he doesn't have a very good internal measuring mechanism by which he can
judge political advice; 10,000 people must have his phone number, and he always
takes their calls. Usually, in politics, once a deal is struck, you stick to it,
but Reagan will take calls from people who disagree with the decision, and then
he'll agonize about it. Because he doesn't have an internal mechanism to help
him judge, he's buffeted back and forth between different people's advice. He
stews and frets and worries and changes his mind back and forth, and I wonder if
he can manage the system.''

Some longtime Reagan watchers say that this characteristic is at work in what is
perceived to be a lack of decision in the campaign's management since Mr. Sears
was ousted. Mr. Sears had been compared to a kind of Svengali who made most of
the major decisions. Since his departure, no one has emerged in a dominant role,
and critics say that Mr. Reagan has vacillated on many campaign policy issues
such as whether to remove Bill Brock as chairman of the Republican National
Committee. From all indications, he changed his mind at least twice about Mr.
Brock and eventually bowed to pressure from party regulars. There is a sense of
drift which observers say Mr. Reagan will have to correct if he hopes to win in
November.

The degree of the former Governor's dependence upon his staff is emphasized by
many who have worked with him - and against him. Says Bob Moretti: ''The kind of
people he gets is going to be very important in what kind of administration he
has.''

Former Assemblyman William Bagley warns: ''I, hope for the sake of the country,
that he can learn faster in Washington than he did in Sacramento. Hopefully,
they learned. But if they get a bunch of new people in there from all over the
country, you could have the same thing over again.''

Ronald Reagan often boasts that when he was Governor of California he attracted
high-quality administrators to Sacramento, and it is a boast that stands up to
scrutiny. ''He had some awfully good people around him,'' recalls John Veneman,
an influential Republican legislator during the first two years of the Reagan
administration.  ''I think he has a certain talent for attracting good people.''

One who gets generally high marks is Edwin Meese 3d, an articulate, likable
48-year-old who served as Mr. Rea-gan's cabinet secretary and is now his chief
of staff. Mr. Meese, a former criminal prosecutor and law professor from San
Diego, is likely to be right-hand man to the President in a Reagan
administration. According to a man who dealt with him in Sacramento, Mr. Meese
''has the ability to zero in on the essence of a problem and synthesize it for
the Governor,'' but others see a tendency to put off decisions, a tendency that
could cause problems if Mr. Meese headed a White House staff operation.

Even David Saxon, president of the University of California, praises Mr.
Reagan's appointments. The university was the target of one of Governor Reagan's
stormiest confrontrations with established political power in the state. He
eventually lost his battle to impose a ''tuition,'' but the university was in
such a financial bind that it was forced to impose ''fees,'' which amounted to
the same thing. The university has not yet fully recovered from all the
budget-cutting trauma of the Reagan years, says Mr. Saxon, but he allows how Mr.
Reagan named ''some awfully good people'' to 16-year terms on the Board of
Regents.

Just how he would proceed if he were elected President is uncertain, of course,
but Governor Reagan's personnel recruiting was done largely by the group of 10
or so wealthy, conservative Republican businessmen and campaign contributors who
had originally persuaded him to run for office. The list included Holmes Tuttle,
a Los Angeles Ford dealer; Henry Salvatori, an oilman, and Justin Dart, the
founder of Dart Industries.

Mr. Tuttle remembers ''calling Verne Orr (president of a Pasadena investment
company). I got him on the phone, and said, 'Verne, you're one of the biggest
bellyachers in town about government; why don't you go up to Sacramento and do
something about it?' '' (Orr became State Director of Motor Vehicles, where he
was credited with major reforms, and later became State Director of Finance, a
job in which he got top grades from Republicans and Democrats.)

Almost all of those the search committee nominated were businessmen or employees
of business corporations. Most were Republicans, and most were conservative -
but the committee did bring a few moderates into government. When the Governor
had a choice between competence and political affiliation, associates say, he
opted for competence. And though he was attacked at times for appointing people
to jobs regulating industries in which they had financial interests, no serious
scandals touched his administration.  (The only major upset was the discovery
that a senior member of Mr.  Reagan's staff was involved in a homosexual
relationship. Mr. Reagan lied to reporters about his knowledge of the matter and
later defended himself by saying he was simply protecting the staffer's
reputation.)

In all, more than 200 business people were brought into state government by Mr.
Reagan, most of them on short-term task forces to recommend ways to improve
government efficiency. Even Mr. Reagan's critics concede they did some good.

Anticipating that their man will be elected President, Mr. Tuttle and his
associates have already begun thinking about recruiting business and
professional leaders - for new task forces to streamline the Federal bureaucracy
and for top jobs in the Admininstration.

In addition to Ed Meese, the candidates for key White House positions close to
Reagan include his longtime friend and public relations consultant, Michael
Deaver; Richard Wirthlin, a pollster who has become an ever-more-influential
confidant; Lyn Nofziger, his Sacramento press secretary and campaign
communications adviser, and Ed Gray, his press secretary, a former executive
with a San Diego savings and loan company.

As long ago as the 50's, when he was touring the country as a spokesman for the
General Electric Company, Ronald Reagan was espousing the merits of free
enterprise and warning darkly of the inroads of Government. Perhaps no
politician on the national scene has enunciated his philosophy so often, over so
many years, with such consistency. And no other Presidential aspirant sensed so
quickly the rising tide of conservatism toward Government that has affected much
of middle-class America in recent years.

In 1971, seven years before California voters would pass Proposition 13,
Governor Reagan began an effort to place a similar, if less sweeping property
tax-reform law before the state's voters.  (The measure lost after a bitter
campaign in which public employee unions spent heavily to defeat it.)

Through those years, many people outside California tended to write off Mr.
Reagan's rhetoric as the simple-minded meanderings of an actor turned after
dinner speaker who appealed only to a narrow spectrum of society - those older,
affluent Americans of the entreprenurial class who were insensitive to the needs
of the poor.  That is not true today. As the opinion polls have shown, much of
the support that provided Mr. Reagan's primary election victories this year has
come from blue-collar workers who say they share his views.

Mr. Reagan these days is still giving much the same speech he gave in the 1950's
and 60's. Besides assailing Government, he woos his audiences with an implicit
appeal for a return to a simpler time, the years after World War II, when
America was the unquestioned leader of what he still calls the ''free world,''
and its citizens faced a future of boundless material rewards in exchange for
hard work. He tells his listeners around the nation, many of them dispirited by
the vague sense that Americans are no longer at the top of the heap, that they
do not have to sacrifice, that the United States, if he is elected President,
can be returned to its rightful position as a ''nation of destiny.''

As President, Mr. Reagan would pursue his old ambition of Sacramento days, to
''cut, squeeze and trim'' the Government. Almost certainly, he says, he would
make an attempt to eliminate entirely some Government agencies such as the
Departments of Education and Energy.

Mr. Reagan's principal advisers on domestic policy, should he become President,
would likely include such economic conservatives as Martin Anderson of the
Hoover Institution at Stanford University (he leads the team that has put
together the candidate's domestic position papers); former Treasury Secretary
William E. Simon and economists Milton Friedman, Arthur Laffer, Arthur Burns and
George Shultz. Another key adviser is William J. Casey, the former Securities
and Exchange Commission chairman, who is Mr. Reagan's day-to-day campaign
director. Daniel J. Terra is finance chairman, and Senator Paul Laxalt of
Nevada, an old friend, has the title of campaign chairman.

Ronald Reagan has never held down a post requiring foreign affairs experience or
expertise, but there is little doubt about where he would stand as President. He
appears to see every international issue through the single prism of America's
relationship with the Soviet Union. He maintains that Communism is as great a
threat to the United States now as it ever was and that the only way to deal
with that threat is to maintain a much stronger military establishment.

He favors building a new manned bomber, moving forward with development of the
MX missile - essentially, giving responsible officers in the Pentagon any weapon
they say they want. In the context of the Soviet threat, as well as what he
calls loyalty to a faithful ally, he is a strong supporter of Israel, arguing
that it helps the United States limit Soviet influence in the Middle East.

Mr. Reagan has assembled a panel of some 68 advisers on foreign affairs and
national security. Almost to a man, their views reach back to the most frigid
days of the cold war. His principal national security adviser is Richard V.
Allen, a specialist on Soviet affairs who served as a national security adviser
to President Nixon. Others include Admiral Thomas Moorer, retired Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Fred Ikle, former director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency, and Prof. William Van Cleave, director of defense and
strategic studies at the University of Southern California.

Some aides to the former California Governor have said privately that they fear
his hawkish views. And his occasional tendency to shoot from the hip on foreign
affairs may be his most vulnerable point in an election year
that has brought many Americans to his corner on domestic policy issues. Last
winter, for example, his suggestion that Cuba should be blockaded in response to
the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan caused much head shaking. He has suggested
that as President he would ''get the Panama Canal back,'' only to admit later on
that he didn't know how he'd accomplish it.

On a campaign stop in Jacksonville, Fla., last winter, Mr. Reagan said he
thought the United States should funnel weapons to the Afghanistan rebels
through Pakistan. He was asked if, in return for Pakistan's cooperation in such
a venture, the United States should drop its opposition to the Pakistani
development of nuclear weapons.  ''I don't think it's any of our business,'' he
replied, in effect renouncing more than 20 years of American policy opposed to
the proliferation of nuclear weapons.

Almost certain to face a campaign in which President Carter will seek to portray
their candidate as a reckless hawk, his staff is trying to mute this image and
depict him as a moderate. Mr. Allen was dispatched to Europe to assure leaders
there that Reagan is not trigger-happy.

There is another major criticism of Ronald Reagan, as Governor and as
Presidential candidate: not only does he often oversimplify the issues, he
actually seems to believe his oversimplifications.

One of his most popular proposals on the primary campaign stump has been a
three-year, 30-percent tax cut ''for everybody, not just for a select few.'' The
concept is borrowed from the long-pending Kemp-Roth Bill in Congress.
(Representative Jack Kemp, Republican of Buffalo, was on the Reagan staff in
Sacramento and is frequently mentioned as a possibility for a senior post on the
Reagan staff in Washington.) Yet, in almost the next breath, Mr. Reagan promises
a massive buildup of arms so that ''no nation on this earth would dare lift a
hand against us.''

When members of his staff are asked to explain the seeming paradox - the cutting
of taxes while increasing expenditures - they reply that there is less conflict
than meets the eye. As President, they say, Mr. Reagan would be pragmatic,
choosing a strategy that worked.  In effect, they are saying that one cannot
always tell what Mr.  Reagan will do on the basis of what he says - as his
record as Governor clearly demonstrated.

An example of his pragmatic flexibility, his aides say, is a recent change in
his economic strategy. Up to this point, it has been based largely on the
controversial theory of Arthur Laffer that when tax rates are cut, the money
saved by the public in taxes is injected back into the economy, providing
stimulation that will, over time, bring about intensified economic activity and
thereby increase tax revenues. In recent weeks, however, Reagan advisers say
that he has begun to listen to other economists, such as Alan Greenspan and
George
Shultz, who argue that, given a substantial tax cut, Federal spending must be
reduced if higher rates of inflation are to be avoided.

Mr. Reagan is frequently asked: ''As President, what would you do during your
first 90 days in office to reduce inflation?'' Usually, with a confident smile,
he answers something like this: ''Well, Government causes inflation, so the way
to bring down inflation is to bring down the cost of Government.''

What does Mr. Reagan have to say when accused of offering simple answers to
complex problems. He has a stock response. ''There are simple answers,'' he
says. ''There just aren't easy ones.''

In 1976, Reagan's predecessor as Governor, Pat Brown, wrote: ''I would allow
that Ronald Reagan is undoubtedly a sincere man; I also believe that he is, in
reality, what he appears to be: a simple man. His ideas, his philosophy, his
perceptions, his comprehension of human affairs and society are also neatly
confined to a simple framework of thought and action that permits no doubts and
acknowledges no sobering complexities. No wonder his manner is that of a man
with utter confidence in his own fundamentalist purity and integrity, the
efficient missionary dedicated to eradicating evil.''

Today, A. Alan Post, the retired California legislative analyst, offers a
similar view: ''I'm scared to death that he'll get elected.  What troubles me is
that he's so superficial. He's an actor. He goes around, making six or eight
speeches a day, saying the same thing, reading from those note cards of his,
with all those facts. It's like he has a conditioned response, like Pavlov's
dogs.''

His defenders offer another perspective. ''He is really a decent and honorable
man who believes he can help solve the country's problems,'' said one longtime
former associate. ''I think it's a great strength to be able to take very
complex issues and reduce them to terms that the average blue-collar guy, the
streetcar conductor, can understand. I know he sometimes sounds strident and
simplistic, but he's a practical man and his rhetoric sounds more strident than
he really is.

''People don't respond to long dissertations; they go for what we used to call
'red meat.' That's what people rise to their feet about, and Reagan likes to
give it to 'em. But I saw him at cabinet meetings in Sacramento, and he's
willing to listen to opposing arguments.  He'll come down on the practical
side.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of Ronald Reagan and advisers

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PLOT AND COUNTERPLOT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1018 words


THE SPIKE By Arnaud de Borchgrave and Robert Moss.  374 pp. New York: Crown.
$12.95.
THE HARGRAVE DECEPTION By E. Howard Hunt.  306 pp. New York: Stein & Day.
$10.95.
SINS OF THE FATHERS By Susan Howatch.  608 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster.
$13.95.

By RICHARD FREEDMAN

THE Russians, it seems, have a Plan to conquer the West without firing a shot.
It involves feeding what they call ''disinformation'' (why not plain lies?) to
our naive, left-leaning press, which, as everyone knows, is rife with what the
late Senator Joseph McCarthy called ''comsymps.''

In ''The Spike'' Bob Hockney of the prestigious New York World is the liberal
journalist. Weaned on the Berkeley riots of 1967, Hockney is fed stories in
Vietnam that help him expose our nefarious Central Intelligence Agency, winning
him a Pulitzer Prize but seriously undermining United States strength.

Secretly manipulating him is the K.G.B.'s Directorate A, which, under the
sinister leadership of Barisov, has infiltrated every level of American life.
When Hockney finally sees the light, his stories are ''spiked'' by his
brainwashed editors.

Every newspaperman, legend has it, keeps a novel in his desk drawer to work on
when the editor is looking for someone to do a fast obit. ''The Spike,'' written
by two newsmen, Arnaud de Borchgrave of Newsweek and Robert Moss of The
Economist, is such a book. Together the authors have cranked out the
journalist's standard dream novel.  It has an air of authenticity and often
seems informed by a reporter's access to normally covert information. And it
easily mixes thinly disguised portraits of real people from current newspaper
headlines (Norman Mailer, Jane Fonda, Senators Patrick Moynihan and Eugene
McCarthy) with fictional figures compounded of cardboard and sex.

It takes the reader behind the scenes in Saigon, Paris and Washington in a
sprawling attack on American gullibility. Nowhere does it suggest that sheer
bumbling - on both sides - may account for most of the mess we're in.

*

Long before he was jailed for his complicity in Watergate, E.  Howard Hunt had
been tapping his knowledge of the inside workings of the C.I.A. for a series of
espionage novels of the cold-champagneand-hot-women variety.

So it's no surprise that within this genre ''The Hargrave Deception'' is
reasonably expert. In fact, apart from an occasional foray into purple prose
(''It was a pale, gibbous moon, occluded by passing clouds''), it's pure
Hemingway compared to the spy novel of Mr. Hunt's fellow stonewaller, G. Gordon
Liddy.

Its hero, David Morgan, was retired from the Agency for refusing to divulge the
names of his agents
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Richard Freedman is film critic for the Newhouse Newspapers and author of ''The
Novel.''
to nosy Congressional investigators. Suddenly he finds himself ordered by the
slick new Agency head to meet C.I.A. defector Roger Hargrave in Geneva, where he
is returning from the U.S.S.R. Hargrave reveals he'd been a loyal double agent
all along, and then is promptly killed.

Suspecting the truth about 100 pages after the reader does, Morgan hops about
Europe tracking down old Agency hands and leaving a trail of bodies wherever he
goes. One body he hangs on to, though, is lissome Ghislaine Percival, who keeps
Morgan's bed warm for him when his aristocratic Cuban mistress is conveniently
blown up by the bad guys.

''The Hargrave Deception'' is more about process than anything else. Mr. Hunt
tells you how to open a Swiss bank account and how to keep champagne cold in the
absence of refrigerators. All classified information.

*

The hefty family saga simply refuses to die; every year several specimens lumber
their way up the best seller lists.  This year's lead elephant is ''Sins of the
Fathers'' by Susan Howatch, the author of ''Penmarric,'' ''Cashelmara'' and
''The Rich Are Different.'' It spans the years 1949-67 in the lives of Wall
Street investment banker Cornelius Van Zale, his neglected second wife
Alicia, his spoiled daughter Vicky and his boyhood chum and junior partner, Sam
Keller.

It's all as if Louis Auchincloss had forgotten his diet pills one day and set
out to write a novel twice his usual length, with half his usual wit. For here
are the corporate shaftings, the Bar Harbor snobberies, the mutual
misunderstandings of the worlds of finance and art that have become the staples
of today's bloated social novel.

The particular sin of Van Zale and Keller that is visited upon their children
was committed when they drove their own boss to suicide back in the 1930's.
Their complicity in that past injustice is the cause of both the closeness and
intense rivalry between the two men. And when Van Zale wins the affection of
Keller's
bohemian mistress, that rivalry heats up considerably.  In revenge, Keller woos
and marries Vicky, Van Zale's daughter by an earlier marriage, although Alicia,
who is currently married to Van Zale, wants Vicky to marry her own son,
Sebastian, also by a previous marriage. Then, in a fit of pique, Alicia seduces
the sybaritic Jake, an old rival of both her husband and Keller.

Clearly, there's enough plot in ''Sins of the Fathers'' to choke a horse (or an
elephant). Its various permutations are expertly followed in a series of
first-person narratives. But in Miss Howatch's plodding view of how the rich
live, none of this amounts to more than soap-operatic life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACKS: NEW AND NOTEWORTHY

BYLINE: Dell/Laurel-Leaf, $1.75.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1256 words

DATELINE: THE ARM OF THE STARFISH, by Madeleine L'Engle.


Leaf, $1.75.) Adam Eddington, a marine biology student en route to summer work
on a Portugese isle, is picked up by a teen-age blonde and finds himself caught
in a power struggle for an important scientific discovery. A tense, tricky,
well-plotted novel for young adults.

THE LADY IN THE CAR WITH GLASSES AND A GUN, by Sebastien Japrisot.  (Penguin,
$2.50.) A Parisian secretary ''borrows'' her employer's Thunderbird for a whirl
on the Riviera, but long before she gets there she discovers a man's body in the
car's trunk and the fact that she's to be the victim of a murderer's plot. When
this very French thriller was first published in 1967, Anthony Boucher praised
it as ''a fine exercise in terror, beautifully plotted.''

THE LAST ENCHANTMENT, by Mary Stewart. (Fawcett, $2.95.) Mary Stewart completes
the trilogy she began in ''The Crystal Cave'' and ''The Hollow Hills'' (Fawcett,
$2.75 each), deftly elaborating and embroidering the thimbleful of facts we have
about King Arthur and his circle. In this adult fairy tale, the Lady of the
Lake, who is a witch, seals Merlin in a cave and takes over his job at the Round
Table. Martin Levin described it as ''a perfect trip out of the present into a
dark but cozy age.''

A SECOND FLOWERING, by Malcolm Cowley. (Penguin, $4.95.) Memories and appraisals
of the ''lost generation'' - particularly Fitzgerald, Hemingway, Dos Passos,
Cummings, Wilder, Faulkner, Wolfe and Hart Crane - by a man who was in the midst
of it all. Our reviewer William Styron called this ''a beautiful, honest book''
by ''a gifted critic and literary chronicler.''

A SOLDIER REPORTS, by William C. Westmoreland. (Dell, $2.95.) Although General
Westmoreland's memoir touches on his student days at West Point, his early Army
career and his family life, most of it is a detailing of his experiences as
American field commander in Vietnam, 1964-68. ''A classic hard-line account that
sees the disaster as entirely the fault of the civilian leadership in
Washington,'' Ward Just declared in his review.

THE CHINESE IN SAN FRANCISCO, by Laverne Mau Dicker. (Dover, $6.) Every large
American city has its Chinatown, but San Francisco's is unique -oldest, largest,
quintessential. Using more than 150 photographs gathered from many sources as
documentation, Laverne Mau Dicker succinctly traces the Chinese experience in
that city and, indeed, the Chinese experience in America in all its complexities
and anomalies - from the 1840's, when natural calamities at home and the Gold
Rush in California brought males here as temporary settlers, through the early
20th century, when a separate community life had developed, to the present, when
two world wars and internal dissensions in China are having their effect on
third-generation Chinese Americans. The photograph reproduced above, of a family
living in tenement conditions - conditions still to be found in most Chinatowns
- was made in 1888 by a Caucasian photographer named Isaiah West Taber.

THE BLACK SWAN, by Thomas Mann. (HBJ/Harvest, $2.95.) In this novella, written
not long before his death, Thomas Mann undertook to write the feminine
counterpart of ''Death in Venice.'' Its clinical account of a middle-aged widow
who falls in love with her son's young tutor shocked male reviewers when it was
first published in 1954.  During the 80's, Carlos Baker predicts in a preface to
this new edition, readers will see this ''admittedly lesser work'' in another
light, as a ''subtle and ironic tale.''

MANET AND THE MODERN TRADITION, by Anne Coffin Hanson. (Yale University Press,
$14.95.) In an attempt to define the elusive nature of the greatness of the
French painter Edouard Manet (1832-83), Anne Coffin Hanson considers his
relationship with the literary figures of his time, the influence of traditional
masterpieces and popular art on his work and the manner in which he developed
his own technique. Our reviewer John Russell concluded that Mrs. Hanson, a Yale
art historian, handles the enigma in ''exemplary classroom style'' and ''we
learn much about Manet's work.'' There are 126 well-reproduced illustrations, a
few of them in color.

THE CHILDREN AT THE GATE, by Edward Lewis Wallant. (HBJ/Harvest, $3.50.) In the
course of their duties in a New England city hospital, Angelo, a young
Italian-American handyman who'd like to pass as a skeptic, encounters Sam, a
Jewish orderly who behaves like a wild clown - and the depravity and horror that
surrounds them is revealed in a new light. This fourth and last novel by a
talented writer who was only 36 when he died in 1962 is ambiguous, haunting,
most remarkable for its closely observed detail.

X, by Lois Gould. (Grosset & Dunlap/Stonesong, $4.95.) Like all fables, this
story can be read on two levels - as an amusing tale about a child called X,
whose parents and a group of eminent scientists are rearing it in such a way as
to keep its gender a complete secret, or as a sly message to those who cling to
traditional notions about the roles of the sexes in society. The illustrations
by Jacqueline Chwast give the volume some of the look of a children's book, but
the message of Lois Gould's narrative is very grown-up.

SOLO FACES, by James Salter. (Penguin, $2.95.) Vernon Rand, a Californian unable
to resist the challenge of danger that mountain climbing offers, becomes a hero
when he leads the rescue of a couple trapped in the French Alps; but the glory
fades and in time he is drawn back for another encounter with the mountain's
stark face that is both harrowing and tragic. ''Like the sport it celebrates,''
Vance Bourjaily observed, ''this is an adventurous and exciting book.''

THE SOUND OF MOUNTAIN WATER, by Wallace Stegner. (Dutton, $6.95.) Essays about
the American West, half of them concerned with the look and history of the land,
the rest with the difficulties of being a Western writer, the work of a
novelist-historian who has won both the Pulitzer Prize and the National Book
Award. All were written during the two decades following World War II, when the
region was beginning its ''fateful leap into modernity.'' This new edition
includes a long, thoughtful retrospective introduction.

GREAT DAYS, by Donald Barthelme. (Pocket, $2.50.) In his sixth collection of
short fiction, Donald Barthelme, who is said to have more imitators than anyone
since Hemingway, practices his old legerdemain - dropping questions or phrases
or mentioning characters to provoke each reader to respond in his own way. Diane
Johnson suggested that ''old-fashioned readers'' may consider them parables; at
any rate, she declared, these are ''Barthelme at his best, quite inimitable,
with a new kind of calm confidence, a new depth of subject.''

UNBECOMING HABITS, by Tim Heald. (Ballantine, $1.95.) Simon Bognor, a detective
for the British Board of Trade and certainly not the smartest cop in the world,
bumbles his way to the solution of the death of a fellow officer who had been
masquerading as a friar in a priory. Newgate Callendar found it a relief to come
across this kind of man in today's supercharged atmosphere, praised Tim Heald
for lacing his story with vignettes that stick in the mind.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Chinese family

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BIOGRAPHER SHEDS NEW LIGHT ON RICKEY

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 2, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 634 words


''I WRITE on things that matter to me,'' said Murray Polner of Great Neck. ''
Vietnam, nonviolence, Jews in America, race and genuine American heroes.''

Sometime in July, the 52-year-old Mr. Polner expects to finish his latest book,
a work that involves two of those interests: race, and a man he considers such a
hero - Branch Rickey, who broke the color barrier in baseball when he was
president of the Brooklyn Dodgers by bringing Jackie Robinson into the major
leagues.

''Mine is the biography of a genuine American hero who, in my judgment, is not a
media-created hero and not an instant celebrity,'' Mr. Polner said, ''a man
whose world is really the lost world - in some ways a more bucolic and
slower-paced America.''

Mr. Polner, who has written books on everything from activities for children to
the return of Vietnam veterans, is a former teacher and education official whose
primary job is that of editor of Present Tense, a quarterly magazine published
by the American Jewish Committee.

As for finding time to write books while maintaining a busy schedule, he said,
''You do what you want to do. Some people play golf; some people go dancing. I
have a very supportive wife'' - the former Louise Greenwald - ''very supportive
kids'' - Beth, 24, a law student; Alex, 22, who teaches theater, and Robert, 20,
a Columbia College junior who is interested in journalism - ''and very
supportive animals'' - four cats and a dog that share the family's white stucco
home.

Mr. Polner, who grew up in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn, traces the
genesis of ''Branch Rickey'' to a visit to baseball's Hall of Fame at
Cooperstown, N.Y. ''I began to look at Jackie Robinson and then I saw Rickey and
I was fascinated by what had made him bring blacks into baseball.

''I was fascinated by the extraordinary, profoundly Christian man who reached
out for another profoundly Christian man, Jackie Robinson, whose roots were
almost common. The motives were fundamentally moral, and they came out of the
life that I've traced.

''You can take the cynic's quick judgment that he did it only for profit, that
he wanted more fans in the stands. What you see in the unpublished
correspondence between Rickey and Robinson, what you see in Rickey's own
unpublished materials is somebody who took the message of Christianity very
seriously. Both of them did. They believed that all men and women are equal
under God.''

Mr. Polner himself came out of a setting he described as being characterized by
''enormous reverence for learning and scholarship.'' His parents -Alex Polner
and the former Rebecca Meyerson - were immigrants from the Ukraine, and Mr.
Polner said of his childhood, ''We lived not on the edges of poverty but in
poverty.''

He attended P.S. 165, graduated from Tilden High School and went to City
College, where he studied history. ''I wanted to teach. I wanted to write.''

He earned a bachelor of social science degree in 1950, a master's from the
University of Pennsylvania and then - after two years in the Army in Japan
during the Korean war - a certificate from the Russian Institute at Columbia
University. His teaching career took him through 10 years at Thomas Jefferson
High School, three years at Suffolk Community College in Selden and then into
administration in the Ocean Hill-Brownsville school district and as executive
assistant to Dr. Harvey Scribner, the New York City school chancellor.

Along the way, he founded a publishing company and began to write books. ''I was
always interested in writing,'' he said, bringing matters full circle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF MURRAY POLNER

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT OPINION PREMONITION OF ON-JOB DANGER BECOMES A WOUNDING

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 18, Column 4; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 670 words


REALITY

By STEPHEN J. SPIGNESI

MY brother operates a polishing machine in a room where temperatures frequently
exceed 100 degrees and where broken bones and maimed fingers are not uncommon. A
couple of months back a piece he was polishing got away from him and, unleashed
from the controlled stability of his hand, flew around the wheel and ripped open
his left middle finger. The stitches left a long, serpentine scar.

Such a work situation requires a stoic acceptance of danger and an alertness far
surpassing the attention span necessary for most jobs.  My brother has both:
Like the Mercury Astronauts in Tom Wolfe's book, Paul has that all-important
Right Stuff.

My brother also usually pays attention to his hunches, those quick-as-a-flash
feelings that jump into the mind without notice, hinting that perhaps the body
still retains some kind of sensory system that lies just outside the range of
the normal senses.

The other day Paul arrived at work at his usual time and pulled into his usual
parking space. Before getting out of the car, he glanced into his rear-view
mirror just in time to see another employee pulling in behind him, not an
unusual thing. Besides the fact that this other worker, also a polisher, had
never previously parked behind Paul, there was nothing odd in this event.

But Paul's nervous system heaved. In his mind a hollow voice said, ''Something's
wrong.'' But, of course, in a civilized, rational society, one does not
broadcast every little feeling of apprehension and every little fear; to do so
would invite ridicule. And so, in many cases, one is not able to prevent
something that perhaps is not inevitable.

So Paul entered the building, bought coffee and sat down. He drank coffee until
the 7 o'clock starting time. And then the same fellow who had parked behind him
walked by and it happened again. But this time, the hollow voice virtually
shouted: ''Something's wrong!'' And again, my brother shrugged it off.

Seven o'clock came, the men started the machines, and soon the room was filled
with the whine of a dozen motors. Two machines down from Paul he sat, oblivious
to any feelings my brother may have had about him, setting up his work so as to
make the polishing go smoothly.  Then he began to polish a job known for its
danger: long thin pieces of metal, all drilled in the center. Unlike the short
thick pieces a man could grip securely, these long pieces seemed to have a mind
of their own as they wrapped themselves around the polishing wheel, usually
ripping flesh and cartilage in the process.

Fifteen minutes later, my brother realized he should have paid attention to that
hollow voice. One of those long thin pieces got away from the hands controlling
it, wrapped itself around the polishing wheel, grabbed the man's arm and broke
it in two places, sending him into shock. His blood was on everything.

Talking about the incident, my brother spoke of his premonition in the same tone
as those who were in Vietnam spoke of the ''feelings'' they got before an
exceptionally brutal, and usually unexpected, bombing or battle. That the
feeling of apprehension proves true only makes the incident that much more
surreal and frightening. And what is most frightening is that such occurrences
cannot be rationalized away. For imminent danger seems to bring with it some
type of vibration that certain people are receptive to.

After they took the fellow away, Paul and the rest of the men went back to work,
one older employee so shaken he had to be splashed with cold water.

More than a few workers failed to make their piecework quota that day.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Stephen J. Spignesi is a New Haven writer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Four Western Civilians Are Freed in Cambodia

BYLINE: (UPI)

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 170 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 29


Vietnamese soldiers today released four Western civilians, including two
Americans, who had been held prisoner for four days in western Cambodia.

The four said they were well-treated but that they had been warned they would be
shot if they tried to escape. The captives said the four-day ordeal ended when
they were blindfolded, taken by truck to a wooden bridge separating Cambodia and
Thailand and then turned loose.

''They gave us cigarettes; they even gave us toothbrushes,'' said Richard
Franken, 35 years old, of Miami, a commercial photographer.  Mr. Franken and a
partner, George Lienemann, 31, of Los Angeles, were taking pictures of refugee
children for the United Nations when they were captured Thursday by Vietnamese
troops at the Nong Chan refguee camp on the Thai-Cambodian border.

Two Red Cross officials, Robert Ashe, 26, of England, and Dr.  Pierre Perrin,
36, of France also were captured. Mr. Ashe directed food distribution at Nong
Chan before the June 23 Vietnamese attack into Thailand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Column

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

UPDATE LIBERALISM,OR ITS A 60'S RELIC;
BY PAUL TSONGAS

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 815 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Liberals are losing cause after cause. SALT II died without a fight. Defense
spending is increased. Social programs are cut. Renewable resources get far too
little funding. Environmental safeguards are pushed back. Ronald Reagan has
moved ahead of President Carter in opinion polls. The mood is right for a
20-muleteam march into the past.

Liberalism risks becoming a relic of the 1960's. To someone choosing a set of
values in that decade, liberalism provided the action and passion. Liberals
marched for civil rights and enlisted in a war on poverty. We volunteered to
serve in the Peace Corps and organized against the war in Vietnam. Liberal
programs responded practically to urgent needs.

In 1980, we cannot abandon unfinished business: pursuing basic human dignity,
equal opportunity and peaceful development. But liberalism must evolve to meet
urgent new issues. In addition, liberals must talk in terms that mean something
to a new generation of potential adherents and activists. Failure will reduce
liberalism to an interesting dissertation topic for historians.

Liberals must take a fresh look at how to mobilize this new generation. The
average young American takes for granted the social equities for which others
fought. Young citizens have never known the abuses and injustices that molded
older generations of liberals.  They have never felt the anger and outrage that
fueled the liberal cause. They have not grown up reading about hungry poor
people; they have read about abuses in the food-stamp program. They have not
grown up confident in an ever-expanding economy; they have seen sagging
productivity, record interest rates, and foreign dominance in trade ranging from
crude oil to efficient cars. They may remember military adventurism in Vietnam,
but they can read every day about Soviet military adventurism in Afghanistan.

Today's most compelling issues -energy and the economy - involve survival. Our
survival and security demand tough, fresh policies.  Public officials must dare
to disregard the political wisdom: ''Never adopt a program that cannot be put on
a bumper sticker.''

The energy crisis, for example, involves one basic fact: Oil is a finite,
diminishing resource. Many liberals approach this issue by attacking the oil
companies. Emotionally satisfying, yes; an answer to the problem, no. The
problem is American consumption, which must be cut through conservation.
Liberals led the fight against the

10-cent gasoline tax ''to protect the consumer.'' That's fine for today. In the
long run, to protect the consumer from the reality of the energy crisis is to
destroy him. John B. Anderson talks about a 50-cent gasoline tax, and the young
flock to his campaign.

Nuclear power is another bumper-sticker issue. Most liberals denounce nuclear
power. But ''no nukes'' means one certain result: large-scale reliance on coal.
Any environmentalist who can accept the severe problems caused by large-scale
coal burning is not an environmentalist by my standards. The absolute priority
is to speed energy conservation, solar energy and other renewable resources, but
nuclear power cannot be ignored in the transition.

The economy has a pressing need for productivity. Unions must demand
productivity gains as part of their contracts. Labor and management must also be
concerned that their products anticipate the future. Detroit, for example,
planned its own obsolescence with gasguzzlers, precision-designed for the past.
Now 296,000 automobile workers are out of work, but without Federal fuel economy
standards (''Government regulation'') it would be far worse.

If economic recovery requires providing tax credit to industry as opposed to
individuals, how will liberals respond? Probably most will vote against it. They
will vote for short-term releif and not longterm job protection and job
creation.

The soul of liberalism is intact: a conviction that government can and must help
people achieve equal opportunity and individual dignity. Liberals need to escape
the 60's time capsule and apply the sound values of our past to today's
particular challenges.

Our successes and our failures created the resurgence of right-wing
simplicities. Conservatives have copied the organizing strategies of liberal
activists in the 60's. They are cashing in on a natural cycle of resentment and
retrenchment against past gains. They are using instances of wasteful spending
and over-regulation to attack the basic Federal role in serving citizens.

Liberals must make sure the liberal agenda meets the needs of the 80's.
Otherwise, we will lose the leadership of this nation - and perhaps we should
lose it. We will abandon the humane policies of government to those who wanted
Washington to stay out of racial discrimination and environmental degradation,
and to stay in Vietnam.

Paul E. Tsongas, a Democrat, is junior Senator from Massachusetts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 873 words


THE MIGHTY STREAM

Duke Ellington once said: ''The history of jazz, of course, begins with the
rhythm coming to America from Africa. It stops in the West Indies, then takes
two courses: one across the Gulf of Mexico to New Orleans, and the other up the
East Coast. The East Coast was inclined to favor strings -violins, banjos and
guitars - while the other development, the one that went to New Orleans and then
up the Mississippi to Chicago, came out in the form of clarinets, trombomes and
trumpets. And they all converged in New York and blended together, and the
offspring was jazz.''

And once again New York stands at the confluence of the many streams of what has
been called America's classical music. The hub is the 10-day annual Newport Jazz
Festival. And many are taking advantage of the jazz ambiance

For example, B. Dalton Bookseller, the bookstore, begins its second annual
salute to jazz with daily three-hour programs of music and talk about music
today through Thursday. Today, Harvey Swartz, bassist; and Dave Friedman,
vibraharpist; play from noon to 1 P.M.  From 1 to 2 P.M. Leonard Feather, the
critic whose ''Encyclopedia of Jazz'' - revised and updated - has been the
music's essential what's what and who's who, will moderate a discussion among
jazz critics and authors. From 2 to 3 P.M., the Fred Hersch Trio will perform.

Tomorrow: noon to 1 P.M., Sheila Jordan, the vocalist; and Mr.  Swartz. From 1
to 2 P.M., Ira Gitler, the jazz researcher, critic and producer; will moderate a
panel. Albert Daily, the pianist, will perform solo in the final hour.

Wednesday: The prolific and voluble Eubie Blake, nonagenarian pianist and
composer, will perform and talk from noon to 2 P.M. And on the final day,
Thursday, Paul McCandless, who plays the oboe, bass clarinet, and soprano sax;
and Steve Lockwood, the pianist, will play the first hour; a jazz panel will
take the middle hour and the Bob Cunningham Duo. Mr. Cunningham is a bassist and
composer.

These programs are free. B. Dalton Bookseller is at 666 Fifth Avenue, near 52d
Street. Information: 247-1740.
IVORY HUNTERS

Five pianists, one at a time, play and sing in another offshoot, ''They Love a
Piano,'' tonight in the music lounge of the Conservatory Restaurant of the
Mayflower Hotel. Ronny Whyte, has been and will be again - from July 11 - the
resident pianist at the Conservatory. His contribution tonight will be singing
and playing the music of Vincent Youmans. Steve Ross, another pianist regarded
as capable of overwehlming the customary distraction in a cabaret, will be
focusing on Irving Berlin, while Charles De Forest, who alternates with Mr. Ross
at Ted Hook's Backstage and Onstage, will do Harold Arlen. Frank Owens, a High
School of Music and Art alumnus who won an amateur night contest at Harlem's
Apollo Theater and who writes. conducts, and acts, will play the music of Errol
Garner. And Charlie Cochran, another serious cabaret musician, will be playing
the Jerome Kern melodies.

And in what management is calling ''a special treat,'' the Conservatory promises
that Eddie Heywood, will play a few of his own compositions.

This program starts at 9 P.M. No cover, no minimum. The Conservatory Restaurant
is on Central Park West at 61st Street.  Information: 581-0896, 581-1293.
ONE BY ONE

In contrast to most of the Newport programs that often mount a mass movement of
as many as three dozen, albeit outstanding, musicians on the stage during a
program, the Jazz Festival has also scheduled a series of cocktail-hour solo
performances every day this week at the Carnegie Recital Hall.

Today's opening day artist is Leroy Jenkins, the violinist and violist. Some
observers contend that avant-garde jazz and avant-garde classical, that is
European-rooted, music have almost merged to form ''third stream.'' Mr. Jenkins
is an exponent of that music.

Tomorrow, the solo hour switches from strings to the keyboard where it will
remain for the rest of the week. The pianists to perform are: Hilton Ruiz
tomorrow; on Wednesday, Mitchell Forman; on Thursday, John Hicks; and the windup
on Friday will feature Eddie Heywood, the pianist-composer.

Carnegie Recital Hall is on West 57th Street and Seventh Avenue.  Time: 5 P.M.
Admission: $5.50. Information: 247-7459, Carnegie Hall.
CHANGE OF PACE

Today is the final day of an exhibition of photographs by James H.  Karalas, a
protege of the late W. Eugene Smith and a staff photographer for Look magazine
and freelance whose work has been published in many national publications.

Mr. Karalas has 53 black-and-white pictures on display in the Rizzoli Gallery,
on the mezzanine of the Rizzoli bookstore. He has said that he has tried ''to
capture and communicate some of the important aspects of our environment and
hopefully contributed to the scope of photography as a creative medium and a
genuinely universal means of communication.'' The photographs, made mostly in
Rendville, Ohio; New York and Vietnam, are sensitive, evocative pictures.

The Rizzoli bookstore is at 712 Fifth Avenue, at 56th Street.  Time:10 A.M. to 6
P.M. Admission: Free. Information: 397-3712.

For today's Entertainment Events listing, see page C14. For Sports Today, see
page C9.  C. Gerald Fraser

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Frank Owens

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WALDEMAR GALLMAN,EX-AMBASSADOR,DIES AT 81

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 281 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 29


Waldemar John Gallman, a former United States ambassador to three countries
whose Foreign Service career spanned 38 years, died yesterday at his home here.
He was 81 years old.

Mr. Gallman's career began in 1923 when he became diplomatic secretary at the
United States Embassy in Havana. In the next 10 years, he held similar posts at
embassies in San Jose, Quito, Riga and Warsaw.

He was the American Consul General in Danzig, Poland, from 1935 to 1938,
assistant chief of the Division of European Affairs in the State Department for
four years and deputy chief of mission to the United States Embassy in London
during and after World War II.

Mr. Gallman became Ambassador to Poland in 1948; deputy commandant for foreign
affairs at the National War College in 1950; Ambassador to South Africa in 1951;
Ambassador to Iraq in 1954, and director general of the Foreign Service, with
rank of Assistant Secretary of State, in 1958.

In later years, he was a consultant to the Asia Foundation and an adviser to the
Governments of South Vietnam and Korea, establishing training program for
Foreign Service officers.

Mr. Gallman was born April 27, 1899, in Wellsville, N.Y. He was graduated from
Cornell University in 1921 and did graduate work at both Cornell and Georgetown
University. He was the author of ''Iraq Under General Nuri,'' publiished in
1964.

He was a member of All Souls Unitarian Church, the Cosmos Club and the Columbia
Historical Society.  Mr. Gallman is survived by two sons, John Gerry Gallman of
Bloomington, Ind., and Philip Gerry Gallman of Burke, Va.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF WALDEMAR GALLMAN

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
